U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Fact Sheet

Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories

50 Largest Crime Labs, 2002


September 2004, NCJ 205988


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in 
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/50lcl02.htm
--------------------------------------------------------------

Matthew J. Hickman
BJS Statistician
                     
Joseph L. Peterson, D.Crim.
University of Illinois at Chicago

The 50 largest publicly funded forensic crime laboratories in the 
United States employed more than 4,300 full-time equivalent (FTE) 
personnel in 2002 and had total budgets exceeding $266.6 million. 
These labs received more than 994,000 new cases, including over 1.2 
million requests for forensic services during calendar year 
2002.***A ‘case' is defined as evidence submitted from a single 
criminal investigation. A case may include multiple ‘requests' for 
forensic services (for example, one case may include a request for 
biology screening and a request for latent prints). A case or 
request is defined as ‘back-logged' if it is in the laboratory and 
remains unreported for a period of 30 days or more.*** The requests
represented about half of all requests for forensic services handled 
by publicly funded laboratories nationally.    

These labs ended the year with over 93,000 backlogged cases including
about 270,000 requests for forensic services-- more than twice the
backlog at the beginning of the year. The backlog increased in all
categories of forensic services.  

The large labs estimated that about 930 additional FTEs would have
been needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround for all 2002 requests for
forensic services. Based on starting salaries for analysts or examiners 
in the large labs, the estimated cost of the additional FTEs exceeds 
$36.2 million.

Most of the large labs indicated that resources beyond personnel
increases would also have been needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround
on all 2002 requests. These included equipment, supplies, and space
requirements, as well as funds for overtime, travel, and training. 
Among those labs providing detailed cost estimates, additional 
equipment accounted for about $18.3 million. 

 This report focuses on the current workload, backlog, and estimated
resources needed to meet the growing demand for forensic services in
the Nation's 50 largest crime labs, as defined by staff size. The 
data were collected as part of the 2002 BJS Census of Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories.

Backlogged requests

The 50 largest labs began 2002 with about 117,000 backlogged requests
for forensic services. These labs received an additional 1.2 million
requests during 2002 and completed nearly 1.1 million requests.  

The total estimated backlog at yearend, about 270,000 requests,
represents an increase of nearly 154,000 requests, or 132%, from the
beginning of the year.  

Dividing the estimated backlogged requests by those completed results
in a ratio that describes backlog growth relative to the labs' current
capacity to process requests. Overall, for every four requests completed
by these large laboratories, there was one outstanding request at
yearend.  

Eighty percent of the estimated 270,000 backlogged requests for forensic
services in these large labs was attributable to requests for controlled
substances (50%), latent prints (19%), and DNA analysis (11%).

Controlled substances

Half of the total backlog -- about 136,000 requests -- was attributable 
to requests for analysis of controlled substances. For every three such
requests completed in 2002, approximately one request was outstanding
at yearend.

Latent prints

The backlog included about 51,000 requests for latent print services, or
about a fifth of the total. For every two latent print requests completed 
in 2002, approximately one request was outstanding at yearend.

DNA analysis

The backlog included about 31,000 requests for DNA analysis. Although
these requests comprised about a tenth of the total backlog, they had 
the greatest backlog relative to labs' current capacity to process 
requests: for every one DNA analysis request completed in 2002, an 
estimated 1.7 requests were outstanding at yearend. 

Expected and actual performance

Laboratory directors were asked to report their performance expectations
for one FTE examiner per year in each category of forensic services.
Overall, examiners in the largest labs processed requests at or above
90% of the expected average in all but two categories: biology screening
(82%) and DNA analysis (78%).    

Examiners performing biology screening were expected to process an
average (median) of 166 requests per year. Examiners actually
processed an average of 136 requests per year, or about 82% of the
expected average.

Examiners performing DNA analysis were expected to process an average 
(median) of 69 requests per year. Examiners actually processed an 
average of 54 requests per year, or about 78% of the expected average. 

Human resource needs

Overall, the largest laboratories estimated that an additional 931 
FTEs would be needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround on all requests 
for forensic services received in 2002. The estimated total cost of 
the additional FTEs exceeds $36.2 million. 

Just over half of the needed FTEs were in the areas of controlled
substances (10%), latent prints (17%), and DNA analysis (25%).

Controlled substances

Labs performing analysis of controlled substances estimated that nearly
100 additional FTEs would have been needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround 
on all such requests received during 2002. These additional FTEs represent 
a 7% increase in FTEs currently performing controlled substance analysis. 
The estimated cost of additional FTEs needed for analysis of controlled
substances exceeds $3.6 million.

Latent prints

Labs performing latent print analysis estimated that about 160 additional
FTEs would have been needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround on all such
requests received during 2002.  These additional FTEs represent a 55% 
increase in FTEs currently performing latent print services.  The
estimated cost of these additional FTEs exceeds $6.7 million. 

DNA analysis

Labs performing DNA analysis estimated that about 230 additional FTEs
would have been needed to achieve a 30-day turnaround on all DNA
analysis requests received during 2002, given current laboratory
conditons and analysis tools. These additional FTEs represent a 90%
increase in FTEs currently performing DNA analysis. The estimated cost
of these additional FTEs exceeds $9.3 million.  

----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is 
director.

Matthew J. Hickman, BJS Statistician, and Joseph L. Peterson, 
Professor and Acting Head of the Department of Criminal Justice, 
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), collaborated on this 
report. Steven K. Smith reviewed the report. Tom Hester edited 
the report.

The data in this report were collected as part of the 2002 BJS 
Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories, currently 
in progress.  The project is directed by Joseph L. Peterson and 
Sandra K. Costello, Associate Director of the UIC Center for 
Research in Law and Justice (CRLJ). CRLJ project staff included
Laura Kunard,  Andrew Krzak, Cosmina Menghes, and Tiffany Vasquez.

Representatives of the American Society of Crime Laboratory 
Directors(ASCLD)served as subject matter experts and 
consultants to this project, providing assistance with the 
development and review of the census instrument, project 
guidance, and non-response follow-up.

ASCLD representatives included the following: Elizabeth 
Carpenter, Director of the Portland (OR) State Police Forensic 
Laboratory; Roger Kahn, Deputy Superintendent of Laboratories 
of the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification and 
Investigation; Susan Johns, Bureau Chief of the Illinois State 
Police Division of Forensic Services; David Petersen, Assistant 
Director of the Minnesota State Forensic Science Laboratory; 
and Jan Bashinski, Chief of the Bureau of Forensic Services 
(ret.), California Department of Justice.  

The UIC Survey Research Laboratory (SRL) produced and 
administered the final census instrument. 

Future reports based on the completed census will provide 
information on the organization, budgets, staff, workload, 
training, and needs of the more than 300 publicly funded 
forensic crime laboratories currently operating in the 
United States.  

Information about the technology programs of the National 
Institute of Justice can be found at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/sciencetech/welcome.html>.

September 2004, NCJ 205988

Office of Justice Programs
Partnerships for Safer Communities
Http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov 
----------------------------------------------

End of file
08/26/04 ih










