U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

September 2011, NCJ 235187

Appeals of Civil Trials Concluded in 2005

Donald J. Farole, Jr., Ph.D., and Thomas H. Cohen, J.D.,
Ph.D. BJS Statisticians

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1753. 
-----------------------------------------------------------

Plaintiff s and defendants appealed 15% of the 26,950
tort, contract, and real property trials concluded in
state trial courts in 2005. These 26,950 trials were a
small percentage of the reported 7.5 million civil claims
filed in all unified and general jurisdiction state courts
nationwide. Among jurisdictions that provided counts of
their trial and non-trial civil dispositions in 2005, trials
collectively accounted for about 3% of all tort, contract,
and real property dispositions in general jurisdiction
courts. ***Footnote 11See LaFountain, R., et. al. (2007).
Examining  the Work of State Courts, 2006: A National
Perspective from the Court Statistics Project. National
Center for State Courts; and Civil Bench and Jury Trials in
State Courts, 2005, NCJ 223851, BJS Web.***

This special report examines civil bench and jury trials
concluded in state trial courts in 2005 that were appealed
to an intermediate appellate court or court of last resort.
It is the first report based on data collected in the Bureau
of Justice Statistics' (BJS) Civil Justice Survey of Trials
on Appeal (CJSTA). The CJSTA included information from
court records on civil trials concluded in 2005 and tracked
the subsequent appeals from 2005 through March 2010.
Information collected included the types of civil cases
appealed, appeals dismissed or withdrawn before being
decided on the merits, and appeals resulting in the trial
court decision being reversed or affirmed. The time from the
filing of an appeal to final appellate court disposition was
also measured.

----------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*Plaintiff s and defendants appealed 3,970 (15%) of the
26,950 tort, contract, and real property bench and jury
trials concluded in state trial courts in 2005 (figure 1).

*Nearly half (44%) of trials with damage awards of $1 million
or more were appealed; in comparison, appeals were filed in
less than a fi fth of trials with no damages (14%).

*Sixty-one percent of civil appeals were decided on the
merits, while the remainder were dismissed or withdrawn.

*The trial court verdict or judgment was fully or partly
reversed in 35% of civil appeals decided on the merits.

*Trials with damage awards of $100,000 or more were
reversed at a higher rate than trials with no damage awards.

*The average case processing time for appeals decided
on the merits was 14 months, while appeals that were
dismissed or withdrawn were disposed on average within
6 months.
----------------------------------------------------------

Study provides insight into civil litigation

Few civil cases are actually tried, as most are settled by
mutual agreement outside of the court system. ***Footnote 2 
2See Contract Cases in Large Counties, NCJ 156664, BJS Web;
and Tort Cases in Large Counties, NCJ 153177, BJS
Web.***Because the terms of settlement agreements and other
key aspects of cases resolved outside of court may not be
publicly available, records from civil trials are the primary
source of information on civil litigation in the United
States. Civil trials appealed are also significant because
they provide information about the finality of trial court
verdicts and judgments and the likelihood that trial court
outcomes could be reversed or modified on appeal. In
comparison to cases disposed by trial, settlements are
unlikely to be appealed because they tend to involve the
resolution of disputes that could lead litigants to seek
further legal remedies.

Among civil cases disposed through other means, such as
dismissals or summary or default judgments, information
on appeals arising from such dispositions was not included
in this study.

Litigants appealed approximately 1 in 7 civil trials
concluded in 2005

An estimated 26,950 civil trials involving tort, contract,
and real property claims were disposed in 2005. Of these
trials, 15% were appealed to a state intermediate appellate
court or court of last resort (table 1). Appeals were filed
in a higher percentage of contract cases (20%) than tort
cases (11%). The appeal rate did not differ based on whether
the plaintiff (14%) or defendant (13%) won at trial.

In general, cases involving larger award amounts at trial
were associated with higher rates of appeal. About 44% of
trials with awards of $1 million or more were appealed,
compared to 10% of trials in which the amount awarded was
less than $100,000 and 14% in which there was no award at
trial. Appeals were filed for a third (33%) of trials in
which punitive damages were awarded.

----------------------------------------------------------
The civil appellate process The formal disposition of a civil
case through a jury or bench trial is not necessarily the end
of the civil justice process. Litigants have the right to
seek appellate review of trial outcomes. Either plaintiffs or
defendants can seek to reverse, modify, or challenge the
trial court's decision by appealing the trial court verdict
or judgment. The route of appeal depends on the state's
organizational structure for appellate review.***Footnote 3
3For a profile of the organizational structure of state
appellate courts, see State Court Organization, 2004 on the
BJS website. Also see the National Center for State Courts
profiles of the routes of appeal for civil cases at 
http://www.ncsconline.org/d_research/cp/CP_Query.aspx.
The majority of appellate systems are organized so that
appeals are first heard by intermediate appellate courts with
mandatory jurisdiction and then by courts of last resort with
discretionary jurisdiction. Appellate courts with mandatory
jurisdiction are required by their state constitution or
statutes to review any case appealed to them, while appellate
courts with discretionary jurisdiction can choose whether to
review an appeal from an intermediate appellate court.

In some states, civil appeals bypassed the intermediate
level of appellate review and were filed directly in courts
of last resort. This might have happened for one of several
reasons. Some states have never established intermediate
appellate courts. In other instances, the intermediate
appellate court lacked jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
Occasionally, a case was transferred to the court of last
resort by the intermediate appellate court without prior
review. Several states in the Civil Justice Survey of Trials
on Appeals (CJSTA) sample did not have intermediate
appellate courts or had intermediate appellate courts with
no review authority over civil appeals from trial courts.
----------------------------------------------------------

Litigants losing at trial were more likely to file an
appeal

Appeal rates for civil trials concluded in 2005 were similar
between plaintiffs (8%) and defendants (7%). The losing
party at trial was more likely to file an appeal than the
winner. Twelve percent of plaintiffs filed appeals when the
defendant won at trial, and 10% of defendants filed appeals
when the plaintiff won. By contrast, 4% of plaintiffs and 1%
of defendants filed appeals after prevailing at trial.
Factors that influence litigants to file appeals in trials
where they have prevailed include dissatisfaction with the
damage awards, attempts to have attorney fees or court costs
assessed against one of the litigants, and the correction of
trial court errors.

About two-fifths of appeals were withdrawn prior to
disposition or were dismissed by the appellate court

Appellate courts did not always review the substantive
legal issues raised in the appeal of a trial court verdict or
judgment. Thirty-nine percent of all appeals of trial court
cases concluded in 2005 were not reviewed on the merits
because they were dismissed or withdrawn (table 2).
Twenty percent of all appeals of trial court cases concluded
in 2005 were dismissed by the appellate court because
the court lacked jurisdiction to review the case, due to a
procedural error, or for other reasons. Another 19% of
appeals were withdrawn by the appellant or by stipulation
of both parties. Appeals are typically withdrawn by the
litigants if a settlement agreement is reached prior to
appellate court resolution.

Appellate courts reversed or modified trial court
outcomes for 1 in 3 appeals reviewed on the merits

Appellate courts reversed or modified the trial court
outcomes of 35% of appeals decided on the merits (figure
2). About half of appeals in which trial court decisions were
reversed involved a full reversal, while the other half
entailed a partial reversal or other modification (not shown
in figure). Courts reversed a somewhat higher percentage of
appeals of jury trials (40%) than appeals of bench trials
(25%). Trials with larger award amounts also were reversed at
higher rates. For example, about half (49%) of appeals with
damage awards of $100,000 or more were reversed or modified
by the appellate court. By contrast, 26% of appeals from
trials with no damage awards were reversed on appeal.
Reversal rates did not vary by the major case types (tort or
contract).

Average case processing time for appeals decided on
the merits was 14 months

Appeals of civil trials were filed with the appellate court
an average of 4 months after the disposition of the lawsuit
at trial (not shown in table). Once filed, appeals were
processed in an average of 11 months (table 3). For cases
in which the appellate court reviewed on the merits, the
average time from the filing of the appeal to final
disposition was 14 months. For those appeals that were
dismissed or withdrawn, the average number of months from
filing to case resolution was 6 months.

Among appeals decided on the merits, 38% were disposed
within 12 months of the filing date, and 82% were disposed
within 18 months of the filing date. In comparison to
appeals decided on the merits, over 90% of appeals that were
dismissed or withdrawn prior to disposition were resolved
within 1 year.

Methodology

The Bureau of Justice Statistics' (BJS) Civil Justice Survey
of Trials on Appeal (CJSTA) was based on 26,950 general
civil (i.e., tort, contract, and real property) cases that
were disposed by bench or jury trial in 156 counties
participating in the 2005 Civil Justice Survey of State
Courts (CJSSC). Subsequently, 3,970 of those cases were
appealed to 84 appellate courts in 35 states.

National sample of general civil trials - CJSSC

The CJSSC generated national-level estimates on civil cases
concluded by bench or jury trial in state courts of general
jurisdiction in 2005. The sample was designed so that
inferences could be made about general civil trials litigated
in the nation's 75 most populous counties as well as general
civil trials disposed in counties outside the 75 most
populous. ***Footnote 4 The sample allowed for inferences to
the 75 most populous counties because prior iterations of the
CJSSC that were fielded in 1992, 1996, and 2001 were limited
to these counties rather than the national sample.***

In general, the CJSSC sample for the 75 most populous
counties is based on both civil disposition and county
population data. It is a stratified sample with 46 of the 75
most populous counties selected. The 75 most populous
counties were divided into five strata: four were based
on the number of civil dispositions, and one stratum was
added in 2001 to reflect population changes. Stratum 1
consisted of the 14 counties with the largest number of civil
case dispositions. Every county in stratum 1 was selected
with certainty. Stratum 2 consisted of 13 counties with 11
chosen for the sample. Ten of the 18 counties were selected
from stratum 3. Nine of the 26 counties in stratum 4 were
included in the sample. Stratum 5 was added to the 2001
sample to replace Norfolk County, Massachusetts, which
was a stratum 4 site that participated in the 1992 and 1996
studies but later fell out of the 75 most populous counties
in the 2000 census. Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, and
El Paso County, Texas, were randomly selected from the four
counties whose population increased sufficiently that they
joined the ranks of the 75 most populous counties.

The sample of civil trial litigation outside the nation's
75 most populous counties was constructed by first
forming 2,518 primary sampling units (PSUs) from 3,066
counties--3,141 U.S. counties minus the 75 most populous
counties. The PSUs were formed using the following criteria:
(1) they respected state lines, (2) they were based on one
or more contiguous counties, and (3) they had a minimum
estimated population of 10,000 persons. The average number
of counties in each PSU was 1.22, with a maximum of 5
counties per PSU.

The 2,518 PSUs were divided into 50 strata according to
census region, population density, and population size.
Two PSUs were selected with equal probability within each
of the 50 strata for a total of 100 PSUs and 110 counties
in the supplemental sample. Thus, a total of 156 counties,
46 representing the nation's 75 most populous and 110
representing the remainder of the nation, were used for
the sample. Substitutes from a shadow sample replaced
PSUs that were initially selected for the CJSSC but did not
participate; therefore, non-response adjustments were not
needed for this survey.

The second stage of the CJSSC sample design involved
generating lists of general civil cases concluded by trial.
Each participating jurisdiction was asked to identify a list
of tort, contract, and real property cases that had been
disposed of by jury or bench trial between January 1, 2005,
and December 31, 2005. The unweighted data represented
8,872 tort, contract, and real property trials. When these
trials are weighted, they represented 26,950 general civil
bench and jury trials disposed in a national sample of
counties.*** Footnote 5 These data were summarized in 
the BJS report, Civil Bench and Jury Trials in State Courts,
2005, NCJ 223851, BJS Web.***Because these data are 
from a weighted sample, they can be used to generate national 
estimates of civil trials that were appealed to an
intermediate appellate court or court of last resort.

Civil Justice Survey of Trials on Appeal

The CJSTA tracked every general civil case concluded by
bench or jury trial in 2005 in the 156 surveyed counties that
were subsequently appealed to an intermediate appellate
court or court of last resort. Of the 8,872 general civil
cases concluded, plaintiffs and defendants filed 1,439
appeals in 61 intermediate appellate courts and 77 appeals in
23 courts of last resort for a total of 1,516 appeals. Of the
appeals, 226 were secondary appeals, such as multiple or
cross-appeals in which either the plaintiff or defendant
filed an appeal after the initial appeal was filed. In
addition, some of the appeals were appeals to courts of last
resort following initial review by an intermediate appellate
court. Because this report focuses on the disposition of
initial appeals from civil trials, the 226 secondary appeals
were excluded from the analysis.

Most appeals (1,243) were filed directly from the trial to
the intermediate appellate courts; however, in several states
civil appeals bypassed the intermediate appellate court (or
no intermediate appellate court existed) and were filed
directly with the court of last resort. In this study 47
civil cases were appealed directly to the court of last
resort or were transferred by the intermediate appellate
court, without review, to the court of last resort. These
direct appeals to courts of last resort share the
characteristics of trial cases appealed to the intermediate
appellate level. The 47 appeals have therefore been combined
with the remaining 1,243 cases appealed to the intermediate
appellate courts. Combining the two sets of appeals allows
for analysis of all civil cases that underwent initial
appellate review after a decision was reached at the trial
court level. When weighted, these 1,290 cases represent 3,970
appeals from a base of 26,950 civil trials.

The appeals were followed until they were withdrawn,
dismissed, or decided on the merits in the appellate courts.
All appeals were tracked until March 30, 2010. A total of
five appeals had still not been decided in the intermediate
appellate courts or courts of last resort at the end of the
study or had an unknown disposition. These five cases were
excluded from the tables analyzing manner of disposition
and appellate reversal rates.

Many appeals that were withdrawn or dismissed may have
settled, thereby rendering the ultimate outcomes for these
cases unknown. The ultimate outcome for appeals that
resulted in a reversal or modification was also difficult to
determine. Many reversed appeals were deferred to the
initial trial court for a new trial. Determining outcomes for
cases sent back for a new trial and comparing the original
trial court verdicts or judgments was not within this
study's scope.

Detailed data on civil appeals were collected from the
case management systems and administrative files of the
intermediate appellate courts and courts of last resort.
Staff from the data collection agent (National Center for
State Courts) accessed the online case management systems
of appellate courts to collect detailed case level appeal
information. For those courts without online case access,
contractors were hired to review appellate case files and
complete data collection forms onsite, or staff from the
data collection agent traveled to the court to complete
the data collection. Several sites with relatively few cases
mailed the National Center for State Courts the appropriate
documentation, which was then coded into the data
collection instrument. These methods resulted in a 100%
response rate for the CJSTA.

Standard errors and confidence intervals

Because the data come from a sample, a sampling error
and confidence intervals are associated with each reported
number. Confidence intervals and standard errors for
several key variables are reported in the appendix tables.
These confidence intervals show where the reported CJSTA
numbers would fall 95% of the time in repeated sampling.
In addition, comparisons of percentages made in this
report were tested to determine if observed differences were
statistically significant. Differences described as higher,
lower, or different passed a hypothesis test at the 0.05
level of statistical significance (95% confidence level).
Since the number of civil trials appealed was relatively low,
there were few differences in key outcomes such as the
affirmance or reversal rates that tested at the 95% level
across various case characteristics including type of trial
(bench or jury). Hence, some comparisons were tested and
found to be statistically significant at the 0.10 level (90%
confidence level). For differences that tested at the 0.10
level, the term "somewhat" was used to note the nature of the
difference.

Significance testing calculations were conducted at BJS using
jackknife replication methods available in WESVAR PC.
The replicate weights needed to produce the standard errors
and confidence intervals were developed specifically for
CJSSC and CJSTA by staff at WESTAT. Replication variance
estimation consisted of repeatedly calculating estimates
for subgroups of the full sample and then computing
the variance among these "replicate" estimates. When
appropriately applied, this technique implicitly accounted
for the complexity of both a sample design and the estimators
that were used.

----------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships * 
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov
---------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This special report was written by Donald J. Farole and
Thomas H. Cohen under the supervision of Duren Banks. Ron
Malega verified the report. Data design and collection was
conducted by the National Center for State Courts (NCSC);
Nicole L. Waters, Ph.D. was the project director and provided
comments. 

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey
and Barbara Quinn produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson
prepared the report for final printing, under the supervision
of Doris J. James.

October 2011, NCJ 235187

This report in PDF and in ASCII and its related statistical
data and tables are available at the website:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1753.

---------------------------------------------------------

9/22/11 /JER /4:00pm