U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Appeals from General Civil Trials in 46 Large Counties, 
2001-2005: 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals 

July 2006, NCJ 212979

Thomas H. Cohen, J.D., Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

------------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

* Among tort trial cases concluded in 2001, litigants filed 
appeals in approximately 33% of product liability and 18% of 
medical malpractice trials. Twenty-one percent of contract 
trials and 24% of real property trials were also appealed. 

*  Forty-three percent of civil appeals were dismissed or 
withdrawn prior to disposition. Appeals filed by defendants 
were dismissed or withdrawn (47%) at higher rates compared 
to appeals filed by plaintiffs (38%).  

*  Among appeals decided on the merits, two-thirds affirmed 
and a third reversed the trial court verdict. 

* Trial court verdicts or judgments that found for 
plaintiffs were reversed or modified on appeal at higher 
rates compared to trial court outcomes favoring defendants 
(42% vs. 21%).  

*  Nearly three-fourths of civil appeals decided on the 
merits (73%) were resolved through the issuance of a signed 
majority/plurality opinion, while 28% were disposed of by an 
unsigned per curiam opinion.  
------------------------------------------------------------

In 46 large counties in 2001, 8,311 civil cases were 
concluded by trial. Plaintiffs and defendants appealed 1,204 
(about 15%) of these tort, contract, or real property cases. 

Of these 1,204 civil appeals, 43% were withdrawn, dismissed, 
or transferred from the appellate courts while the remaining 
57% were decided on their merits.

Of the civil appeals decided on the merits, the trial court 
verdict or judgment was affirmed in about two-thirds of the 
cases and reversed or modified in approximately a third. 
Most reversed or modified appeals were sent back to the 
trial court for a new trial or with additional instructions 
to modify the prejudgment award.

Of civil appeals disposed by the intermediate appellate 
courts, 218 cases (19%) were subsequently appealed to courts 
of last resort. Of these 218 cases that were further 
appealed, 12% or 25 cases were granted additional review by 
courts of last resort. 

These findings are from the 2001 Supplemental Survey of 
Civil Appeals. This study tracked 1,204 general civil (tort, 
contract, or real property) trials concluded in 2001 in 46 
large counties in which the trial verdict or judgment was 
appealed to an intermediate appellate court or court of last 
resort. 

These appeals were tracked through April of 2005.

The 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals is part of a 
series examining civil trial litigation in the Nation's most 
populous counties. Earlier reports focused on general civil 
cases concluded by bench or jury trial in the Nation's most 
populous counties in 2001. **Footnote 1:  See Civil Trial 
Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001  
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ctcvlc01.htm>, Medical 
Malpractice, Trials and Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001. 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mmtvlc01.htm>, and 
Tort Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ttvlc01.htm>. **

Civil appellate process

Litigants filing appeals must allege that the trial court 
misapplied the State's substantive or evidentiary laws, made 
a procedural mistake, or erred in holding that the verdict 
or findings were supported by the evidence.  **Footnote 2: 
See National Center for State Courts Topics on Appellate 
Courts: Structure, Jurisdiction, and Process at 
<http://www.ncsconline.org>. **

Either plaintiffs or defendants can seek to reverse, modify, 
or challenge the trial court's decision by appealing the 
verdict or judgment. Plaintiffs might appeal if they lose at 
trial or are dissatisfied with the damage award. Defendants 
might appeal a trial court decision finding in favor of the 
plaintiff. 

In most States intermediate appellate courts represent the 
first level of appellate review. Intermediate appellate 
courts typically have mandatory jurisdiction over civil 
appeals, meaning that they are required by their State 
constitution or statutes to review any case appealed to 
them. These courts are primarily concerned with correcting 
errors at the trial court level.
 
In some States, the intermediate appellate court's 
jurisdiction is geographically divided. For example, 
California has six intermediate appellate court districts, 
and each of these districts hears appeals from certain 
designated counties. Other States have only one intermediate 
appellate court to hear all appeals for that State. Courts 
of last resort represent the final level of State appellate 
review. Most courts of last resort have discretionary 
jurisdiction over civil appeals, meaning the court can 
choose whether to review an appeal from an intermediate 
appellate court. Cases reviewed by courts of last resort 
tend to involve legal or policy issues with broad 
implications for a State's legal system and citizens.  
**Footnote 3: Rottman et al. 2000. State Court Organization, 
1998. National Center for State Courts. Williamsburg, 
Virginia. 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sco98.htm>.**
 
Types of general civil cases appealed from trial court

In 2001, 8,311 general civil cases were concluded by trial 
in 46 large counties. In about 15% or 1,204 of these trials, 
the plaintiffs or defendants filed an appeal after jury 
verdict or bench judgment. Litigants filed appeals in 11% of 
tort trials, 21% of contract trials, and 24% of real 
property trials in State courts. 

Among tort trials approximately a third of product liability 
and professional malpractice trials generated an appeal. 
Eighteen percent of medical malpractice trials were 
appealed, while 5% of automobile accident trials resulted in 
an appeal. In contract cases about a third of employment 
discrimination and a quarter of tortious interference trials 
resulted in an appeal.

Types of parties filing an appeal

After a civil trial reaches a verdict or judgment, the 
plaintiffs or defendants can file an appeal alleging that 
the trial court misapplied the State's substantive or 
evidentiary laws, made a procedural mistake, or erred in 
holding that the verdict or findings were supported by the 
evidence. The party filing the appeal is the appellant or 
petitioner and the party responding to the appeal is the 
appellee or respondent. **Footnote 4: Sometimes both parties 
- plaintiffs and defendants - file notices of appeal. In 
this report, only the first appeal is counted, while the 
second, or cross-appeal, has been excluded from analysis. **

Among all 1,204 civil appeals filed between 2001 and 2005, 
plaintiffs and defendants filed appeals at nearly equal 
rates; the defendants were appellants in 52% of civil 
appeals, while the plaintiffs were appellants in the 
remaining 48%. 

Among tort trials appealed, plaintiffs (53%) were slightly 
more likely to be appellants than defendants (47%). 
Plaintiffs were appellants in 60% of medical malpractice 
appeals. Plaintiffs and defendants were equally likely to 
file an appeal in product liability trials. Defendants 
constituted the majority of appellants (58%) in the 513 
contract cases appealed from trial. The trial court outcome 
is a substantial factor influencing whether the litigants 
seek to file an appeal. For example, defendants filed 
appeals in nearly four-fifths (79%) of trials appealed from 
a verdict or judgment finding for the plaintiff. Plaintiffs 
were appellants in 90% of civil appeals from trials that 
produced a defense verdict or judgment. 

Plaintiffs also filed appeals in 21% of civil appeals from 
trials that found for the plaintiff. Dissatisfaction with 
trial damage awards may induce a plaintiff who won at trial 
to file an appeal.

Types of appellants

Of the 558 civil appeals filed by plaintiffs, individuals 
constituted 79% and businesses accounted for about 20% of 
plaintiff appellants. Governments and hospitals represented 
less than 2% of plaintiffs who filed an appeal.

Businesses constituted the majority (57%) of the 593 
defendant appellants, while individuals accounted for 
approximately 29% of defendants who filed an appeal. 
Governments and hospitals represented the remaining 15% of 
defendant appellants. 

Disposition of civil cases appealed from trial court

Appeals from trial court verdicts or judgments can produce a 
variety of  outcomes. After an appeal is filed, the parties 
may decide not to continue to pursue the appeal or the case 
may be dismissed by the appellate court. In appeals not 
withdrawn or dismissed, the appellate court reviews the 
arguments of the parties as well as the trial court record, 
then renders a decision on the merits by ruling on whether 
to affirm, reverse, or modify the trial court decision.

Trial court outcomes reversed or modified on appeal can also 
be remanded back to the trial court for further proceedings. 
In this report, those appeals that resulted in an 
affirmance, reversal, or modification of the trial court 
decision are considered to have been decided on the merits. 
Appeals not decided on the merits were dismissed or 
withdrawn from further appellate review.

Fifty-seven percent of the 1,189 civil appeals disposed 
during the 2001-2005 study period were decided on the 
merits.  **Footnote 5:  A total of 1,189 civil appeals were 
disposed during the 2001-2005 study period. The remaining 15 
appeals were still pending as of April 2005. **

The remaining 43% of appeals were either dismissed by the 
appellate court or withdrawn by the parties. Appeals filed 
by defendants were dismissed or withdrawn (47%) at higher 
rates compared to appeals filed by plaintiffs (38%). 

Of the 510 appeals not decided on the merits, approximately 
60% were withdrawn by one or both parties (not shown in a 
table). A primary reason for withdrawing an appeal is that 
the parties have settled after the appeal is filed.

The appellate court dismissed the remaining 41% of the 510 
appeals not decided on the merits. Nearly 70% of these 
dismissed appeals were removed from the appellate courts 
because of procedural errors. Other dismissed appeals were 
not reviewed because the appellate court lacked jurisdiction 
(16%) to hear the case (not shown in a table).

Review of trial court outcomes on appeal


Of the 679 appeals decided on the merits, the appellate 
court affirmed the trial court outcome in about two-thirds 
and reversed in a third. Appeals from trial court decisions 
favoring plaintiffs (42%) were more likely to be reversed or 
modified than appeals from trial court outcomes finding for 
defendants (21%).

Reversals in civil cases appealed from trial court

An appellate court can reverse a trial court verdict or 
judgment completely or partially or make other modifications 
to the trial court outcome. Trial court decisions that are 
reversed on appeal are typically sent back to the trial 
court for further proceedings. In some appeals, however, the 
appellate court can remand the case without any reversal or 
other modification. This typically occurs when cases are 
remanded to the trial court for a recalculation of court 
fees or costs.

These remanded appeals have been combined with appeals that 
modified the trial court verdict or judgment for this 
report. 

In about half of the 222 appeals in which the trial court 
verdict or judgment was reversed or modified, the appellate 
court reversed in full. The appellate court partially 
reversed the trial court verdict or judgment in 36% of these 
appeals and modified the trial court outcome in the 
remaining 13% of reversed appeals. 

For defense verdicts or judgments reversed on appeal, the 
appellate court reversed 65% in whole and 27% in part. In 
comparison, plaintiffs who won at trial and had their case 
subsequently reversed on appeal were nearly as likely to 
receive a whole (45%) or partial (40%) reversal. 

Reversed or modified appeals remanded for further 
proceedings

Seventy percent of the 222 reversed or modified appeals were 
remanded back to the trial court for further proceedings 
(not shown in a table). Of the 154 remanded appeals for 
which data were available, about 42% were sent back for a 
new trial, while 23% were remanded for the purposes of an 
adjustment to the prejudgment award, prejudgment interest, 
or other court costs. 

Impact of trial damage awards on appellate reversal rates

Trials with large damage awards, in general, produced higher 
reversal rates compared to trials with relatively modest 
damage awards. For example, nearly half (48%) of appeals 
from trials with damage awards of over $1 million were 
reversed or modified by the appellate courts. In comparison, 
the reversal rates for appeals from trials that produced 
damage awards ranging from $1 to $100,000 was 35%.

Oral arguments on appeal

Many appellate courts allow the litigating parties to engage 
in oral argument. In appellate courts, oral argument takes 
place before a panel of judges and involves a question and 
answer process focusing on the issues raised on appeal. Oral 
arguments occurred in 44% of the 1,189 civil appeals 
disposed during the 2001-2005 study period (not shown in a 
table). Approximately 80% of appeals decided on the merits 
had oral arguments.

Type of decision in civil cases appealed from trial court

Appellate courts utilize different approaches to resolve 
cases including issuing signed majority/plurality opinions 
or unsigned per curiam decisions. The resolution of a case 
through a majority/plurality opinion means that an 
individual justice wrote a majority opinion or several 
justices wrote separate plurality opinions describing the 
rationale for the appellate court's decision. 

Unsigned per curiam refers to cases in which the appellate 
court issued a written decision that is not signed by the 
individual justices. Generally, per curiam opinions are 
shorter than majority/plurality opinions, do not identify 
the judges(s) who crafted the opinion, and are not viewed as 
setting precedence. The use of per curiam opinions also 
varies by appellate court. Some appellate courts use per 
curiam opinions extensively while others utilize them 
sparingly. 

Appellate courts also issue orders that refer to short 
memos, usually unpublished, dismissing or withdrawing the 
appeal. A total of 250 orders were issued by the appellate 
courts and approximately 70% of them were applied to 
dismissed or withdrawn appeals (not shown in a table).

The appellate courts rendered a decision resulting in a 
signed majority/plurality opinion or an unsigned per curiam 
decision in 604 of the 679 appeals decided on the merits. 
The remaining 75 appeals decided on the merits resulted in 
decisions that were categorized as written orders. These 
written orders could not be classified into the signed or 
unsigned opinion categories and have been excluded from 
subsequent analysis.

About three-fourths (73%) of the 604 appeals decided on the 
merits were resolved through the issuance of a signed 
majority/plurality opinion, while the remaining 28% were 
decided by an unsigned per curiam opinion.

Appeals reversing trial court outcomes resulted in signed 
opinions (78%) more often than appeals affirming trial court 
outcomes (70%).


------------------------------------------------------------
Examples of trial verdicts or judgments involving damage 
awards over $1 million reversed on appeal

The decision by an appellate court to reverse a trial 
court's verdict or judgment can have different impacts on 
case outcomes. The following cases provide examples of the 
effects of appellate reversals on trial verdicts or 
judgments involving damage awards over $1 million:

*  A seller of a company (plaintiff) brought a fraud action 
lawsuit against the company's buyers (defendants) claiming 
they committed statutory fraud, common law fraud, and 
securities fraud. The case went to a jury trial which found 
in favor of the plaintiff and awarded $4.7 million in 
damages. The defendant appealed asserting that the legal and 
factual evidence did not support the jury's findings of 
fraud and damages. The appellate court agreed with the 
defendant's contentions, reversed the trial court verdict in 
full, and held that the plaintiff could not take any of the 
$4.7 million verdict (Source 125 S.W.3d 113).

*  A plaintiff sued multiple defendants alleging they had 
engaged in malicious prosecution. The jury found for the 
plaintiff and awarded damages of $8.9 million. Two 
defendants appealed the trial court verdict. The appellate 
court dismissed one appeal, but granted review for the other 
finding that the trial court had issued improper jury 
instructions. The appellate court reversed the trial court 
verdict for this one defendant and remanded the case back 
for a new trial on liability and damages. The other 
defendants remained liable to the plaintiff for their 
portion of the $8.9 million award (Source 2003 WL 22080233; 
Cal.App.4 Dist, Opinion not published).

*  A plaintiff sued a defendant over injuries sustained 
while working on a sea vessel that left the plaintiff a 
quadriplegic. The jury found for the plaintiff and awarded 
$5.8 million in damages. The defendant appealed asserting 
that the trial court erred by refusing to admit evidence 
that the plaintiff would receive an annuity of $10,000 per 
month in injury compensation. The appellate court found that 
the annuity payment evidence should have been admitted and 
remanded the case back to the trial court with instructions 
to reduce $540,520 from the final judgment (Source 832 
So.2d. 829). 
-----------------------------------------------------------

Appeals producing published opinions

Once an opinion is published, it becomes precedent that can 
be cited by attorneys or other courts; rulings for 
unpublished opinions, in comparison, apply only to those 
cases for which they were written. **Footnote 6: R. 
Schauffler, R. LaFountain, N. Kauder, & S. Strickland, 
Examining the Work of State Courts, 2004: A National 
Perspective from the Court Statistics Project (National 
Center for State Courts 2005). ** 

A third of the 604 appeals decided on the merits produced a 
published opinion. Whether the trial court verdict or 
judgment was upheld on appeal influenced the decision to 
publish an opinion. Nearly half of appeals (46%) that 
reversed or modified the trial court decision resulted in a 
published opinion. In comparison, published opinions were 
generated in a quarter (26%) of appeals affirming the trial 
court decision.

Dissenting opinions

When an opinion is published, sometimes not all the judges 
are in agreement with the majority's legal rationale or 
holding. In such cases, justices have discretion to write a 
dissenting opinion. Judges wrote dissents in about 7% of 
published opinions (not shown in figure). Nearly 10% of 
published opinions that completely reversed a trial court's 
verdict or judgment resulted in a dissent (figure 1). 
Dissents were somewhat less common among published opinions 
that reversed a trial court holding in part (7%) or affirmed 
a trial court decision (5%).

Alternative dispute resolution in appellate courts 

Some States have turned to mediation programs to encourage 
case settlement at the appellate level. In appellate court 
mediation programs, a third party mediator attempts to 
encourage the parties to settle prior to case resolution 
by the court. Thirty-five percent of civil cases appealed 
from the trial courts of States participating in alternative 
dispute resolution programs were referred to appellate court 
mediation. About a third (34%) of the 259 referred appeals 
were resolved through mediation programs.


Case processing time in civil appeals

Among all civil appeals, the average case processing time 
from filing of the appeal to final disposition was 11 
months, with half of the appeals taking a minimum of 10 
months to dispose. Appeals reversing or modifying the trial 
court verdict or judgment took an average of about 17 months 
to dispose, while appeals affirming the trial court decision 
were resolved within an average of 15 months. The average 
case processing time for appeals that were dismissed, 
withdrawn, or transferred was 6 months.

Subsequent appeals to courts of last resort

Most of the 46 counties in this survey were located in 
States that had two levels of appellate review. ** Footnote 
7: The exceptions are Honolulu, Hawaii and Fairfax, 
Virginia. In these States, civil cases are appealed directly 
from the trial court to the court of last resort. ** The 
first level involves review by an intermediate appellate 
court. In these States, parties dissatisfied with the 
intermediate appellate court's holding can appeal further to 
the State's court of last resort. Courts of last resort 
represent the final stages of appellate review. These courts 
have discretion to accept or reject appeals and the appeals 
they choose to hear tend to involve complex legal issues and 
have broad policy and legal implications. ** Footnote 8: See 
Rottman et. al. 2000. State Court Organization, 1998. 
National Center for State Courts. Williamsburg, Virginia. **

Approximately 19% of civil appeals disposed of by the 
intermediate appellate courts were subsequently appealed to 
courts of last resort for a total of 218 cases. The rate in 
which cases were further appealed varied by how they were 
handled at the intermediate appellate court level. About 43% 
of appeals that reversed or modified a trial court's verdict 
or judgment were further appealed to the court of last 
resort. Twenty-six percent of appeals affirming the trial 
court outcome were subsequently appealed to the court of 
last resort and about 1% of appeals that were dismissed, 
withdrawn, or transferred were further appealed.

Courts of last resort granted review in 12% of the 218 
appeals from intermediate appellate courts. Eighteen percent 
of appeals from decisions to reverse or modify a trial court 
outcome were granted further review, and 6% of appeals from 
cases affirming a trial court decision were subsequently 
reviewed by courts of last resort. 

------------------------------------------------------------
Characteristics of appeals granted additional review by 
courts of last resort in 46 large counties, 2001-2005

Thirty primary appeals were disposed in the intermediate 
appellate courts in which the courts of last resort 
subsequently decided to grant additional review. In 25 of 
these appeals the petitioner requested, and the courts of 
last resort granted, additional review. For the five 
additional appeals, the courts of last resort took 
jurisdictional control over the case prior to the parties 
requesting additional review.

Amicus briefs - meaning briefs filed by someone who is not a 
party to the litigation, but who believes that the court's 
decision may affect its interest - were filed in 30% of 
civil appeals granted additional review by courts of last 
resort.

Of the 30 appeals granted additional review in courts of 
last resort –

*  9 were pending at the end of the study period.

*  2 were dismissed or transferred. 

*  19 were decided on the merits.

Among the 19 appeals decided on the merits in courts of last 
resort –

*  trial court outcomes were reversed or modified in 10 
appeals, 4 of which were completely reversed, 5 partially 
reversed, and 1 modified. 

*  95% resulted in a signed majority/plurality opinion

*  5% were decided through an unsigned per curiam opinion.

*  all 19 produced a published decision and judges dissented 
in 42% of these published decisions. 

The average case processing time from the filing of an 
appeal with a court of last resort to the disposition of 
that appeal was 15 months.
---------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------
2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals: Intermediate 
Appellate and Court of Last Resort Opinion Survey

In addition to the data presented in this report, the 
National Center for State Courts (NCSC) coded 646 written 
opinions, unsigned per curiam opinions, or published orders 
produced by the intermediate appellate courts in this survey 
of civil appeals (Intermediate Appellate Court Opinion 
Survey). This dataset offers a rich set of contextual 
variables on civil opinions produced at the intermediate 
appellate court level. 

Many opinions involve multiple legal issues and a maximum of 
eight issues for each appeal have been coded in this 
dataset. Some of the data fields include the number of legal 
issues handled on appeal, the alleged trial court errors 
addressed on appeal, and the underlying legal issues raised 
in these written opinions. The dataset also focuses on how 
the appellate courts resolved each legal issue raised, the 
standard of review utilized to decide these legal issues, 
and the primary statutory authority that served as a basis 
for addressing these issues. 

The NCSC also coded 21 written opinions, unsigned per curiam 
opinions, or published orders produced by the courts of last 
resort in this survey of civil appeals (Court of Last Resort 
Opinion Survey). This dataset contains fields similar to the 
intermediate appellate court opinion survey. Some of the 
variable fields include number of issues addressed on 
appeal, types of issues handled on appeal, standard of 
review applied on appeal, and the resolution of each issue 
raised on appeal. 

Several appendices on the Internet provide information on 
the types of data coded from these published opinions. The 
intermediate appellate court and court of last resort 
opinion surveys are available at the National Archive of 
Criminal Justice Data, maintained by the Inter-University 
Consortium for Political and Social Research at the 
University of Michigan 
(http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/index.html), 1-800-999-
0960.

------------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Definitions of disposition types

Jury trial: A trial held before and decided by a group of 
laypersons selected according to the law presided over by a 
judge culminating in a verdict for the plaintiff(s) and/or 
defendant(s).

Bench trial (nonjury trial): A trial held in the absence of 
a jury and decided by a judge culminating in a judgment for 
the plaintiff(s) and/or defendant(s).

Intermediate appellate court: Intermediate appellate courts 
represent the first level of appellate review. Intermediate 
appellate courts typically have mandatory jurisdiction over 
civil appeals, meaning that they are required by their State 
constitution or statutes to review any case appealed to 
them. 

Courts of last resort: Courts of last resort represent the 
final level of State appellate review. Most courts of last 
resort have discretionary jurisdiction over civil appeals, 
allowing them to choose whether to review an appeal from an 
intermediate appellate court. 

Affirmed appeal: Appellate court upheld the entire trial 
court verdict or judgment.

Reversed appeal: Appellate court reversed the trial court 
verdict or judgment in whole or in part.

Modified appeal: Appellate court modified the trial court's 
resolution of an issue without remanding the case back to 
the trial court.

Remanded appeal: The appellate court sent the case back to 
the trial court for additional proceedings.

Dismissed appeal: The appellate court dismissed the case 
because the court lacked jurisdiction to hear the case, a 
procedural error prevented review of the issues raised, the 
appeal was improvidently granted, or no valid issue was 
raised on appeal.

Withdrawn appeal: Appeal was withdrawn by either or both 
parties.

Transferred appeal: Appeal was transferred to another court. 
Typically a transfer means that the appeal was sent from the 
intermediate appellate court to the court of last resort or 
transferred to another jurisdiction.

Signed majority/plurality opinion: A member of the appellate 
court wrote a majority opinion with detailed reasons for the 
decision, or members of the court wrote separate opinions 
that constitute a plurality.

Unsigned (per curiam) opinion: The appellate court issued a 
written decision not signed by any justice.

Order: The court issued an order dismissing or resolving the 
appeal.

Sample of appeals

This report is a follow up to the 2001 Civil Justice Survey 
of State Courts which examined 8,311 general civil cases 
(e.g., tort, contract, and real property) concluded by bench 
or jury trial in a sample of 46 of the Nation's 75 most 
populous counties in 2001. These cases were then weighted to 
represent the 11,908 general civil trials concluded in the 
Nation's 75 most populous counties.

Data from the 2001 Civil Trial Survey were used to produce 
several BJS reports describing the characteristics of civil 
litigation in State courts. These and other reports on civil 
justice can be accessed at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/civil.htm>.

The 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals study plan was 
to track every general civil case concluded by bench or jury 
trial in 2001 in the 46 surveyed counties that were 
subsequently appealed to an intermediate appellate court or 
court of last resort. In the 2001 Civil Justice Survey of 
State Courts, information was collected for every general 
civil trial concluded in 43 of the 46 selected counties. In 
these counties, the 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil 
Appeals collected information on all general trials that 
produced an appeal. In two of the remaining three counties, 
(Cook and Philadelphia), a sample of general civil trials 
was collected in the 2001 survey. In Bergen county some 
civil case files were unavailable for coding purposes. In 
these counties, the appeals survey was able to obtain 
information for both those general civil trials concluded in 
2001 that were subsequently appealed and in addition, was 
able to collect information for those general civil appeals 
that were not captured at the trial court level. 

The 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals presents data 
on general civil appeals that originated from 46 of the 
Nation's 75 most populous counties. Unlike the 2001 Civil 
Justice Survey of State Courts, cases were not weighted to 
represent appeals in the Nation's 75 most populous counties.

The appeals were followed until they were withdrawn, 
dismissed, or decided on the merits in the appellate courts. 
All appeals were tracked until April 30, 2005. Appeals not 
disposed on that date are identified as pending.

Many appeals that were withdrawn or dismissed may settle, 
thereby rendering the ultimate outcomes for these cases 
unknown. The outcomes for appeals that resulted in a 
reversal or modification were also difficult to determine. 
Many reversed appeals were remanded back to the trial court 
for a new trial. 

Determining the eventual outcomes for those cases that were 
sent back for a new trial and how they compared to the 
original trial court's verdicts or judgments was not within 
this study's scope.

Of the 8,311 general civil cases concluded by trial in 46 
large counties in 2001, plaintiffs and defendants filed 
1,419 appeals. A total of 215 of these cases were secondary 
appeals such as cross-appeals in which either the plaintiff 
or defendant filed notice of appeal after the initial appeal 
was filed.

These 215 secondary appeals were excluded from further 
analysis. Most of the 1,204 primary appeals were filed 
directly from the trial to the intermediate appellate 
courts; however, in two States (Hawaii and Virginia), civil 
appeals bypass the intermediate appellate court and are 
filed directly with the court of last resort. 

In Hawaii civil appeals go directly to the court of last 
resort, which has discretion to send the case to the 
intermediate appellate court. In this study, seven civil 
trials were appealed and remained in the Hawaii court of 
last resort. In Virginia civil cases are appealed directly 
from the trial court to the court of last resort. Virginia 
does not allow civil appeals as a matter of right. In this 
study 22 civil cases were appealed directly from the 
Virginia trial court to the court of last resort. 

Since the intermediate appellate courts are bypassed in 
Hawaii and Virginia, the 29 appeals to courts of last resort 
in these two States share the characteristics of trial cases 
appealed from verdict or judgment for further review at the 
intermediate appellate level. Appeals in Hawaii and 
Virginia, therefore, have been combined with the remaining 
1,175 cases appealed from the trial to the intermediate 
appellate courts with jurisdiction over the surveyed 
counties. Appeals subsequently reviewed by courts of last 

resort after initially being reviewed by intermediate 
appellate courts are examined in the "Characteristics of 
appeals granted additional review by courts of last resort" 
text box of this report.

Data coding

For each appeal, a standard coding form was manually 
completed by on-site court staff and personnel from the 
National Center for State Courts to record detailed case 
processing information about that appeal. The standard 
coding form is available in the appellate database codebook.

-------------------------------------------------------------
This report and others fromthe Bureau of Justice Statistics 
are available through the Internet 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>
The data from the 2001 Supplemental Survey of Civil Appeals are
available at the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, maintained
by the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research at the University of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960. 
The archive may also be accessed at 
<www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/>

--------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs

Partnerships for Safer Communities 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov>
---------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey Sedgwick is the 
director.  BJS Special Reports address a specific topic 
in depth from one or more datasets that cover many topics.
Thomas H. Cohen wrote this report under the supervision 
of Steven K. Smith. Mark Motivans provided statistical review. 
Erica Smith provided technical review and comments.

Data collection was supervised by the National Center for 
State Courts (NCSC). Paula Hannaford-Agor was the project 
director. Paula Hannaford-Agor and Nicole Waters of the 
NCSC provided comments. Nicole Waters also provided data 
assistance. Katrina Baum, Joanna Bradford, Kristen Hughes, 
and Vicky Tsaparas also provided substantive editorial 
comments. Tina Dorsey and Marianne Zawitz produced and 
edited the report. Jayne Robinson prepared the report 
for final printing.
-------------------------------------------------------------

6/27/06 pm
July 2006, NCJ 212979


