U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Assessing Measurement Techniques for Identifying
Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Observation-Based
Data Collection in Airports and at Immigration
Checkpoints

January 2003, NCJ 196855


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/amtireg.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------

Based on a report and data provided by 
Humanalysis, Inc.

Over the past several years State and local governments have
engaged in data collection regarding demographic
characteristics of persons stopped by the police. These efforts
are aimed at understanding factors used by law enforcement to
make such stops.  While data collections on law enforcement
encounters have been undertaken, analysts have debated the
availability of methods to meaningfully analyze these data. One
complicating factor is the need to identify the baseline data
necessary to make assessments regarding different racial
groups' experience with the police.

In 1999 several Federal law enforcement agencies designed
and implemented data collection procedures to capture race
and ethnicity information on persons stopped by their officers. 
The Immigration and Naturalization Service's (INS) Border
Patrol agents began collecting race and ethnicity data for those
persons stopped at selected border crossings and highway
checkpoints. Likewise Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
agents collected data on nonspecific suspects stopped in
selected airports. 

At the State level, studies have been undertaken in Maryland,
California, and New Jersey. New Jersey measured
characteristics of persons using the New Jersey Turnpike and
those that were speeding. (See list of sources.)

The various Federal and State agencies collecting the data
wanted to have baseline data available to estimate the 
race and ethnicity of all persons passing through their area of
responsibility. Lacking this kind of baseline data, it would not be
possible to know whether the characteristics of the persons
stopped were disproportionate to all those who had a probability
of being stopped. 

Scope

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), working with the Bureau
of Transportation Statistics (BTS), contracted with Humanalysis,
Inc., of Orlando, Florida, to conduct observational studies at two
sites: 1) Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) Border
Patrol Checkpoint along Interstate 5 in San Clemente,
California, and 2) the Detroit Metropolitan Airport. This report
describes the findings from both data collections and assesses
the difficulties in implementing this kind of a study. 

The primary object of the observational studies was to determine 
the feasibility of using such techniques for estimating
the demographic characteristics of persons coming through the
checkpoint and airport, and what issues would be involved in
replicating this technique in other locations. Can people's race
and ethnicity be easily recorded from observational techniques?
To what extent do practical issues, such as gaining authorized
access or proximity to persons under observation, play in the
implementation of this kind of study? 

OMB standards for classification of Federal data on race
and ethnicity 

OMB Statistical Policy Directive No. 15 "Race and Ethnic
Standards for Federal Statistics and Administrative Reporting"
established standards for observer-collected data on race and
ethnicity. Federal law enforcement agencies participating in the
data collection used these categories on their data collection
forms. 

The base data collection at the two sites implemented the
combined race/ethnicity format which uses the following
categories: 
*  American Indian or Alaska Native
*  Asian
*  Black or African American
*  Hispanic or Latino
*  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
*  White.

---------------------------------------------
This study was supported by Bureau of Transportation 
Statistics contract number DTTS59-01-F-10151 to 
Humanalysis, Inc. The contents of this document do 
not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the U.S. Department
of Justice, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 
or the U.S. Department of Transportation.
----------------------------------------------

Practical issues for observational studies

Practical arrangements were necessary to conduct an
observational study, such as gaining permission to access the
site and finding an unobtrusive location within the site, as 
well as dealing with issues of traffic volume, poor lighting, 
and multiple points of ingress and egress. 

Site access

Gaining approval to conduct the observation test project
required a great deal of effort over many months. BJS was
denied access by three airports before the Detroit airport was
approached and agreed to allow observers into the facility.
Numerous sites were reviewed before the INS San Clemente
checkpoint was selected.  The terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, also added a 4-month delay in obtaining permission to
conduct the studies.

Limitations

Demographic data were not available from either site. Since it
was not critical that the observer accurately categorize the
person's race or ethnicity, as the premise of racial profiling is 
the perception of the officer, the project tested the observation
method to assess whether baseline data could practicably be
collected. 

Border crossing checkpoint study

Study location

INS selected the Border Patrol checkpoint at San Clemente,
California, as the site for the observational study. The
checkpoint is located on Interstate I-5 approximately 5 miles
south of San Clemente, within the Camp Pendleton US Marine
base. Interstate I-5 is the main north-south coastal highway in
California and has four traffic lanes at the checkpoint with
daytime traffic flow normally in thousands of cars per hour. 

The Border Patrol site has a two-story operations building and a
one-story administration building for the patrol agent in charge
and staff. 

Border Patrol checkpoint on I-5 south

The actual checkpoint was covered by a pavilion that shades
the area during the day. Suspended lights provided illumination
after sunset.

The volume of traffic at the checkpoint varied with time and day.
The Border Patrol monitored traffic flow using video cameras
south of the checkpoint.  When the backup of vehicles extended
more than a mile, the checkpoint was shut down and vehicles
were allowed to pass at highway speed. This occurred most
often during the morning and afternoon rush hours on weekdays
and from midmorning through evening on weekends. 

Setting up the checkpoint consisted of positioning vans in both
breakdown lanes, rolling out two "wheeled" stop signs, and
opening the circuit breaker controlling power to the checkpoint
area. The vans had two large, flashing red lights on the front to
signal traffic to prepare to stop and a series of bright lights 
along the side that shone into the cars as they came to a stop. 
This additional lighting was particularly helpful at night, as 
the overhead lights of the checkpoint structure created deep
shadows inside the cars. 

The Border Patrol agents positioned themselves behind the
mobile stop signs between lanes one and two and lanes three
and four. Each agent controlled the two lanes passing on either
side. The vehicles were waved through the checkpoint at 5 to 10
miles per hour until an agent decided to stop one. 

While agents looked for vehicles carrying anyone they might
recognize as a felon (a "most wanted" gallery was posted in the
operations anteroom), they also stopped any vehicle with
"covered or occluded objects in the backseat (or elsewhere)."
Most stops resulted in a quick survey of the interior and a few
verbal questions and the vehicle was allowed to continue. 
An agent might require a vehicle to pull forward to a covered
inspection area to the right of the highway. There, additional
agents assisted in inspecting the vehicle and questioning the
occupants.  Dogs were also used in the area to sniff out drugs
and other substances.  When criminal activity was suspected,
the suspects were handcuffed and removed from the area.

Viewing location at checkpoint

From the border checkpoint location on I-5 the enumerators
were able to see the nearest lane of traffic with a downward
viewing angle of approximately 18 degrees. The distance from
enumerator to car was approximately 20 feet.

Two obstacles limited the viewing range: the heavy support
girders, both vertical and diagonal, of the checkpoint and the
Border Patrol van parked in the right breakdown lane at the stop
point.  The enumerators had an effective viewing range, left to
right, of approximately 54 degrees. The distance between
vertical supports was approximately 9 feet.

Enumerators

Four enumerators (two white females and two white males) rotated 
through observation sessions in pairs. All enumerators were 
required to wear Border Patrol identification badges during
their time on the site. 

Materials

All data were recorded on a survey collection form containing
columns for date, time, vehicle identification, window tint, driver
and passenger race/ethnicity and gender classification, as well
as indicators for observational certainty. As specified, the
possible race/ethnicity classifications were in accordance with
the OMB standards. An additional classification of "unknown"
was also available. 
  
Observation sessions

Day one (Thursday, January 10, 2002)

The first pair of observers, a male and a female, conducted
three sessions on the first day of the study. The observation
times were spread out during morning, afternoon, and early
evening.  In the first session it became apparent that the limited
viewing range, coupled with the speed of the vehicles during
normal operation, impacted the observers' ability to collect all
data on the survey collection form. 

The observers could not see license plates, and the only vehicle
identification possible was an occasional notation by both
enumerators such as "red car" or "blue SUV." A slight break in
traffic flow (three car lengths or more) gave the opportunity to
record the type of vehicle approaching. These became the only
milestones for assuring the alignment of collected data. 

Following the first 5 minutes of the first recording session, the
fields (L, M, H for low, medium, high surety) on the collection
form for recording the surety of each assignment of
race/ethnicity were also ignored. There was insufficient time to
record any data other than the race/ethnicity and gender of the
driver and of any passengers. Due to the pace and volume of
traffic during the first session, subsequent observation sessions
were limited to 30 minutes to maintain the quality of the
recordings.

Day two (Friday, January 12, 2002)

On the second day, two additional enumerators were trained
during the first morning session. They were then paired with an
enumerator from the previous day for sessions 5 through 8.

Due to heavy traffic flow during late Friday afternoon, the
checkpoint was shut down. During the evening the enumerators
experienced difficulty viewing into the vehicles when the area
lights were illuminated. As a consequence, the evening
sessions were stopped for the day. 

This experience indicated that the use of enumerators to record
data on passing vehicles at night would not be productive. This
phenomenon could apply to controlled land border crossings as
well.

Day three (Saturday, January 13, 2002)

On day three of the study, four sessions were completed which
included stoppages for checkpoint shutdowns. The last session
of the day occurred just before noon. The traffic flow was so
heavy the watch commander determined that the checkpoint
would be shut down for the rest of the afternoon.

Results 

All observational data for each session and by each enumerator
were compiled, resulting in 12 sessions that represented 3,534
pairs of vehicle observations. The race/ethnicity and gender
classifications were recoded into numeric values for further
analyses.

The frequency and percent distributions of the total driver
observations for each classification were summarized for each
session. The enumerators classified the majority of drivers
across all sessions as "White male" (ranging from 35% to 60%
of all observations. The enumerators classified more drivers as
"White female," than other nonwhite male or female
classifications, across seven sessions (ranging from 17% to
23% of all observations). During five sessions -- 4, 6, 8, 9, and
10 -- at least one enumerator in each session classified more
drivers as "Hispanic male" than "White female." 

Across all sessions, no drivers or passengers were classified as
"Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander" or "American Indian/Alaska
Native." 

The enumerators classified a majority of vehicles across all
sessions as having only a driver with no passengers. The
percent of driver-only vehicle observations ranged from 60% of
the total weekend observations to 96% of the weekday
observations. 

Across the majority of reported observations of drivers with
passengers, the race/ethnicity classification of the driver
matched the race/ethnicity classification of the passenger(s).
The percent of race/ethnicity observed matches of drivers and
passengers ranged from 80% to 100% of all combined observations.

Discussion

The degree of inter-rater agreement for driver race/ethnicity
classification was relatively high across all sessions. Combined,
the paired enumerators agreed on the race and ethnicity
categorization of observed persons in 77% of the cases. The
checkpoint study was limited by the constraints of the
enumerators' position at the site location and the continuous
flow of the traffic being observed. 

Detroit (Wayne County) Metropolitan Airport

Study location

The Department of Justice selected the Detroit Metropolitan
Airport for the observational study. Observation locations and
collection times were restricted by the airport's legal counsel 
in consultation with the Detroit Airport Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) security chief. Contract personnel were
limited to observations in unsecured areas of three terminals
between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 

Viewing location at airport

Project staff initially visited all possible viewing locations in 
the Detroit airport's unsecured areas. Ultimately, two clear viewing
locations were found for data collection. One observation point
was in the Northwest Airlines main terminal.  The terminal
consists of two large ticketing areas (about 12 ticket agent
positions per area) positioned on either side of the access to the
security point.  The Northwest Airlines terminal manager
restricted the enumerators to a standing position against a wall
approximately 6 feet from the roped serpentine enclosure that
guided passengers into the security checkpoint. The second
observation point was in the Northwest International departure.
Only one observation session was conducted at this location at
a departure time when the passenger traffic was substantial
enough to collect an adequate sample. The viewing location
was again within 6 feet of the roped passenger enclosure. 
Sessions were limited to 30 minutes to maintain recording
quality.

Enumerators

Two enumerators (white female and white male) conducted all
observation sessions. While arrangements had been made with
local universities for additional enumerators, the limitations
placed on viewing locations eliminated the need for additional
personnel.
 
Materials

All data were recorded on a survey collection form containing
columns for date, time, sampling location, passenger
race/ethnicity, gender, age (adult/ child), type and number of
carry-ons, whether she/he was traveling alone, and an indicator
of observational certainty. The race/ethnicity classifications were
in accordance with the OMB government standards. An
additional classification of "unknown" was also used. 

Observation sessions (Thursday, January 31, 2002, through
Saturday, February 2, 2002)

The enumerators conducted four sessions on the first day of the
study. Due to adverse winter weather conditions, more than half
of the day's flights were canceled and passenger traffic through
the security checkpoints was sporadic. As weather conditions
improved, the enumerators conducted 30-minute observation
sessions during the morning, afternoon, and early evening. 
After the first 5 minutes of session 1 observations, it was
apparent that the close viewing range made identification
certainty "high" and this category was ignored in subsequent
recordings.  Three observation sessions were conducted in the
main terminal and one session was conducted in the
international departure terminal. Three additional observation
sessions were conducted on each of the second and third days
in the main terminal. 

Results 

All observational data for each session and each enumerator
were compiled resulting in 10 sessions representing 1,928 pairs
of departing passenger observations. The gender,
race/ethnicity, and carry-on classifications were recoded into
numeric values for further analyses.

The frequencies and percents of the total observations for each
race/ethnicity and gender classification made by each observer
were summarized for each session. The majority of departing
passengers observed in all 10 sessions were classified as white
(from approximately 78% to 94% of the total observations). The
majority of departing passengers across 9 of the 10 sessions
were white males (from approximately 41% to 58% of the total
observations. White females were observed more frequently
than other male or female classifications across all 10 sessions
(from approximately 33% to 49% of the total observations).
More white females than white males were observed during
session 8. Across all sessions, only two passengers were
classified as American Indian/Alaska Native, and none was
classified as Native Hawaiian/ Pacific Islander. 

Discussion

The 10 sessions conducted over 3 days in this pilot observational 
study allowed the observer to assess the inter-rater reliability 
of race/ethnicity and gender identification.  Given the proximity 
of the observers to the passengers, race/ethnicity, gender, and 
age identifications were fairly easy to determine and the 
inter-rater agreement was good. In the airport the paired observers 
agreed with their race and ethnicity categorization of persons in 
97% of the cases (1,862/1,928).    

Recommendations for future observational studies

Gaining access to sites and viewing areas with the best
proximity for observational studies was the most difficult aspect
of this project. To assess the validity of these observational
classifications, sessions would also require additional data
based on the subjects self-reports of their race/ethnicity.  

An actual border crossing, where each car is stopped, would be
more suitable than a checkpoint. Using such a location would
allow interviews of a random sample of drivers concerning their
demographic characteristics and a comparison of the results to
enumerators' classifications.

A comprehensive airport study requires access to all areas
(gates, security checkpoints [from both sides], concourses,
entrances, and so on). Airports with various designs and open
or less restricted access need to be selected for future studies
to provide an opportunity to undertake a comparison of
sampling designs, and to allow for the collection of demographic
data from airport users.  

Sources for further information

Final Report of the New Jersey State Review Team Regarding
Allegations of Racial Profiling, July 1999.

General Accounting Office (GAO). Racial profiling: Limited data
available on motorist stops. March 2000. (Report to the
Honorable James E. Clyburn, Chairman, Congressional Black
Caucus.)

Harris, David. "Stories, the Statistics, and the Law: 'Why Driving
While Black' Matters, Minnesota Law Review. Volume 84, Issue
2. December 1999: 265-325.

Lamberth, John. Revised Statistical Analysis of the Incidence of
Police Stops and Arrests of Black Drivers/Travelers on the New
Jersey Turnpike Between Exits or Interchanges 1 and 3 from the
Years 1988 through 1991. November 11, 1994.
<http://www.lamberthconsulting.com/research_articles.asp>.

Montgomery County, Maryland Department of Police. Traffic Stop 
Data Collection Analysis: First Report Covering the Period 
October 2000 through March 2001. October 31, 2001.
-----. Traffic Stop Data Collection Analysis: Second Report
Covering the Period April 2001 through September 2001.
January 30, 2002.
-----. Traffic Stop Data Collection Analysis: Third Report
Covering the Period October 2001 through March 2002. May 31,
2002.

Office of the Attorney General. Speed Violation Survey of the
New Jersey Turnpike: Final Report. Trenton, NJ. December
2001.

San Diego Police Department. Vehicle Stop Study: Mid-Year
Report. September 21, 2000. 

San Jose Police Department. Vehicle Stop Demographic Study.
December 1, 2000. (for the period June 1999 to July 2000).

------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department of 
Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director.

Humanalysis Inc. collected the data and provided 
the information for this report. At BJS, Steven K. 
Smith and Carol J. DeFrances prepared this report.  
Carolyn C. Williams produced and edited the
report.  

The following individuals provided assistance to 
Humanalysis personnel as they conducted the border 
checkpoint and airport observational studies: James 
St. Hilaire from INS, Stephen Gonzales from INS, Wes 
Knippler from INS, and Delphine Fairbanks from the 
Detroit Municipal Airport.

January 2003, NCJ 196855
---------------------------------------------

End of file
01/23/03 ih