U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Background Checks for Firearm
Transfers, 2000


June 2001, NCJ 187985

----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft00.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#bcft
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver 
Regional Justice Information Service

Sidra Lea Gifford 
Devon B. Adams 
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Background checks of applications for firearm transfers 
since implementation of the Brady Act

Application                      National total/a
for firearm transfer      2000       1999       1994-2000/b
 
Received               7,699,000   8,621,000    29,953,000
Rejected                 155,000     204,000       691,000
 
Rejection rate               2.0%        2.4%          2.3%
 
Note: All counts are rounded.
See notes on table 1.

*  From the inception of the Brady Act on
March 1, 1994, to December 31, 2000,
nearly 30 million applications for firearm
transfers were subject to background
checks.  About 691,000 applications were
rejected.

*  The number of applications for firearm
transfers or permits decreased 11%, from
8.6 million in 1999 to 7.7 million in 2000.  
The FBI's National Instant Criminal Background
Check System Operations Center experienced 
a decrease, as did 17 State points of contact, 
with the largest decreases in California and 
Indiana (about 25%).

*  In 2000 alone, 155,000 (2.0%) of
approximately 7,699,000 applications for
firearm transfers or permits were rejected by
the FBI or State and local agencies.  The
national rejection rate decreased from 2.4%
in 1999 to 2.0% in 2000.

*  State and local agencies maintain a
significant role in background checks,
conducting checks on almost half of the
applications for firearm transfers or permits
in 2000, while the FBI was responsible for
the remainder.

*  The rejection rate for applications checked
by the FBI (1.6%) was lower than the rate for
checks by State and local agencies (2.5%). 
Rejection rates for individual States ranged
from over 7% to less than 1%.

*  Felony convictions or indictments
accounted for 57.6% of the rejections by State
and local agencies, a lower proportion than
in previous years (72.5% in 1999).
----------------------------------------------------------

The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act
(the Brady Act) provides for the legal transfer
of firearms by mandating criminal history
background checks on persons applying for
firearms from federally licensed firearm
dealers (Federal Firearm Licensees or
FFL's).  The direct impact of the Brady Act
and similar State laws is described in this
Bulletin, which reports the number of
applications for firearm transfers and
permits, the number of rejections that
resulted from background checks, reasons
for rejection, and rates of rejection for 
many States.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act
became effective on November 30, 1998. 
The act established the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
and requires a background check by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or a
State point of contact (POC) on all persons
applying to receive a handgun or long gun
from a FFL.  The Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) began the Firearm Inquiry Statistics
(FIST) program in 1995 to provide
information on the numbers of applications
and rejections resulting from the Brady Act. 
 
Nearly all applications included in the FIST
survey were subject to a NICS check, as well
as checks to fulfill additional State
requirements.  A small number of
applications were subject only to checks
required by State laws.  (See Components of
the National firearm check system
for further details.)  

The information in this Bulletin was collected
from 19 statewide POCs and over 600 State
and local agencies  that conduct checks
under Federal and State laws.  Statistics are
also included from data compiled by the FBI
on the inquiries or transactions handled by
the NICS operations center.***Footnote 1: The
number of background checks handled by State
POC's, as reported in the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
Operations Report (January 1- December 31,
2000), April 2001, may be higher than the
estimates reported here because multiple
inquiries or transactions for the same
application (which may be done at the 
discretion of the discretion of the agency)
are deleted from FIST data but are routinely
retained in FBI operational statistics.***

National estimates

Fewer applications were filed in 2000 than in
1999, decreasing from 8.6 to 7.7 million, or
11%.  Rejections fell from 204,000 in 1999 to
153,000 in 2000, a decrease of 25%.  

According to the NICS operations report, the
FBI processed nearly 4.3 million applications
for firearm transfers in 2000.  State and local
checking agencies processed an additional
3.5 million, according to FIST data.

When a background check produces
evidence of factors that disqualify an
applicant from owning a firearm, the
application is rejected.  (See definitions in
Methodology for more detail.)  In 2000
the FBI rejected 67,000 firearm transfer
applications, a 1.6% rejection rate, while
State and local agencies rejected 86,000, a
rate of 2.5%.  Together, approximately
153,000 firearm transfer applications were
rejected in 2000, a rate of 2.0%.  This overall
rate of rejection decreased from 2.4% in
1999, the first year of permanent Brady.

Since the inception of the Brady Act (the
interim provisions going into effect on March
1, 1994), nearly 30 million applications for
firearm transfers have been checked, of
which 689,000 were rejected, a rejection rate
of 2.3%.  Permanent Brady's addition of long
gun and pawn redemption checks resulted in
an increase in the volume of background
checks in 1999 and 2000, but did not appear
to substantially effect the national rejection
rate.  That rate was 2.5% during the 5 years
of the interim period (1994-98) and 2.2%
during 1999-2000, the first 2 years of
permanent Brady.

Approval systems

State systems for approval of a prospective
firearm purchaser can be classified as
"instant approval," "permit," or "other
approval" systems. 

Instant approval systems

Instant approval (instant check) systems
require a seller (FFL) to transmit the
applicant's information to a checking agency
by telephone or computer.  The checking
agency is required to respond to the seller at
once or as soon as possible (generally within
3 days).  State agencies conducted over 2
million instant checks in 2000, and about 3%
of the applications were rejected.

The FIST survey also included all State
permits required to purchase firearms and
certain "exempt carry permits" that can be
used to make purchases without a background 
check at the actual time of purchase. 
(Federal law does not mandate a permit to 
purchase firearms.)  

Purchase permit systems

State purchase permit systems require a
prospective firearm purchaser to obtain, after
a  background check, a government-issued
document (called a permit, license,
identification card, or other name) that must
be presented to a seller to receive a firearm. 
Most agencies that issue purchase permits
are under statutes that allow between 7 and
30 days to complete a background
investigation, but some carry permit statutes
allow longer periods.  There were 674,000
applications filed for State and local
purchase permits in 2000.

Exempt carry permit systems

An exempt carry permit is not required for
purchase but can be used to exempt the
holder from a background check at the point
of sale.  A permit is exempt if it is issued 
after a check that includes the NICS, and meets
other requirements of the Brady Act under an
ATF ruling. (See Overview of the National
Instant Criminal Background Check System.)  
Agencies that issue exempt carry 
permits either access the NICS index
themselves or request a check by sending
information to the FBI.

An estimated 190,000 exempt carry permit
applications were received by State agencies
in 2000, of which 4,300 were rejected, or
2.3%.  Besides the State agencies, local
agencies received an additional 118,000
applications for exempt carry permits, 
rejecting over 2,000 for a rejection rate 
of 1.9%.  Seven States reported statewide 
data on exempt carry permits for 2000, 
with Indiana providing the
largest number (83,000 applications).

                    Among State agencies
                    issuing exemptions
                    and reporting to FIST,
                    the number of--
                    Applica-    Rejec-    Rejection
                    tions       tions     rate
Arizona             15,100        340        2.3%
Indiana             83,396      2,242        2.7
North Dakota         2,197          8        0.4
South Carolina       7,145        145        2.0
Texas               26,781        377        1.4
Utah                 7,777         87        1.1
Wyoming              1,069         23        2.2
 
Note: The 7 States listed reported statewide data
for 2000.  Estimates for Alaska, Arkansas,
Mississippi, and North Carolina are included in
the national estimate but are not reported in this
table.  (See Methodology.)

Other types of approval systems

Other approval systems require a seller to
transmit the applicant's information to a
checking agency by mail, telephone, or
computer.  The checking agency is not
required to respond immediately but must
respond before the end of a statutory time
limit, generally within 7 to 10 days.  Other
types of approval systems processed
445,000 applications in 2000 (predominately
in California) and less than 1% of them were
rejected.

Rejection rates vary for types of statewide
approval systems, with instant checks having
the highest rate (3.0%), followed by exempt
carry permits (2.5%), purchase permits
(1.8%), and other approvals (1%).

Statewide reporting of applications and
rejections

In 2000 the FIST survey obtained statewide
data from the 19 single statewide NICS
points of contact.

The 19 POC's processed checks for 2.8
million applications in 2000, rejecting 71,000
(a rejection rate of 2.6%).  This may be
compared to 1999, when the same agencies
conducted checks for 3.1 million applications, 
of which 91,000 were rejected, or 3%.  This 
represents an 12% decrease in applications 
and a 22% decrease in rejections between 1999 
and 2000. 

The many interrelated factors that influence
rejection rates have not been fully quantified,
but a few observations are possible from the
limited data available.  The rejection rates 
in States surveyed by FIST ranged from 0.2% 
in Connecticut to 7.2% in Tennessee.
Among the lowest rates for instant checks
were those in New Jersey (0.4%) and Illinois
(0.8%), where an instant check at the time of
transfer is the second step required for
approval of prospective firearm owners. 
Both States require that before an instant
check for a sale can be conducted, prospective 
owners must obtain an identification card or 
a permit.  During the first step of the process, 
application for the prerequisite permit or 
ID card, the rejection rate is considerably 
higher in New Jersey (1.7%) and Illinois (2.0%).

The highest rejection rates tended to occur 
in States that implemented an instant approval
system on or after the effective date of the
Brady Act.  These States include Tennessee
(7.2%), Colorado (5.0%), and Georgia
(4.9%).  Approval systems established
before passage of the Brady Act tended to
have low rejection rates.  In addition to
Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey, these
systems include California (1%),  Virginia
(1.4%), and Wisconsin (1.4%).  The older
systems also tended to have rates that are
relatively stable, with two of the oldest
systems, California and Illinois (the instant
approval step), having only slight variations
in yearly rates since 1996.

During 2000 all States maintained databases
that record past felony convictions, and
many maintained data on other disqualifying
factors such as fugitive status, court
restraining orders, having been adjudicated
as a mental defective or committed to a
mental institution, and domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions.  States differ as 
to the degree of automation in record searching
and whether records are in a central
database or in data bases maintained by
county courts or other local agencies. 

Delays

Checking agencies often encounter delays if
they attempt to access records in other
jurisdictions.  The most frequent delays
occur when researching the final disposition
of a criminal charge indicated in another
jurisdiction's arrest or indictment record.  
If the final disposition cannot be found during
the time allowed for a background check, the
agency must decide, based on Federal or State
law, whether the application will be approved, 
denied, or delayed pending further research.  

The Brady Act allows a transfer to
proceed if a disqualifying record is not found
within the 3-day limit for a NICS check, which
may contribute to the FBI's relatively low
rejection rate (1.6%).  However, some States
have laws and regulations that allow their
agencies to deny or delay a transfer if an
incomplete record is being researched when
the time limit expires.  These rules may
account for the relatively high rejection 
rates in Colorado, for example.

Reasons for rejection

Nearly 58% of rejections for firearm transfer
among State and local checking agencies
(about 50,000 applications in 2000) occurred
because the applicant either had a felony
conviction or was under felony indictment. 
The second most common reason for rejection 
was a domestic violence misdemeanor conviction 
or restraining order (about 12% of rejections 
or approximately 11,000 applications).  A 
portion of all rejections reported by State 
and local agencies fall under the categories 
of State and local law prohibitions (5% of 
rejections) and mental illness (1%). 

The numbers of applications and rejections
more than doubled in 1999 as a result of the
implementation of the instant check system
(on November 30, 1998) and the requirement 
that checks be run for long gun applications 
and pawn transactions.
 
Over the past 6 years records of disqualifying 
factors other than felonies have
become more accessible. (See table 4 for
other prohibitions.) The number of
rejections for other reasons increased 250% 
from the first year of the Brady Act to 2000.  
The percentage of rejections that were due to 
felony records decreased from 71% to 59% of 
rejections in 2000. 

Appeals of denials or rejections

Specific appeal procedures for persons
denied a firearm or permit are codified in
Federal law and in the laws of nearly all
States that require background checks.  The
most common procedure provides an appeal
to the checking agency and a subsequent
appeal to a court.  Twenty-two States
provide for an appeal to the checking agency,
and 18 allow an appeal to a court.  In four
States a government officer in a department
separate from the checking agency performs
an administrative review.

Procedures for an initial appeal may be
relatively informal, with some checking
agencies allowing a denied person to initiate
a review with a telephone request.  Other
agencies involved in firearm appeals are
those which maintain criminal histories or
other records which could disqualify an
applicant.  An appellant may be required to
contact the agency that supplied a criminal
history or another record that caused a
denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant
denies being the individual named in a
disqualifying record found by the checking
agency.  To resolve the identity question, 
the appellant will ordinarily submit 
fingerprints for comparison with Federal 
and/or State arrestee records.  If the 
appellant's prints do not match any records 
on file, the denial can be reversed.   

Another common appeal arises when an
applicant is denied because of a felony
arrest or charge without a recorded
disposition.  The applicant can have the
denial reversed by submitting court records
to prove that the charge was subsequently
dismissed.  Whether a checking agency is
required to approve, delay, or deny a person
with a missing disposition (as dictated by
State law) may affect the number of appeals
filed. Data indicate that the vast majority of
disputed firearm denials are resolved at the
administrative level and are rarely appealed
to the courts.  Most disputed denials turn on
accuracy of records, not on interpretation of
the law.  

The variation in the number of appeals as
well as in the percentage of rejections that
are appealed suggests that State definitions
of what constitutes an appeal may differ. 

Denied persons subject to arrest

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm
or a permit by a background check may be
subject to arrest and prosecution if they are
wanted in an outstanding warrant or have
submitted false information on their
application.  Many checking agencies
notify ATF of persons who submit false
information on a Federal firearm transaction
record.  If a misrepresentation violates State
law, the checking agency will inform either
the agency with jurisdiction over the location
of the transaction (usually a dealer's
premises) or the agency with jurisdiction over
the applicant's residence, or both.  In seven
States those who falsify an application or
attempt an illegal purchase are reported to a
special police unit that determines who will
be arrested.

Potential buyers of a firearm often come to
the attention of law enforcement agencies as
a result of a denied application.  Of the six
States reporting, Virginia had the largest
number of arrests for outstanding warrants or
other reasons, following a denial of a firearm
purchase.
                                   
                  Number of
State             arrests in 2000
 
Colorado              259
Georgia                 9
Maryland              130
New Jersey             27
Oregon                 94
Virginia              775
 
Note: A statewide unit responded to all falsified
applications and illegal attempts and reported
arrests in Maryland and Virginia, while arrest in
the other States listed above represent those
made by local agencies,  which may not always
be reported to the State.                      
                                   
When a check identifies a wanted person,
the checking agency generally will inform the
agency that entered the warrant, in addition
to notifying the agency with jurisdiction over
the fugitive's present location or place of
residence.  A statewide fugitive apprehension 
unit may also be informed.  In some States, 
all persons denied a firearm, for whatever 
reason, are reported to a special police unit. 

Background 

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. sec.
922, prohibits transfer of a firearm to a
person who --

*  is under indictment for, or has been
convicted of, a crime punishable by
imprisonment for more than 1 year
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to,
any controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental
defective or committed to a mental institution
*  is an illegal alien or has been admitted to
the United States under a nonimmigrant visa
*  was discharged from the U.S. Armed
Forces under dishonorable conditions
*  has renounced U.S. citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him
or her from harassing, stalking, or
threatening an intimate partner or child
*  has been convicted in any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.

In addition, the Gun Control Act makes it
unlawful for any licensed importer,
manufacturer, dealer, or collector to transfer
a long gun to a person younger than age 18
or any other type of firearm to a person less
than 21 years of age. 

The Federal act's categories of prohibited
persons are the prevailing minimum for all
States.  Many States have enacted similar or
additional prohibitions.  For example, 19
States prohibit firearm possession by
persons who are addicted to alcohol or have
been convicted of alcohol-related offenses;
24 States restrict persons who were
adjudicated delinquent or who had
committed serious offenses as juveniles. 
(See Survey of State Procedures Related to
Firearm Sales, Midyear 2000, NCJ 186766.)

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the Gun Control Act
and included interim provisions, 18 U.S.C.
sec. 922(s), in effect from February 29, 1994,
until November 29, 1998.  The U.S.
Department of Justice, with the States,
developed the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) during
the 57-month interim period, as authorized
by the permanent provisions of the Brady
Act, 18 U.S.C. sec. 922(t).  Since November
29, 1998, the NICS has allowed a licensee to
contact the system by telephone or other
electronic means for information, to be
supplied immediately, on whether receipt of
a firearm by a prospective transferee would
violate Federal or State law.  In addition,
States are encouraged to serve as a point of
contact, receiving inquiries from firearm
dealers and accessing the FBI's NICS index
as well as their own records. 

In addition to regulation of handgun sales,
the permanent provisions mandate that
licensees request background checks on
long gun purchasers and persons who
redeem a pawned firearm. Licensees have
the option of requesting a NICS check 
on persons who attempt to pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement
Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established a grant program
(NCHIP) to ensure immediate availability of
complete and accurate State records. The
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST),
which collects statistics on background
checks, is one of many NCHIP programs.

NCHIP is designed to assist States to
develop or improve existing criminal history
records systems and to establish an
interface with the NICS.  Grant funds have
also supported direct technical assistance,
evaluation, and research related to improving
records within the States.

To date, over $314 million has been awarded
directly to States to assist them in
establishing and enhancing criminal records
which support the FBI's record system.  All
States have received funding under the
program.

Components of the national firearm check
system

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local
agencies conduct background checks on
persons who apply to purchase a firearm or
for a permit that can be used to make a
purchase.  Variations in Federal and State
procedures for determining firearm
possession eligibility are described below.

Overview of NICS

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a
NICS check requested by a dealer or present
a State permit that ATF has qualified as an
alternative to the point-of-transfer check. 
Qualifying permits are those which -- 

(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire,
or carry a firearm, and 
(2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier
by the State in which the transfer is to take
place, after verification by an authorized
government official that possession of a
firearm by the transferee would not be a
violation of law.  A permit issued after
November 29, 1998, qualifies as an
alternative only if it includes a check of 
the NICS. 

A licensee initiates a NICS check by
contacting either the FBI or a point of 
contact (POC) agency designated by the State
government.  The FBI or POC checks the
available Federal, State, and/or local
databases and responds with a notice to the
licensee that the transfer may proceed, may
not proceed, or is delayed pending further
review of the transferee's record.  (See the
FBI, National Instant Criminal Background
Check System (NICS)2000 Operations Report, 
April 2001.)

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to
permanent Brady requirements, a licensee
must receive a completed Firearm
Transaction Record (ATF  F 4473).  For
more information, see Commerce in
Firearms in the United States, February 2000
<www.atf.treas.gov/pub/fire-explo_pub/
020400report.pdf>.

State and local participation in the 
NICS

Each State government determines the
extent of its involvement in the NICS
process.  Three forms of State involvement
currently exist:

*  A POC requests a NICS check on all
firearm transfers originating in the State.
*  A POC requests a NICS check on all
handgun transfers; licensees in the State 
are required to contact the FBI for approval 
of long gun transfers. 
*  The State does not maintain a POC;
licensees are required to contact the FBI 
for NICS checks on all firearm transfers
originating in the State.

Handgun checks are conducted by the FBI
for 24 States and by POC agencies for 26
States; long gun checks are conducted by
the FBI for 34 States and by POC agencies
for 16 States. The FBI also conducts checks
for the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and the U.S. Virgin Islands.  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies
includes initiating checks on persons who
apply for State permits.  In a few States with
full or partial participation, the FBI conducts
the NICS check on certain pawn transactions
instead of the POC.

Procedures for determining the eligibility of
prospective firearm purchasers are generally
classified by ATF as "instant check" or
"permit or other type of approval" systems. 
Thirty-one States have approval systems for
purchase or permits required for purchase. 
Eighteen States operate instant check
systems; 12 require purchase permits; and 4
maintain other types of approval systems. 
(Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey are
each counted twice because they operate
separate purchase permit and instant check
systems.)  In addition to the Brady Act's
regulation of sales by federally licensed
dealers, some States require background
checks for firearm transfers that occur
between unlicensed persons at gun shows or
other locations.

A few States require a mandatory waiting
period after a purchaser applies and before
a firearm transfer can be completed,
regardless of when the instant check is
completed.

The NICS process does not automatically
supplant State firearm sales regulations. 
State background check and permit statutes
that existed before the effective date of 
the NICS remain in force unless repealed by
legislative action or allowed to expire.

The POC agencies conduct any checks and
issue any permits required by State law in
addition to following procedures mandated
under the NICS.  Generally, instant check
agencies conduct a single background check
that incorporates Federal and State
requirements for each transaction.

Except for Delaware all States with instant
check systems are points of contact for the
NICS.  Most States have designated a single
agency with statewide jurisdiction as their
NICS point of contact; some States have
multiple points of contact, which are usually
county sheriffs or local police departments.
(For agencies conducting firearm checks,
see Appendix B.)

Parallel State systems

Most background checks required by State
laws are conducted by agencies that also
serve as NICS points of contact.  However,
purchasers in six States are required to
undergo two checks conducted by different
agencies.  If agencies that conduct checks
under State law are unable to access the
NICS, licensees in that State are required
to contact the FBI for approval of transfer. 
Thus prospective transferees in some
States are required to undergo a permit or
point-of-transfer check by a State or local
agency and a NICS check by the FBI.  Six
States (Delaware, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, and
Rhode Island) maintain firearm check
systems that can be described as parallel
to the NICS process.

For more information on background check
systems in specific States, see Survey of
State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 2000, NCJ 186766.

Methodology

Definitions

State instant approval (instant check)
systems require a seller to transmit a
purchaser's application to a checking agency
by telephone or computer; the agency is
required to respond immediately or as soon
as possible without delay.

Purchase permit systems require a
prospective firearm purchaser to obtain, 
after background check, a government-issued
document (called a permit, license,
identification card, etc.) that must be
presented to a seller to receive a firearm.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit
(issued after a background check) that
exempts the holder from a check at the time
of purchase under an ATF ruling or State
law.

Other type of approval systems require a
seller to transmit a purchaser's application 
to a checking agency by mail, telephone, or
computer; the agency is not required to
respond immediately but must respond
before the end of the statutory time limit.

Application for firearm transfer is information
submitted by a person to a State or local
checking agency to purchase a firearm or
obtain a permit that can be used for a
purchase; includes information submitted
directly to a checking agency or forwarded
by a prospective seller.

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal
NICS system and may include more than
one inquiry per application.
 
Rejection occurs when an applicant is
prohibited from receiving a firearm or a
permit that can be used to receive a firearm,
due to the finding of a disqualifying factor
during a background check.

Data collection procedures

The Regional Justice Information Service
(REJIS), through a cooperative agreement
with BJS under the Firearm Inquiry Statistics
(FIST) program, collected the data.  

The agencies supplied data on either paper
or diskette.  Several different forms were
provided to meet the varying office
procedures of the agencies.  In addition
REJIS wrote special software distributed free
of charge to requesting agencies.  This
software was designed to simplify the record
tabulating functions of the agency.  It also
helped to reduce the burden of keeping the
statistical data because a capability of the
software was to automatically report the data
needed for the study.  In all cases the data
that the agency sent to REJIS contained only
statistical information and would not allow the
identification of an individual.  The software
also assists agencies in purging records after
the delay specified by law.

FIST data are collected directly from State
agencies conducting background checks and
from local checking agencies.  Data are
collected from local checking agencies by
mail and telephone contact.

Information collected included the following: 
firearm applications made to the agency,
firearm applications rejected by the agency,
and the reasons for rejection.  Although
many local checking agencies may not
handle appeals through the entire process
and may have only limited information on
outcomes from such appeals, appeal data
were requested from local agencies. 

Determining populations

To estimate the application and rejection
rates within a given area, the appropriate
agency population was needed and was
determined as follows:  

The stratification classification of the 
county was based on the size of the largest 
city within the county. 
 
If cities within a county were conducting 
their own background checks, their populations
were subtracted from the county population. 

If a municipal agency provided services for
other selected municipalities, then
populations for those municipalities were
added to the populations of the reporting
municipality. 

If an agency participating in the study relied
upon other jurisdictions to conduct
background checks, they were replaced by
those other jurisdictions (for example, a town
being replaced by a county).

State and local checking agencies were
stratified by size of the population served: 
State agencies that served an entire State
population; local agencies that served a
population greater than 100,000; local
agencies that served a population between
10,000 and 100,000; and local agencies that
served a population of less than 10,000. 
Population size was based on 1998 Census
Bureau information.  The population
categories were chosen to be consistent with
those commonly used by the FBI when
conducting similar studies. 

All agencies serving a population greater
than 100,000 were asked to contribute data
in 2000.  The number of agencies in the
survey are shown by population category in
the table below.

Population served      Number of agencies
 
Under 10,000                 372
10,000 to 100,000            262
Over 100,000                  26
Statewide                     31
 
Total                        691
 
Note:  Agencies conducting more than one 
check are counted only once.

In some States one statewide agency
conducts background checks for purchase
and another agency (or division within an
agency) issues ATF-approved permits. 
Although both agencies conducted
background checks, care was taken not to
count State populations twice in the
estimation process.  This situation of dual
agencies conducting background checks did
not occur among local agencies.     

Estimation procedures

Based on data provided by both sets of
agencies, national estimates were developed
using population weighting factors.  When 
an agency did not provide data for all months, 
a simple linear extrapolation or interpolation
was used to generate a 12-month total.

The mix of State and local agencies
conducting background checks changed
during the transition from the interim 
to the permanent provisions of the Brady 
Act. Consequently, while data collection
procedures remained similar over time, the
agencies providing data changed. 

For example, when the permanent provisions
of the Brady Act became effective, six
agencies that had previously conducted
statewide checks turned their background
checks over to the FBI. However, three
States (Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and
Vermont) that had not performed their
background checks during the interim period
began statewide systems.  

The distribution of local checking agencies
also changed after the permanent provisions
of the Brady Act became effective.  Many
States delegated their responsibilities 
to the FBI, so local agencies in those 
States no longer conducted background checks. 
Further, it was deemed necessary to collect
data from local agencies (and some statewide 
agencies) that issue certain carry permits 
approved by ATF or State law as an
alternative to a presale background check. 

Estimation based on State population was
used to determine the number of carry permit
applications and rejections in Arkansas. 
Extrapolation was used to estimate carry
permit applications and rejections in
Mississippi and North Carolina.  In Alaska,
the number of carry permit applications was
available, but the number of rejections had 
to be estimated using State population. 
Agencies with a rejection rate over four
standard deviations above the average
standard rejection rate were classified as
outliers and their data were not used for
projection of estimates.  In addition, 
rejection rates that could not be determined 
with sufficient accuracy were not used.  

The accuracy of the estimates presented in
this report depends on two types of errors:
nonsampling and sampling.  In this study,
nonsampling error may occur from the
following:  nonresponse; differences in the
ways checking agencies process, code,
store, and retrieve their information;
differences in interpretation of the survey
questions; and activities that delay personnel
from completing the survey.  

In any sample survey, the full extent of
nonsampling error is never known. However, 
steps were taken to minimize the
potential for error.  Extensive telephone
follow-ups were made to encourage
responses, answer questions about
misunderstood requests, and generally
assist in assembling the information in 
a useable form.  Extensive verification of 
the data ensured the accuracy of the numbers. 
Agencies providing data were asked to
review and revise their reports, and various
quality checks were performed in receiving
and processing the data.  The estimates are
only for the 50 States and do not include
U.S. Territories or the District of Columbia.

Sources of additional information

Additional information on State firearm laws
is available from BJS in the Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 2000, NCJ 186766.  Further information 
on Federal law and BJS-related publications 
is available from the following
Internet sites:

ATF <http://www.atf.treas.gov/core/
firearms/ firearms.htm>
BJS  <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
guns.htm>
FBI <http://www.fbi.gov/programs/
nicsfact.htm>

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice.  Lawrence A.  Greenfeld is 
acting director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection
programs such as the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics program.  State and local 
officials have cooperated in reporting the 
data presented.

Michael Bowling and Gene Lauver of REJIS
and Sidra Lea Gifford and Devon B. Adams
of BJS wrote this Bulletin.  David M. Naglich
and Ronald J. Frandsen of REJIS collected
and analyzed the FIST data presented. 
Terry Tomazic, Ph.D., professor of research
methodology at St. Louis University,
provided statistical consultation.  Steven K.
Smith of BJS reviewed the report, and Carol
G. Kaplan supervised the project. Tom
Hester produced and edited the report.  

Further information on the FIST program can
be obtained from  

Carol G. Kaplan, Chief
Criminal History Improvement Programs
U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics
810 Seventh Street, NW
Washington, DC 20531

Gene Lauver, Project Manager
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program
Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard
St. Louis, MO 63108

July 2001, NCJ 187985

End of file
06/06/01 ih
06/28/01 th
