U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2005

November 2006, NCJ 214256

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft05.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#bcft
-------------------------------------------------------

Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver
Regional Justice Information Service
Matthew J. Hickman, Ph.D.
Devon B. Adams
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Nearly 70 million background checks conducted under the 
Brady Act through 2005; over 57 million since the 
permanent provisions took effect

* 1.6% of the 8.3 million applications for firearm transfers 
or permits in 2005 were rejected by the FBI (66,700 
applications)or State and local agencies(65,200
applications).

* Among State and local checking agencies in 2005, 46% of all
rejections for firearm transfers (about 30,000 applications) 
were due to a felony conviction or indictment.

* About 15% of State and local rejections(10,000 applications) 
were due to a domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or 
restraining order.

* The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearm and Explosive's(ATF) 
field offices investigated 9,575 National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System(NICS)denials that were referred by 
the FBI in 2005. 

* In 2005 agencies reported 1,400 arrests of persons denied 
a firearm or a permit.

* In 2005 U.S. attorney offices accepted for prosecution 135 
NICS denial cases investigated by ATF.
--------------------------------------------------------

The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act(Brady Act)mandates
criminal history background checks on persons applying to 
purchase firearms from federally licensed firearm dealers. 
The act established the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS) and requires a background 
check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)or a 
State point of contact(POC)on persons applying to receive 
firearms from a Federal Firearm Licensee (FFL).  

In order to provide national estimates of the total number 
of applications and rejections resulting from the Brady Act 
and similar State laws, the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) in 1995 began the Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program 
(FIST). The FIST program collects information on background 
checks conducted by State and local agencies, and combines 
this information with FBI NICS transaction data.

In 2005 about 8.3 million applications for firearm transfers
or permits were subject to background checks under the Brady 
Act and similar State laws. This is an increase of 2.4% from
the 8.1 million applications in 2004. The FBI processed
nearly 5.0 million of these applications (60%), and State 
and local agencies processed 3.3 million (40%).

8.3 million background checks 
conducted nationwide in 2005;
nearly 70 million since 1994

Nearly 70 million applications for firearm transfers or
permits were subject to background checks under the NICS.
***For greater detail on the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS), see Components of the 
national firearm check system on page 9.*** During the 
interim period of the Brady Act (1994-1998), an estimated
12.7 million applications were checked. Most of these
applications were for handgun transfers. Background checks 
for long guns were included under the permanent provisions 
of the Brady Act (effective November 1998). 

An estimated 1.4 million applications to purchase a firearm
were rejected between 1994 and 2005, or 1.9% of all 
applications. In 2005 an estimated 132,000 applications, or 
1.6%, were rejected. (See Prohibited persons on page 8 for 
more detail on factors that disqualify an applicant.) 

State and local agencies conducted 3.3 
million background checks in 2005

State systems for approval of a prospective firearm purchaser
can be classified as instant check, purchase permit, exempt 
carry permit, or other approval systems. The FIST survey 
included applications for two types of State permits--purchase 
and exempt carry permits. 

State agencies conducted over 1.9 million instant checks in
2005, and about 40,000 (2%) of the applications were rejected. 
From 1999 to 2005 State instant approval systems received 15
million applications, rejecting 386,000 (2.6%). 

Instant check systems require a seller to transmit the
applicant's information to a checking agency by telephone 
or computer. The checking agency is required to respond to 
the seller at once or as soon as possible(generally within 
3 business days).

In 2005 State and local agencies received 624,000 applications 
for purchase permits. Around 15,000, or 2.4%, were rejected. 
From 1999 to 2005, 5 million applications for purchase permits
were received by State and local agencies, of which 107,000
were rejected (2.1%).

Purchase permit systems require firearm purchasers to obtain,
after a background check, a government-issued document(such 
as a permit, license, identification card, or other document)
that must be presented to a seller in order to receive a
firearm. Most agencies issuing purchase permits operate under 
State statutes that allow between 7 and 30 days to complete a 
background check.

Ten States reported complete statewide data on exempt carry
permits for 2005. These agencies received 155,000 exempt 
carry permit applications, of which 3,600 were rejected 
(2.3%). 

Local agencies received 178,000 applications for exempt carry
permits and rejected 2,200 (1.3%).

From 1999 to 2005 State and local agencies received 2.4
million applications for exempt carry permits, rejecting 
47,000 or about 2%.

An exempt carry permit is not required for purchase but may
be used to exempt the holder from a background check at the 
point of sale. A permit is exempt if it is issued after a 
check that includes the NICS and meets other requirements of 
the Brady Act under a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms 
and Explosives (ATF) regulation and 18 U.S.C. 922(t). 

Agencies issuing ATF-approved exempt carry permits usually
request a check by sending information to the FBI. Indiana 
and Minnesota carry permits are only exempt under State law. 

In 2005 other types of approval systems processed 447,000
applications, predominately in California, and rejected 
4,000(1%). From 1999 to 2005 these systems received 3.2 
million applications, rejecting 33,000 (1%).

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit the
applicant's information to a checking agency by mail, 
telephone, or computer. The checking agency is not required 
to respond immediately but must respond before the end of a 
State statutory time limit, typically within 7 to 10 days.

FBI rejection rates affected by 
separate State or local background 
check requirements

In States where the FBI conducted both long gun and handgun
background checks in 2005, rejection rates ranged from 2.1% 
for Alaska to less than 1% for Kansas, Massachusetts, Maine,
Missouri, Rhode Island, and West Virginia.

NICS rejection rates in Massachusetts (0.1%) and Rhode Island
(0.7%) were low as a result of separate background checks 
by local agencies. Rates in Delaware (1.4%) were reduced 
by prior checks conducted by the State Police (3.8% 
rejection).

Statewide rejection rates ranged 
from 0.3% to 3.8%

In 2005 statewide data was obtained from 16 NICS POC States
(where State agencies conduct background checks instead of 
or in addition to the FBI) and Delaware. These States 
processed checks for 2.7 million applications, rejecting 
51,000 or 1.9%. 

The rejection rates for these States ranged from 0.3% in
Connecticut and New Jersey to 3.8% in Delaware. Instant 
checks in New Jersey (0.3%) and Illinois (0.6%) were among 
the lowest rejection rates in 2005, where an instant check 
at the time of transfer is the second step required for 
firearm owners. During the first step of the process--an
application for the requisite permit or ID card--the 
rejection rate is considerably higher in Illinois (2.6%), 
more similar to the national average.

Higher rejection rates in 2005 mainly occurred in States that
implemented an instant approval system, such as Colorado(3.1%) 
and Tennessee (3.5%).  Approval systems established before
passage of the Brady Act, such as California (1%), Virginia
(1.2%), and Wisconsin(1.5%), typically had lower rates. These 
rates have varied little from year to year.

In 2005 local agencies received 568,000 applications for
purchase and exempt carry permits. Around 11,000 or 1.9% were 
rejected. Rejection rates for both types of permits were 
highest in jurisdictions with a population over 100,000 and 
lowest in those under 10,000. 

Overall, local agency rejection rates in 2005 were higher for
purchase permits than for exempt carry permits.

25 States had fully automated 
criminal history records in 2003; 24 
States partially automated 

All States maintain databases that record felony convictions,
and many maintain data on other disqualifying factors such as 
fugitive status, court restraining orders, mental illness, 
and domestic violence misdemeanor convictions. States differ 
as to the degree of automation used in record searching and 
whether records are in a central database or in county courts 
or other local agencies.

In 2003, 49 States had automated at least some records in
their criminal history files. The number of States with fully 
automated criminal history files increased from 21 to 25 
between 1999 and 2003. (See Survey of State Criminal History 
Information Systems, 2003, <http://www.ojp.gov/bjs/abstract/
sschis03.html>.) 

Checking agencies often encounter delays when they access
incomplete records. The most frequent delays occur when 
researching the final disposition of a criminal charge in an 
arrest or indictment record. If the final disposition cannot 
be found during the time allowed for a background check, the 
agency must decide, based on Federal or State law, whether 
the application will be approved, denied, or delayed pending
further research. A State's rejection rate may tend to be 
lower if an approval is mandated and higher if a denial is 
mandated. 

The Brady Act allows a transfer to proceed if a disqualifying
record is not found within the 3-business-day limit for a NICS 
check. Some States have laws and regulations that allow their
agencies to deny or delay a transfer if an incomplete record
is being researched when the time limit expires. 

Felony convictions, indictments, 
leading reason for rejections in 2005 

In 2005 the FBI reported that 37% of its rejections were for
felony-related reasons (about 25,000 applications), followed 
by other criminal history disqualifiers (about 18,000 
applications or 27%), which include State-specific 
prohibitions.  

A domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or restraining
order accounted for more than 15% of the rejections (about 
10,000 applications). Other common reasons for rejection 
were an applicant's drug use (9%) or status as a fugitive
(5%).

Forty-six percent of all rejections for firearm transfers
among State and local checking agencies(about 30,000 in 
2005) occurred because the applicant either had a felony 
conviction or was under felony indictment. The second most 
common reason for rejection was a domestic violence
misdemeanor conviction or restraining order(about 15% of
rejections or approximately 10,000 applications).

Other common reasons for rejection were the presence of a
State law prohibition(9.6% of rejections)and an applicant's 
status as a fugitive (8.3%).

From 1999 to 2005 the number of rejections by all checking
agencies fell 35%. While the number of felony-related 
rejections decreased 61%, the number rejected for reasons 
other than felony conviction or indictment increased 32% 
(from 57,000 to 75,000). Overall, the percentage of 
rejections for non-felony reasons increased from 28% to 57%.

Local agencies more likely to reject 
on State or local prohibitions, drug 
addiction, or mental illness

Although a felony conviction or indictment was the most common 
reason for rejection by both State and local law enforcement 
during 2005, the State agencies rejected for this reason more
frequently (58%) than the local agencies (28%).

State agencies were more likely to reject an applicant because 
of fugitive status, while local agencies were more likely 
to base a rejection on a State or local prohibitor, drug 
addiction, or mental illness.

161,000 appeals of denials from 
1999 to 2005; 57,000 reversed

Specific procedures for appealing the denial of a firearm
purchase or permit are codified in Federal law and in the 
laws of nearly all States that process background checks. 
The most common procedure provides an appeal to the checking 
agency and a subsequent appeal to a court.

Seventeen States provide an appeal to the checking agency for
a person who is denied a firearm purchase or a permit required 
for a purchase. (In eight other States, local agencies may
reconsider their decisions although they are not required to
do so by law.) Seventeen States provide an appeal to a court, 
and two States have a government officer in a department 
separate from the checking agency who performs an 
administrative review.

Other agencies involved in appeals are those that maintain
criminal history records or other records which could 
disqualify an applicant. An appellant may be required to 
contact the agency that supplied a criminal history or 
another record that caused a denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant denies being the
individual named in a disqualifying record found by the 
checking agency. To resolve the identity question, the 
appellant will ordinarily submit fingerprints for comparison 
with Federal or State arrestee records. If the appellant's 
prints do not match any records on file, the denial may be 
reversed.

Another common appeal arises when an applicant is denied
because of a felony arrest or charge without a recorded 
disposition. The applicant can have the denial reversed by 
submitting court records to prove that the charge was 
subsequently dismissed.

The vast majority of disputed denials are resolved at the
administrative level and are based upon the accuracy of 
records rather than interpretation of the law.

In 2005 checking agencies that reported data to FIST received
23,000 appeals of denials, of which almost 7,600(or 33% were 
reversed. Of the more than 65,000 denials issued in 2005 by 
State and local agencies, about 14,500(or 27%)were appealed. 
Of the appealed denials, nearly 5,900 (or 41%) were reversed.

From 1999 to 2005, of the 1,048,000 denials by the FBI and 
State and local agencies about 161,000 (16%) were appealed. 
Of the appeals, nearly 57,000 (35%) were reversed. For States 
that are able to report the number of appeals, the percent of 
rejections appealed ranged from 1.9% in Virginia to 54% in 
Oregon.

The FBI NICS Appeal Services Team (AST) reviews and investigates 
appeals of NICS denials. Of the 67,000 denials issued by the FBI 
in 2005, about 8,300 (or about 12%) were appealed. About 21% of 
appeals resulted in the denial being overturned.

In 2005, 1,400 arrests of persons 
denied firearm or permit 

In 2005 agencies reported 1,400 arrest of persons denied a
firearm or a permit. During the permanent Brady period, 
over 9,700 persons have been arrested, according to checking 
agencies that reported arrests to FIST. 

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm or a permit by a
background check may be subject to arrest and prosecution if 
they are wanted in an outstanding warrant or have submitted 
false information on their application. When a check identifies 
a wanted person, the checking agency generally will inform the 
agency that entered the warrant, in addition to notifying the 
agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive's location or place 
of residence. A statewide fugitive apprehension unit may also 
be informed.

Many checking agencies notify ATF of persons who submit false
information on a Federal firearm transaction record or fail to 
disclose required information. If a misrepresentation violates
State law, the checking agency will inform the agency with
jurisdiction over either the location of the transaction 
(usually a dealer's premises)or the applicant's residence, or 
both agencies. 

In seven States persons who falsify an application or attempt
an illegal transfer are reported to a special police unit to 
make an arrest determination. In some States all persons 
denied a firearm are reported to a special police unit. Of the 
States reporting for 2005, Virginia had the largest number of 
arrests of denied persons due to outstanding warrants or other 
reasons.

FBI referred 67,700 NICS denials to 
ATF in 2005

The FBI electronically transmits NICS denial data to ATF's
Brady Operations Branch daily. In 2005 the FBI referred a 
total of 67,713 NICS denials to ATF's Brady Operations Branch.
Standard referrals by the FBI NICS contain data on prohibited
persons who unlawfully attempted to purchase a firearm. Some 
prohibited persons obtain a firearm during an "open 
transaction," where the FBI has not completed a check in 
three business days and the dealer is allowed to transfer the 
firearm. When the FBI finishes the check and finds a prohibitory 
record, they make a "delayed denial" referral to ATF.

The FBI determines if a firearm was transferred to the subject 
of the delayed denial. ATF is responsible for retrieving these 
firearms. In POC States local law enforcement, a statewide
firearms unit, or ATF may be responsible for the retrieval,
depending on the specific jurisdictions for the dealer and the 
applicant.

ATF field offices investigated 9,575 
NICS denials in 2005; 135 accepted 
for prosecution by U.S. Attorneys

ATF's Brady Operations Branch searches databases for additional 
information on denied persons referred by the FBI. ATF and 
United States Attorneys have developed referral criteria for 
all 94 judicial districts that reflect the types of cases most
likely to merit prosecution. After initial screening, 9,575 
denials which met the established guidelines were referred to 
Field Divisions.

A NICS coordinator in each ATF division distributes referrals
to the appropriate field office. A State point of contact may 
also refer denials to the nearest field office. Agents verify 
prohibiting information and conduct other investigations. If 
ATF finds that a person should not have been denied, they 
notify the FBI or the POC. In a delayed denial case, the agent 
contacts the firearm purchaser and seizes or takes an 
abandonment of the firearm. The agent could also coordinate a
transfer of the firearm to a licensed dealer or to a third
party who is not a prohibited person.

The referred transactions included 3,215 delayed denials and
6,360 standard referrals. A total of 135 cases (41 delayed 
denials and 94 standard referrals) were accepted for 
prosecution.

Methodology

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), through 
a cooperative agreement with BJS under the FIST program, 
collected the data from Federal, State, and local agencies. 

State and local checking agencies were stratified by size 
of the population served: State agencies that served an 
entire State population; local agencies that served a 
population greater than 100,000; local agencies that served 
a population between 10,000 and 100,000; and local agencies
that served a population of less than 10,000. Population size
was based on 2000 Census Bureau information. The population 
categories were chosen to be consistent with those used by 
the FBI when conducting similar studies.

The sample for the FIST survey was selected from the
population of 2,950 State and local checking agencies. All 
27 statewide agencies were included, along with a stratified 
random sample of local agencies. Overall, 682 agencies 
provided data for a response rate of 85.4%

National estimates were developed using population weighting
factors. When an agency did not provide data for all months, 
a simple linear extrapolation or interpolation was used to 
generate a 12-month total.

Estimation based on State population was used to determine
the number of carry permit applications and rejections in 
Mississippi. Pennsylvania reported 371,338 instant checks,
included in the FIST national estimate, and 111,150
applications for nonexempt carry permits. Pennsylvania 
provided the combined number of denials of all applications, 
which was prorated to obtain the number of denials of instant 
checks.

Background

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act(GCA), 18 U.S.C. 922, prohibits
transfer of a firearm to a person who--  

* is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year
* is a fugitive from justice
* is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, a controlled
substance
* has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to 
a mental institution
* is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United 
States under a nonimmigrant visa
* was dishonorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces
* has renounced U.S. citizenship
* is subject to a court order restraining him or her from
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or 
child
* has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence.

The GCA also prohibits transfers of long guns to persons
under age 18 and transfers of handguns to persons under 21. 
State laws may include additional prohibitors.

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the GCA and included interim provisions, 
18 U.S.C. 922(s), in effect from February 29, 1994, until 
November 29, 1998. The U.S. Department of Justice, with the
States, developed the NICS during the 57-month interim period, 
as authorized by the permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 
18 U.S.C. 922(t). 

Since November 30, 1998, the NICS has allowed a licensee to
contact the system by telephone or other electronic means for 
information, to be supplied immediately, on whether receipt 
of a firearm by a prospective transferee would violate Federal 
or State law. 

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the permanent
Brady provisions mandate that licensees request background 
checks on long gun purchasers and persons who redeem a pawned
firearm. Licensees have the option of requesting a NICS check
on persons who attempt to pawn a firearm.

Components of the national firearm 
check system

About 3,000 Federal, State, and local agencies conduct 
background checks on persons who apply to purchase a firearm 
or for a permit that may be used to make a purchase. 
Variations in Federal and State procedures for determining 
firearm possession eligibility are summarized below.

Overview of the NICS 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a NICS check requested 
by a dealer or present a State permit that the ATF has 
qualified as an alternative to the point-of-transfer check. 
Qualifying permits are those that--  
 
1. allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm,
and 

2. were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State in
which the transfer is to take place, after verification by an 
authorized government official that possession of a firearm 
by the transferee would not be a violation of law.

A permit issued after November 29, 1998, qualifies as an
alternative only if its approval process included a NICS 
check. Many qualifying permits may be used for multiple 
purchases while valid. State laws also often provide that 
a permit will be revoked if the holder is convicted of an 
offense or otherwise becomes ineligible after receiving 
the permit.

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to permanent Brady
requirements, a licensee must receive a completed Firearm 
Transaction Record(ATF form 4473). 

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the
FBI or a point of contact(POC)agency designated by State 
government. Most inquiries are initiated by telephone. In 
2002 the FBI added online checking (known as E-Check) as 
another means to contact the NICS. About 101,000 inquiries 
were made by this method in 2005, double the number of E-
Check inquiries in 2004.

The FBI or POC checks available Federal, State, and local
databases and responds with a notice to the licensee that 
the transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or is delayed 
pending further review of the transferee's record.

State and local NICS participation

Each State government determines the extent of its
involvement in the NICS process. Three forms of State 
involvement currently exist:

* A full POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers
originating in the State.

* A partial POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers;
licensees in the State are required to contact the FBI for NICS 
checks for long gun transfers.

* The State does not maintain a POC; licensees are required to
contact the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm transfers 
originating in the State.

The FBI conducts all NICS checks for 29 States. POC agencies
conduct all NICS checks in 13 States. In eight States NICS 
checks are conducted by POC agencies on handgun transfers and 
by the FBI on long gun transfers. The FBI conducts all NICS 
checks for the District of Columbia, Guam, Northern Mariana 
Islands, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The only 
change in State participation during 2005 occurred on July 1, 
when the FBI assumed responsibility for Georgia NICS checks.

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies includes initiating
checks on persons who apply for qualified State permits. Most 
POC agencies conduct a background check that incorporates
Federal and State requirements. In a few States with full 
or partial participation, the FBI conducts the NICS check 
on certain pawn transactions instead of the POC. Most States 
have designated a single agency with statewide jurisdiction 
as their NICS point of contact; some States have multiple 
points of contact, which are usually county sheriffs or local 
police departments. (For agencies conducting firearm checks,). 

The NICS is integrated with most State instant approval,
purchase permit, or other approval systems. Twenty-eight 
States maintained approval systems for purchase or permits 
required for purchase at yearend 2005. Fifteen States operated 
instant check systems; 12 required purchase permits; and 5 
maintained other types of approval systems. (Connecticut, 
Illinois, and New Jersey are each counted twice because they 
operated separate purchase permit and instant check systems; 
Minnesota is counted twice because it gives a buyer the 
option of a purchase permit or an "other approval" process.) 

At yearend 2005, 17 States issued carry permits that exempted
the holder from a check under the permanent Brady law or a 
State law or both. ATF ruled that Georgia and Nevada concealed
handgun permits were no longer exempt, effective October 19,
2005. On that date Alaska began issuing permits that are "not 
NICS exempt" in addition to "NICS exempt" permits.

In addition to the Brady Act's regulation of sales by licensed 
dealers, some States require background checks for firearm 
transfers that occur between unlicensed persons at gun shows 
or other locations. 

A few States require a mandatory waiting period after a
purchaser applies and before a firearm transfer can be made, 
regardless of when a background check is completed.

Parallel State systems

In eight States transferees are required to undergo two checks 
conducted by different agencies. Seven States(Delaware, Indiana,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New York, and Rhode Island) 
have checking agencies that are not points of contact, and 
licensees in these States must contact the FBI for NICS checks. 
In New Jersey local agencies that conduct permit checks are not
points of contact and licensees must contact the State Police
for NICS sales checks.

For more information on approval systems in specific States,
see Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
2005 <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs05.htm>.

Definitions

Application for firearm transfer is information submitted by
a person to a State or local checking agency to purchase a 
firearm or obtain a permit that can be used for a purchase; 
includes information submitted directly to a checking agency 
or forwarded by a prospective seller.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit (issued after a
background check) that exempts the holder from a check at the 
time of purchase under an ATF regulation or State law.

Instant check (instant approval) systems require a seller to
transmit a purchaser's application to a checking agency by 
telephone or computer; the agency is required to respond 
immediately or as soon as possible.

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit a
purchaser's application to a checking agency by telephone or 
other electronic means; the agency is not required to respond 
immediately but must respond before the end of the statutory 
time limit.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective firearm
purchaser to obtain, after a background check, a government-
Issued document (called a permit, license, or identification 
card) that must be presented to a seller to receive a firearm.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is prohibited from
receiving a firearm or a permit that can be used to receive a 
firearm, due to the finding of a disqualifying factor during a 
background check. 

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal NICS system and may
include more than one inquiry per application.

----------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of 
findings from permanent data collection 
programs.

This Bulletin was written by Michael Bowling 
and Gene Lauver, of the Regional Justice 
Information Service and Matthew Hickman and 
Devon Adams of BJS, who provided statistical 
verification. Allen J. Beck reviewed the report. 
Carolyn C. Williams edited the report and  
Jayne Robinson prepared it for final printing, 
under the supervision of Doris J. James.

November 2006, NCJ 214256
-----------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in 
ASCII and its related statistical data and 
tables — including two appendix tables — are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft05.htm>.
------------------------------------------------


End of file
11/14/06 ih