Presale Handgun Checks, 1997   
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 1999

June 2000, NCJ 180882
Revised 7/14/00

By Sidra L. Gifford
BJS Statistician

Devon B. Adams
BJS State Program Manager

Gene Lauver
Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Regional Justice Information Service

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ffo98.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------------


---------------------------Highlights-------------------------
* From the inception of the Brady Act on March 1, 1994, to
December 31, 1999, about 22 million applications for firearm
purchase or pawn transaction were subject to background checks
of applicants.  About 536,000 were rejected.

* In 1999 alone, 204,000 (2.4%) of approximately 8,621,000
applications for firearm transfer were rejected by the FBI or
State and local agencies. 

* Over half of the applications for firearm transfers were
checked directly by the FBI, while the remainder of applications
were checked by State or local agencies.

*The rejection rate was lower in States where background checks
were conducted only by the FBI (1.8%) as opposed to States where
points of contact were responsible for background investigations
(3.0%).

* Two-thirds (68%) of the Nation's population lived in the 26
States that served as POCs for handgun checks.

*Among State and local agencies, about 73% of the rejections
were for a felony conviction or indictment, 11% for a disqualifying
domestic violence conviction or restraining order, and about 4%
for State or local law prohibitions.  The FBI's rejections
included a slightly higher percentage based on the finding of a
domestic violence conviction or restraining order (15%).
--------------------end of highlights----------------------------

On November 30, 1998, the permanent provisions of the Brady
Handgun Violence Prevention Act (P.L. 103-159, 1993) became
effective.  The interim system had lasted from February 29,
1994, through November 29, 1998, and applied to handgun
purchases from  licensed firearm dealers.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act require background
checks of applicants for transfer of both hand- guns and long
guns from a Federal firearms licensee (FFL).  Transfers
requiring checks now include pawn- shop transactions as well as
purchases from retail gun shops.  The minimum check required by
the permanent provisions is the FBI's National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS).   

This Bulletin presents findings from the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics (FIST) program.  Included are background checks
conducted by State and local points of contact (POCs), by other
checking agencies (such as those that check backgrounds of
permit applicants), and by the FBI.  Also provided are
estimates of rejection rates and the 

National estimates

Information in this Bulletin is based on a survey of 19 single
State POCs and over 500 local checking agencies in 15 States. 
Statistics are also included from FBI data on the inquiries
passing through the NICS operations center. ***Footnote 1:  The
number of background checks handled by State POCs as reported in
the FBI's National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS) Operations Report (November 30, 1998-December 31, 1999),
published March 1, 2000, are higher than the estimates reported
here because multiple inquiries for the same application (which
may be done at the discretion of the agency) are deleted from
BJS' FIST data.***

When a background check finds evidence of disqualifying factors,
an application is rejected. (See Definitions in Methodology on
page 8 for more detail.)  The estimates of rejection rates and
reasons for rejection of purchase applications for firearms by
State POCs or local checking agencies were derived from FIST
data.  These can be compared to the reasons for rejection by the
FBI.

In addition, FIST collected statistics about applications for
both purchase permits and ATF-exempt carry permits.  

The FBI processed over 4.5 million applications for firearm
transfers in 1999, while State and local checking agencies
processed an additional 4 million (Highlights table).  (See
Appendix A for details of State participation.)

More than twice as many applications were filed in 1999 as in
1998 (table 1).  This increase can be attributed in large part
to the permanent Brady requirements that background checks be
conducted for the transfer of long guns as well as handguns, and
at pawn shops in addition to retail stores.

As reported by the FBI, the number of NICS transactions
conducted during December 1998, the first month of the permanent
provisions, was higher than the monthly average for January
through November of 1999 (figure 1). Similarly, the over 1.2
million NICS transactions conducted in December 1999 was the
highest monthly number for 1999.

Rejection rates

The rate of rejection in the first year of permanent Brady
(2.4%) was similar to the rejection rate during the interim
Brady period (2.5%) (table 1).  The overall rate of rejection of
potential firearm transfers takes into account the
FBI and the aggregate of State and local agencies that retain
responsibility for running background checks on firearm
applications.  

In 1999 the FBI rejected 81,000 applications, a 1.8% rejection
rate, while State and local agencies rejected 123,000, a rate of
3.0% (Highlights table).  Together, approximately 204,000
applications for firearm transfer were rejected in 1999, a rate
of 2.4%.

States conducting background checks may have the ability to
access State and local files not available to the FBI.  In 1999
all State POCs accessed computer databases that record past
felony convictions, and many accessed databases with other
disqualifying information such as fugitive status, court
restraining orders, mental illness, and domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions.  

Some States retained data that pertained to their own
prohibitions and that the FBI did not access.  In some States,
courts or other local agencies maintained automated databases
that the FBI may not access.

Approval systems

State approval systems can be classified as "instant approval,"
"permit," or "other approval" systems.  Permit systems surveyed
by the FIST program include all permits required for purchase
and certain "exempt carry permits" that can be used to make a
purchase without a background check. (See Definitions in
Methodology, page 9, and Survey of State Procedures Related to
Firearm Sales, Midyear 1999, BJS report, NCJ 179022.)

In States operating under an instant approval system (an instant
check on State data as well as a NICS check were conducted), the
rejection rate was 3.6% (table 2).  Of the 4 million
applications checked by State and local agencies, almost 2.5
million applications were for instant approvals to transfer a
firearm.  About 600,000 were checked by agencies in States with
other types of approval systems.

Twelve States required some form of a State or local permit to
purchase a firearm.  The FIST program collects data from permit
States to identify characteristics of these different approval
systems.  Applications for purchase permits comprised about
600,000 background checks, and applications for ATF-exempt carry
permits comprised 144,000 applications processed by State or
local agencies.

The rejection rate of applications for purchase permits (2.4%)
was similar to the rejection rate for all applications for
firearm transfers (2.4%), but lower than that of State instant
checks (3.6%).  "Other approval" systems that allow up to 10
days to conduct a background check had the lowest rejection rate
(less than 1%).  However, California dominates this category,
and the low rate reflects that State's overall rejection rate.  

Permit exemptions

Federal law does not mandate a permit to purchase firearms. 
However, State permits for purchase, carrying, or other
activities can be used to exempt the holder from another
background check at the time of purchase, provided the
applicable permit meets certain requirements of the Brady Act. 
(See "Overview of NICS" on page 6.)

In 1999, 17 States issued carry permits that could exempt a
holder from a purchase check under an ATF ruling or State law. 
Approximately 310,000 applications for exempt carry permits were
subject to background checks, among the agencies reporting data
(table 3).  

The rejection rate of exempt carry permit applications among
statewide agencies that issue exemptions ranged from less than
1% in Mississippi to nearly 3% in Indiana.  The rejection rate
of exempt carry permit applications was 2.2% in all State and
local agencies in which data were available.

Reasons for rejection

Nearly 3 out of 4 rejections for firearm transfer (about 150,000
applications in 1999) occurred because the applicant either had
a felony conviction or was under felony indictment (table 4). 
The second most common reason for rejection was a domestic
violence misdemeanor conviction or restraining order (about 13%
of rejections or approximately 27,000 applications).  

The FBI and the POCs rejected applications in roughly equal
percentages due to the finding of a felony indictment or
conviction.

However, POCs were able to report rejections in the additional
categories of State and local law prohibitions (4% of
rejections) and mental illness (less than 1%).  These other
categories may have lowered the relative percentages for the
other reasons listed, as compared to the FBI.  For example, the
FBI rejected a greater percentage of applications based on drug
involvement (4% of FBI rejections) than did State and local
checking agencies (1%). 

The FBI had a slightly higher percentage of their rejections for
domestic violence convictions or restraining order (15%) than
did the State POCs (11%).  This is due in part to an effort by
the FBI to investigate all convictions for the presence of
domestic violence. Both the FBI and POCs had about 6% of
rejections for other factors such as juvenile or alien-status,
dishonorable discharge from the armed services, and citizenship
renunciation.

Statewide reporting of applications

Among State and local agencies responding to the FIST survey, 19
had a single NICS point of contact for their State and provided
statewide totals for 1999 (table 5).  These States processed
over 3 million applications for firearm transfers and rejected
91,300 (2.9%).  An estimated 7,983 (2.0%) applications were
rejected by local agencies serving as points of contact. 

The 19 Statewide agencies served 50.6% of the resident
population of the United States (Census Bureau, 1998) but
received about 36% of the total number of applications for
firearm transfer during 1999 (figure 2).

State and local agencies run handgun checks for 68% of the
Nation's population.  By contrast, long gun checks are run by
State and local agencies for 43% of the population.

Total population of States where --

State/local agencies 
check applications for --

Handguns	183.6 million people
Long guns	117.1 million people

FBI checks applications for --
Handguns            86.6 million people
Long guns          153.1 million people

Type of firearm

It is unknown how much of the approximately 160% increase in
background checks -- from less than 3.3 million in 1998 to about
8.6 million in 1999 -- was due to the requirement that long gun
transfers be included.  Because disqualifiers under the Brady
Act are similar for handguns and long guns, most States do not
identify for statistical purposes which type of firearm is being
transferred.

Since the FBI checks the majority of applications for long gun
transfer, the NICS system offers the most comprehensive
information about long gun applications.  The firearms
transaction record (ATF Form 4473), which must be completed at
the time of transfer, asks whether the weapon is a hand- gun,
long gun, or both, and the make, model, and type of every
firearm being transferred.  

The FBI reports that about two-thirds of NICS inquiries are for
long guns.  The authors spoke to officials of five State
agencies keeping separate counts of transfer applications for
handguns and long guns.  Those officials suggested that long
guns account for about half of the applications in their States.

----------------------box on p5-----------------------------------
Background
Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. 922, prohibits
transfer of a firearm to a person who --

is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year
*is a fugitive from justice
*is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, any
controlled substance
has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed
to a mental institution
*is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United
States under a nonimmigrant visa
*was discharged from the U.S. 
Armed Forces under dishonorable conditions
*has renounced U.S. citizenship
*is subject to a court order restraining him or her from
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child  
*has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime
of domestic violence.

In addition, the Gun Control Act makes it unlawful for any
licensed importer, manufacturer, dealer, or collector to
transfer a long gun to a person younger than age 18 or
any other type of firearm to a person less than 21 years of age. 

The Federal act's categories of prohibited persons are the
prevailing minimum for all States.  Many States have enacted

similar or additional prohibitions.  For example, 19 States
prohibit firearm possession by persons who are addicted to alcohol
or have been convicted of alcohol-related offenses; 24 States
restrict persons who were adjudicated delinquent or who had
committed serious offense sas juveniles.  (See Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 1999, BJS report,
 NCJ 179022.)

Interim Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the Gun Control Act and included
interim provisions, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), in effect from
February 29, 1994, until November 29, 1998.  The interim
provisions prohibited sale of a handgun by a licensed
dealer (called a Federal Firearms Licensee) for 5 days
or until the licensee had been advised that, based on a
background check, a prospective purchaser was not prohibited
under Federal or State law.  Checks were conducted by the
Chief Law Enforcement Officer of the jurisdiction where
the licensee operated.

The interim provisions allowed States with prohibitory
statutes comparable to Federal law to follow a variety
of alternative procedures.  State laws that qualified
under these alternatives required that before any licensee
completed the transfer of a handgun to a non-licensee,
a government official verified that possession of a handgun
by the transferee would not be a violation of law.
The "Brady-alternative States" generally employed either
an "instant check" or a "permit or other approval type"
system, as designated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms.

Permanent Brady Act provisions

Establishment of the National Instant Criminal Background
Check System (NICS) was authorized by the permanent provisions
of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t).  The U.S. Department of
Justice, with the States, developed the system during the
57-month interim period.  Since November 29, 1998, the NICS
has allowed a licensee to contact the system by telephone
or other electronic means for information, to be supplied
immediately, on whether receipt of a firearm by a prospective
transferee would violate Federal or State law.  

Under the NICS configuration States are encouraged to
serve as a point of contact, receiving inquiries from
firearm dealers and accessing the FBI's national record
system. (See Components of the National Firearm Check
System on page 6 for further details on checks under
the NICS or State laws.)

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the permanent
provisions mandate that licensees request background checks
on long gun purchasers and persons who redeem a pawned firearm.
Licensees have the option of requesting a NICS check on persons
who attempt to pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established a grant program (NCHIP) to ensure
immediate availability of complete and accurate State records.
The Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST), which collects
statistics on background checks, is one of many NCHIP programs.

NCHIP is designed to assist States to develop or improve existing
criminal history records systems and to establish an interface
with the NICS.  Grant funds have also supported direct technical
assistance, evaluation, and research related to improving
nonfelony records within the States.

To date, over $270 million has been awarded directly to
States to assist them in establishing and enhancing criminal
records which support the FBI's record system.
---------------------end of box--------------------------------------------

---------------box on p6------------------------------------------
Components of the National Firearm Check System

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local agencies conduct background
checks on persons who apply to purchase a firearm or for a
permit that can be used to make a purchase.  Variations in
Federal and State procedures for determining firearm possession
eligibility are described below.

Overview of National Instant Criminal Background Check System 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a NICS check requested
by a dealer or present a State permit that ATF has qualified as
an alternative to the point-of-transfer check.  Qualifying
permits are those which -- 

(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm,
and 

(2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State in
which the transfer is to take place, after verification by an
authorized government official that possession of a firearm by
the transferee would not be a violation of law.  A permit issued
after November 29, 1998, qualifies as an alternative only if the
information available to the State authority includes the NICS
Index maintained by the FBI. 

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI
or a point of contact (POC) agency designated by the State
government.  The FBI or POC checks the available Federal, State,
and/or local databases and responds with a notice to the
licensee that the transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or is
delayed pending further review of the transferee's record.  (See
the FBI, National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS) Operations Report (November 30, 1998-December 31, 1999),
March 1, 2000.)

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to permanent Brady
requirements, a licensee must receive a completed Firearm
Transaction Record (ATF  F 4473).  For more information,
see Commerce in Firearms in the United States, February 2000 
(www.atf.treas.gov/pub/fire-explo_pub/ 020400report.pdf).

State and local participation in the NICS

Each State government determines the extent of its involvement
in the NICS process.  Three forms of State involvement currently
exist:

* A POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers originating
in the State.
* A POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers; licensees
in the State are required to contact the FBI for approval of
long gun transfers. 
* The State does not maintain a point of contact; licensees are
required to contact the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm
transfers originating in the State.

Handgun checks are conducted by the FBI for 24 States and by POC
agencies for 26 States; long gun checks are conducted by the FBI
for 35 States and by POC agencies for 15 States (Appendix A).  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies includes initiating
checks 

on persons who apply for State permits.  In a few States with
full or partial participation, the FBI conducts the NICS check
on certain pawn transactions instead of the POC.

Procedures for determining the eligibility of prospective
firearm purchasers are generally classified by ATF as "instant
check" or "permit or other type of approval" systems.  Seventeen
States utilize instant check systems; 12 require purchase
permits; and 4 maintain other type of approval systems (Illinois
and New Jersey are each counted twice because they operate
separate purchase permit and instant check systems).  In
addition to the Brady Act's regulation of sales by federally
licensed dealers, some States require background checks for
firearm transfers that occur between unlicensed persons at gun
shows or other locations.

A few States require a mandatory waiting period after a
purchaser applies and before a firearm transfer can be
completed, regardless of when the instant check is completed.

The NICS process does not automatically supplant State firearm
sales regulations.  State background check and permit statutes
that existed before the effective date of the NICS remain in
force unless repealed by legislative action or allowed to expire.

The POC agencies conduct any checks and issue any permits
required by State law in addition to following procedures
mandated under the NICS.  Generally, instant check agencies
conduct a single background check that incorporates Federal and
State requirements for each transaction.

Except for Delaware all States with instant check systems are
points of contact for the NICS.  Most States have designated a
single agency with statewide jurisdiction as their NICS point of
contact; some States have multiple points of contact, which are
usually county sheriffs or local police departments. (For
agencies conducting firearm checks, see Appendix B.)

Parallel State systems

If agencies that conduct checks under State law are unable to
access the NICS Index, licensees in that State are required to
contact the FBI for the NICS check.  Thus, prospective
transferees in some States are required to undergo a permit or
point-of-transfer check by a State or local agency and a NICS
check by the FBI.  Six States (Delaware, Massachusetts,
Minne-sota, Missouri, New Jersey, and Rhode Island) maintain
firearm check systems that can be described as parallel to the
NICS process. 

For more information on background check systems in specific
States, see Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 1999, NCJ 179022.
-------------------------end of box-----------------------------------


Methodology

Definitions

State instant approval (instant check) systems require a seller
to transmit a purchaser's application to a checking agency by
telephone or computer; the agency is required to respond
immediately or as soon as possible without delay.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective firearm purchaser
to obtain, after background check, a government-issued document
(called a permit, license, identification card, etc.) that must
be presented to a seller to receive a firearm.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit (issued after a
background check) that exempts the holder from a check at the
time of purchase under an ATF ruling or State law.

Other type of approval systems require a seller to transmit a
purchaser's application to a checking agency by mail, telephone,
or computer; the agency is not required to respond immediately
but must respond before the end of the statutory time limit.

Application for firearm transfer is information submitted by a
person to a State or local checking agency to purchase a firearm
or obtain a permit that can be used for a purchase; includes
information submitted directly to a checking agency or forwarded
by a prospective seller.

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal NICS system and may
include more than one inquiry per application.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is prohibited from receiving
a firearm or a permit that can be used to receive a firearm, due
to the finding of a disqualifying factor during a background
check.

Data collection procedures

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), through a
cooperative agreement with BJS under the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics (FIST) program, collected the data.  

The agencies supplied data on either paper or diskette.  Several
different forms were provided to meet the varying office
procedures of the agencies.  In addition REJIS wrote special
software distributed free of charge to requesting agencies. 
This software was designed to simplify the record tabulating
functions of the agency.  It also helped to reduce the burden of
keeping the statistical data because a capability of the
software was to automatically report the data needed for the
study.  In all cases the data that the agency sent to REJIS
contained only statistical information and would not allow the
identification of an individual.  The software also assists
agencies in purging records after the delay time specified by
law.

FIST data are collected directly from State agencies conducting
background  checks.  Two approaches were used for the collection
of data from local checking agencies.  The first involved
continuation of an ongoing survey.  The ongoing survey included
agencies that have provided information consistently for the
FIST survey since 1995.  The second consisted of telephone and
mail contact to obtain data from all other local checking
agencies that collected and would share information on firearm
applications.

The following presents the approach used to supplement the
ongoing survey among checking agencies.  Telephone and mail
contact was attempted in 1999 with all local checking agencies
not previously invited to participate in the ongoing survey. 

Information collected included the following:  firearm
applications made to the agency, firearm applications rejected
by the agency, and the reasons for rejection.  Information on
appeals of rejected applications was not included since local
checking agencies may not handle appeals through the entire
process and may have only limited information on outcomes from
such appeals.

Determining populations

To estimate the application and rejection rates within a given
area, the appropriate agency population was needed and was
determined as follows:  

The stratification classification of the county was based on the
size of the largest city within the county.  

If cities within a county were conducting their own background
checks, their populations were subtracted from the county
population.  

If a municipal agency provided services for other selected
municipalities, then populations for those municipalities were
added to the populations of the reporting municipality. 

If an agency participating in the study relied upon other
jurisdictions to conduct background checks, they were replaced
by those other jurisdictions (for example, a town being replaced
by a county).

State and local checking agencies were stratified by size of the
population served:  State agencies that served an entire State
population; local agencies that served a population greater than
100,000; local agencies that served a population between 10,000
and 100,000; and local agencies that served a population of less
than 10,000.  Population size was based on 1998 Census Bureau
information.  The population categories were chosen to be
consistent with those commonly used by the FBI when conducting
similar studies. 

All agencies serving a population greater than 100,000 were
asked to contribute data in 1999, either by continuing to report
in the ongoing survey or by providing a report in the
supplemental survey.  The number of agencies in both the ongoing
survey and the supplemental survey are shown by population
category in the table below.

                     Number of agencies   
Population served

	Under 10,000	      262
	10,000 to 100,000	  211
	Over 100,000	       37
	Statewide agencies		
		(POCs and those
		issuing permits)   25

Total agencies            535

These agencies together served 192,394,762 people, or 71.18% of
the more than 270 million people estimated to live in the U.S.
in 1998.  The addition of agencies did not skew the distribution
of agencies toward any particular State or region.

In some States one statewide agency conducts background checks
for purchase and another agency (or division within an agency)
issues ATF-approved permits.  Although both agencies conducted
background checks, care was taken not to count State populations
twice in the estimation process.  This situation of dual
agencies conducting background checks did not occur among local
agencies.     

Estimation procedures

Based on data provided by both sets of agencies, National
estimates were developed using population weighting factors. 
When an agency did not provide data for all months, a simple
linear extrapolation or interpolation was used to generate a
12-month total.

It is important to emphasize that the mix of State and local
agencies conducting background checks changed during the
transition from the interim to the permanent provisions of the
Brady Act.  Consequently, while data collection procedures
remained similar to those used in 1998, the agencies providing
data changed. 

For example, when the permanent provisions of the Brady Act
became effective, six agencies that had previously conducted
statewide checks turned their background checks over to the FBI.
 However, three States (Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Vermont)
that had not performed their background checks during the
interim period began statewide systems.  

The distribution of local checking agencies also changed after
the permanent provisions of the Brady Act became effective. 
Many States delegated their responsibilities to the FBI, so
local agencies in those States no longer conducted background
checks.  Further, it was deemed necessary to collect data from
local agencies (and some statewide agencies) that issue certain
carry permits approved by ATF or State law as an alternative to
a presale background check.  

In 11 States local agencies still conducted checks required by
State law.  Local agencies that had been reporting these data to
FIST were asked to continue.  However, not enough local agencies
remained in the ongoing survey to calculate a sufficiently
accurate national estimate.  Additional local checking agencies
conducting background checks for permits had to be included in
the estimation process.  For these reasons, FIST supplemented
participants in the ongoing survey with data from other checking
agencies.

Agencies with a rejection rate over four standard deviations
above the average standard rejection rate were classified as
outliers and their data were not used for projection of
estimates.  In addition, rejection rates that could not be
determined with sufficient accuracy were not used.  

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this report depends
on two types of errors: nonsampling and sampling.  In this
study, nonsampling error may occur from the following: 
nonresponse; differences in the ways checking agencies process,
code, store, and retrieve their information; differences in
interpretation of the survey questions; and activities that
delay personnel from doing paperwork.  

Also, the process of a researcher receiving data and storing it
in the computer for analysis can introduce nonsampling error.  

In any sample survey, the full extent of nonsampling error is
never known.  However, steps were taken to minimize the
potential for error.  Extensive telephone follow-ups were made
to encourage responses, answer questions about misunderstood
requests, and generally assist in assembling the information in
a form useable by FIST.  Extensive verification of the data
ensured the accuracy of the numbers.  Agencies providing data
were asked to review and revise their reports, and various
quality checks were performed in receiving and processing the
data.

Because of the sampling design, State comparisons cannot be
made.  The estimates are only for the 50 States and do not
include U.S. Territories or the District of Columbia.

Sources of additional information

Additional information on State firearm laws is available from
BJS in the Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 1999, NCJ 179022.  Further information on Federal law
and BJS-related publications is available from the following
Internet sites:

BATF - http://www.atf.treas.gov /core/firearms/firearms.htm
BJS - http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/guns.htm
FBI - http://www.fbi.gov/programs /nicsfact.htm


The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs such as the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics program.  State and local officials have cooperated
in reporting the data presented.

Sidra L. Gifford and Devon B. Adams of BJS and Michael Bowling
and Gene Lauver of REJIS wrote this Bulletin.  REJIS is a
criminal justice agency commissioned by the city and county of
St. Louis, MO.  Terry Tomazic, Ph.D., professor of research
methodology at St. Louis University, provided statistical
consultation.  Carol G. Kaplan supervised the project.  REJIS
collected and analyzed the FIST data presented.  Matthew Durose
of BJS prepared figure 2.  Tom Hester  edited The Bulletin,
Jayne Robinson administered final production.  

Further information on the FIST program can be obtained from --

Carol G. Kaplan, Chief
Criminal History Improvement Programs
U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics
810 Seventh Street, NW
Washington, DC 20531

Gene Lauver, Project Manager
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program
Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard
St. Louis, MO 63108

June 2000, NCJ 180882

End of file
Revised 7/14/00  ih,pm



