U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2004


October 2005, NCJ 210117


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft04.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#bcft
--------------------------------------------------------------

Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver 
Regional Justice Information Service
                 
Matthew J. Hickman, Ph.D.
Devon B. Adams
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------
Highlights

Background checks of applications for firearm 
transfers since implementation of the Brady Act

* From the inception of the Brady Act on February 
29, 1994, to December 31, 2004, more than 61 million
applications for firearm transfers or permits were 
subject to background checks. About 1,228,000 were 
rejected.

* Total applications for firearm transfers or 
permits increased 3.2% nationwide, from 7,831,000 
in 2003 to 8,084,000 in 2004.

* State and local agencies conducted background 
checks on 42% of the total applications for firearm 
transfers or permits in 2004, while the FBI was 
responsible for the remainder.

* In 2004, 126,000 (1.6%) of approximately 
8,084,000 applications for firearm transfers or 
permits were rejected by the FBI or State and 
local agencies. 

* In 2004 the rejection rate for applications 
checked by the FBI(1.4%)was lower than that for 
checks by State and local agencies (1.8%). 

* A felony conviction or indictment was the most 
common reason for rejection during 2004 by State 
or local agencies (50%) and the FBI (38%).  

* A domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or
restraining order was the second most common 
reason for rejection by State or local agencies 
(16%). 

* Other criminal history was the second most 
common reason for rejection by the FBI (25%).

* An estimated 1,500 persons were arrested in 
2004 for an outstanding warrant or submission of 
false information on an application, according to 
checking agencies reporting arrests to FIST.

* In 2004 ATF referred for prosecution 1,140 cases
involving false information on applications for 
firearm transfers. These referrals are based on 
prosecutorial criteria provided by the individual 
U.S. attorney offices.
----------------------------------------------------
                 
The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (Brady 
Act)mandates criminal history background checks on
persons applying to purchase firearms from federally
licensed firearm dealers, Federal Firearm Licensees
(FFL's). This Bulletin reports the number of 
applications for firearm transfers and permits, 
rejections that resulted from background checks, 
and reasons for rejection for selected States during 
2004.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act became
effective on November 30, 1998. The act established 
the National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS) and requires a back-ground check by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or a State point of 
contact (POC) on persons applying to receive firearms 
from an FFL.  

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) began the 
Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program in 1995 
to collect information on background checks conducted 
by State and local agencies. The State and local 
data -- when combined with FBI NICS data -- provide 
national estimates of the total number of 
applications and rejections resulting from the Brady 
Act and similar State laws. 

In 2004 FIST collected information from almost 700 
State and local agencies, including 17 statewide POC's 
that conduct their own checks under Federal and State 
laws. The FBI also compiled data on the inquiries or 
transactions handled by the NICS section.***Footnote 1: 
The number of background checks handled by State POC's, 
as reported by the National Instant Criminal Background 
Check System (NICS) may be higher than the estimates 
reported here because multiple inquiries or 
transactions for the same application are processed. 
FIST only counts the first of 
multiple inquiries.*** 

Nearly all applications included in the 2004 FIST 
survey were subject to a NICS check, as well as 
checks that fulfilled any additional State 
requirements. A small number of applications were 
subject only to checks required by State laws.(See 
Components of the national firearm check system on 
page 9 for further details.)

National estimates

In 2004, 8,084,000 applications for firearms 
transfers or permits were filed, an increase 
of 3.2% over the 7,831,000 applications filed 
in 2003. In addition to the nearly 4.7 million 
applications for firearm transfers processed 
by the FBI in 2004, State and local checking 
agencies processed 3.4 million applications.

In the first 6 years of the permanent Brady period, 
the FBI and State and local agencies received about 
49 million applications. State and local agencies 
received 12.7 million applications during the 
interim Brady period (1994-98). Most of the 
applications in the interim period were for
handgun transfers. Under the permanent provisions,
background checks for long guns were added, 
greatly increasing the volume of checks. 

Since the inception of the Brady Act, State and 
local agencies have  conducted more than 21 million
background checks. The FBI accounted for more than 
26 million background checks under the permanent 
provisions of the Brady Act. When a background 
check produces evidence of factors that disqualify 
an applicant from receiving a firearm, the 
application is rejected. (See Definitions on page 
10 for more detail.)

In 2004 checking agencies rejected 126,000 
applications, the same number rejected in 2003.  
State and local agencies rejected 62,000 
applications in 2004, a 1.8% rejection rate. The 
FBI rejected nearly 64,000 applications, a 1.4% 
rejection rate.  The overall rejection rate in 
2004 was 1.6%, the same rate as in 2003.

Since the inception of the Brady Act, more than 61
million applications for firearm transfers have 
been checked. Of the total, 1,228,000 applications, 
or 2.0%, were rejected. 

State approval systems

State systems for approval of a prospective firearm
purchaser can be classified as "instant approval,"
"purchase permit," "exempt carry permit," or "other
approval" systems.

Instant approval systems

Instant approval (instant check) systems require 
a seller to transmit the applicant's information 
to a checking agency by telephone or computer. 
The checking agency is required to respond to the 
seller at once or as soon as possible (generally 
within 3 business days). State agencies conducted 
over 1.9 million instant checks in 2004, and 
about 37,000 (1.9%)of the applications were 
rejected. From 1999 to 2004 State instant approval 
systems received 13.1 million applications, 
rejecting 346,000 (2.6%). 

The FIST survey also included applications for 
two types of State permits. Federal law does 
not mandate a permit to purchase firearms.

Purchase permit systems

These systems require firearm purchasers to obtain, 
after a background check, a government-issued document
(such as a permit, license, identification card, or 
other document) that must be presented to a seller in 
order to receive a firearm. Most agencies issuing 
purchase permits operate under State statutes that 
allow between 7 and 30 days to complete a background 
check. In 2004 State and local agencies received 
710,000 applications for purchase permits, while 
15,000, or 2.2%, were rejected. From 1999 to 2004, 
4.3 million applications for purchase permits were
received by State and local agencies, of which 
92,000 were rejected (2.1%).

Exempt carry permit systems

An exempt carry permit is not required for purchase 
but can be used to exempt the holder from a background
check at the point of sale. A permit is exempt if it 
is issued after a check that includes the NICS and 
meets other requirements of the Brady Act under a 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
(ATF)regulation and 18 U.S.C. 922(t). 

Agencies issuing ATF-approved exempt carry permits 
usually request a check by sending information to 
the FBI. Some permits are only exempt under State 
law, including Indiana and Minnesota carry permits.

Nine States reported complete statewide data on 
exempt carry permits for 2004. State agencies 
received 161,000 exempt carry permit applications, 
of which 3,000 were rejected(1.9%). Local agencies 
received 192,000 applications for exempt carry 
permits and rejected 2,000 (1.0%). From 1999 to 
2004 State and local agencies received 2,044,000 
applications for exempt carry permits, rejecting 
41,000 or 2.0%. 

Other types of approval systems

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit 
the applicant's information to a checking agency 
by mail, telephone, or computer. The checking 
agency is not required to respond immediately but 
must respond before the end of a State statutory 
time limit, generally within 7 to 10 days. Other 
types of approval systems processed 401,000 
applications in 2004 (predominately in California),
and rejected 4,000 (or 1%). 

From 1999 to 2004 these systems received 2.8 
million applications, rejecting 29,000 (or 1%).

Analysis of rejection rates

FBI reporting

Among the States for which the FBI conducted both 
long gun and handgun background checks for 
transfers in 2004, rejection rates ranged from 2% 
for Alaska to less than 1% for Kansas, 
Massachusetts, Maine, Missouri, Rhode Island, and 
West Virginia. 

Rejection rates in Massachusetts and Rhode Island 
may have been low in part because these States 
require a background check by a local agency 
separate from the NICS check. The local background 
check may eliminate some applicants before a NICS 
check is necessary. Delaware is similar because the 
State Police conduct a check separate from the NICS 
process. In 2004 the Delaware State Police reported 
a rejection rate of 3.8% included checks of mental 
health records, while the FBI rejection rate for 
Delaware was 1.6%.

Statewide reporting

In 2004 the FIST survey obtained statewide data 
from 15 NICS points of contact and Delaware. 
These 16 States processed checks for 2.2 million 
applications in 2004, rejecting 40,000 (or 1.8%). 

Rejection rates varied slightly in 2004 by the type 
of statewide approval system.  Purchase permits 
(2.0%), instant checks (1.9%), and exempt carry 
permits (1.9%)had the highest rates, and other 
approval systems had a lower rate (1.1%). The 
rejection rates for individual States surveyed in 
2004 ranged from 0.2% in Connecticut to 3.8% in 
Delaware.

Among the lowest rejection rates in 2004 were instant
checks in New Jersey (0.3%) and Illinois (0.7%), 
where an instant check at the time of transfer is 
the second step required for approval of prospective 
firearm owners. During the first step of the 
process -- application for the requisite permit or 
ID card -- the rejection rate is considerably higher 
in Illinois (2.3%), more similar than the second step
to the national average of 1.6%. 

Generally, the higher rejection rates in 2004 
occurred in States that implemented an instant 
approval system on or after the effective date 
of the Brady Act, including Colorado (3.3%) 
and Tennessee (2.4%). Approval systems 
established before the Brady Act, such as 
California (1.1%) and Virginia (1.1%), generally 
had lower rates that varied little from year to 
year. 
 
Local reporting

Local agencies mainly conduct checks for purchase 
and exempt carry permits. In 2004 local agencies 
received 596,000 applications, of which 11,000 
(1.8%) were rejected. Rejection rates varied among 
local agencies by size of the population served, 
by the jurisdiction, and by the type of permit. 

Rejection rates for purchase permits were highest 
in jurisdictions with a population over 100,000 
and lowest in those under 10,000. Rejection rates 
for exempt carry permits were highest in 
jurisdictions with populations between 10,000 and 
100,000, and lowest in the smallest jurisdictions. 
Overall, local agency rejection rates in 2004 were 
higher for purchase permits than for exempt carry
permits. 

There was a similar pattern during the permanent 
Brady period: rejection rates for purchase and 
exempt carry permits were highest in jurisdictions 
with populations over 100,000 and lowest in those 
under 10,000.

Availability of records

All States maintain databases that record felony
convictions, and many maintain data on other 
disqualifying factors such as fugitive status, 
court restraining orders, mental illness, and 
domestic violence misdemeanor convictions. States 
differ as to the degree of automation used in 
record searching and whether records are in a
central database or in county courts or other 
local agencies.

As of December 31, 2001, 49 States had automated 
at least some records in their criminal history 
files. Automation expanded from 1999 to 2001, as 
the number of States with fully automated criminal 
history files increased from 21 to 27. (See Survey 
of State Criminal History Information Systems, 
2001, NCJ 200343). 

Checking agencies often encounter delays when they
access incomplete records. The most frequent de
lays occur when researching the final disposition 
of a criminal charge indicated in an arrest or 
indictment record. If the final disposition cannot 
be found during the time allowed for a background 
check, the agency must decide, based on Federal 
or State law, whether the application will be
approved, denied, or delayed pending further 
research. A State's rejection rate may tend to 
be lower if an approval is mandated and higher 
if a denial is mandated.

The Brady Act allows a transfer to proceed if a 
disqualifying record is not found within the 3
business day limit for a NICS check. Some States 
have laws and regulations that allow their 
agencies to deny or delay a transfer if an 
incomplete record is being researched when the 
time limit expires. These types of rules may 
partially account for the comparatively high 
rejection rates in States such as Colorado and 
Tennessee.

Reasons for rejection

Half of all rejections for firearm transfers among 
State and local checking agencies (about 31,000 
applications in 2004) occurred because the 
applicant either had a felony conviction or was 
under felony indictment. The second most common 
reason for rejection was a domestic violence 
misdemeanor conviction or restraining order
(about 16% of rejections or approximately 10,000
applications). Other common reasons for 
rejections were the presence of a State law 
prohibition (9% of rejections)and an applicant's 
status as a fugitive (8.3%).

The FBI reported that 38% of their rejections 
were for felony-related reasons (about 24,000 
applications), followed by other criminal history 
disqualifiers (about 16,000 applications, or 25%), 
which includes State prohibitors. A domestic 
violence misdemeanor conviction or restraining 
order accounted for 17% of the rejections (about 
11,000 applications). Other common reasons for
rejection were an applicant's drug use (9.1%)or 
status as a fugitive (4.6%).

Although a felony conviction or indictment was the 
most common reason for rejection by both State and 
local law enforcement during 2004, the State 
agencies rejected for this reason more frequently 
(59%)than the local agencies (28%). State agencies 
were more likely to reject an applicant because of 
fugitive status while local agencies were more 
likely to base a rejection on a State or local
prohibitor, drug addiction, or mental illness.

During the permanent Brady period, the number of
rejections by State and local agencies for reasons 
other than felony conviction or indictment increased 
28% (from 57,000 to 73,000). The percentage of 
rejections for nonfelony reasons increased from 28% 
to 58%. Over the same period the total number of 
rejections fell 38%, and the number of felony-
related rejections decreased 64%.   

States have used funds from NCHIP to flag criminal 
history records that contain a domestic violence 
misdemeanor conviction or protection order. 
Forty-six States now submit data to the NCIC 
Protection Order File, which became operational 
in May 1997 and includes over 920,000 records
as of July 2005.
  
Appeals of denials

Specific procedures for appealing the denial 
of a firearm purchase or permit are codified in 
Federal law and in the laws of nearly all States 
that process background checks. The most common 
procedure provides an appeal to the checking 
agency and a subsequent appeal to a court. 

Eighteen States provide an appeal to the checking 
agency for a person who is denied a firearm 
purchase or a permit required for a purchase. (In 
eight other States, local agencies may reconsider 
their decisions although they are not required to 
do so by law.) Some agencies allow a denied person 
to initiate a review with a telephone request.
Another 18 States provide an appeal to a court, 
and in 2 States a government officer in a 
department separate from the checking agency 
performs an administrative review. 

Other agencies involved in appeals are those that 
maintain criminal histories or other records which 
could disqualify an applicant. An appellant may be 
required to contact the agency that supplied a 
criminal history or another record that caused a
denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant denies being 
the individual named in a disqualifying record 
found by the checking agency. To resolve the 
identity question, the appellant will ordinarily 
submit fingerprints for comparison with Federal 
and/or State arrestee records. If the appellant's 
prints do not match any records on file, the
denial may be reversed.

Another common appeal arises when an applicant is
denied because of a felony arrest or charge 
without a recorded disposition. The applicant can 
have the denial reversed by submitting court 
records to prove that the charge was subsequently 
dismissed. The vast majority of disputed denials 
are resolved at the administrative level, and 
turn on the accuracy of records rather than
interpretation of law.

Of the 916,000 denials by the FBI and State and 
local agencies in the first 6 years of the 
permanent Brady period, 138,000 (15%) were appealed. 
Of the appealed denials, 49,000 (36%) were reversed. 

In 2004 checking agencies that reported data 
to FIST received 23,000 appeals of denials, 
of which 8,500 (or 37%) were reversed. Of the 
62,000 denials issued in 2004 by State and local 
agencies, 13,000 (or 21%) were appealed. Of the 
appealed denials, 5,500 (or 42%) were reversed. 

The FBI NICS Appeal Services Team (AST) reviews 
and investigates appeals of NICS denials. Of the 
64,000 denials issued by the FBI in 2004, 10,000 
(or 16%) were appealed. About 3 in 10 appeals 
resulted in the denial being overturned. 

In the aggregate, the number of reversals of 
denials is 0.1% (49,000 reversals/48,894,000 
checks). 

Denied persons subject to arrest

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm or a 
permit by a background check may be subject to 
arrest and prosecution if they are wanted in an 
outstanding warrant or have submitted false 
information on their application. When a check 
identifies a wanted person, the checking agency
generally will inform the agency that entered the 
warrant, in addition to notifying the agency with 
jurisdiction over the fugitive's location or 
place of residence. A statewide fugitive
apprehension unit may also be informed.

Many checking agencies notify ATF of persons who 
submit false information on a Federal firearm 
transaction record or fail to disclose required 
information. If a misrepresentation violates 
State law, the checking agency will inform  the
agency with jurisdiction either over the 
location of the transaction (usually a dealer's 
premises) or over the applicant's residence, or 
both agencies.  

In seven States persons who falsify an 
application or attempt an illegal transfer are 
reported to a special police unit to make an 
arrest determination. In some States all persons 
denied a firearm are reported to a special police
unit. Of the States reporting for 2004, Virginia 
had the largest number of arrests of denied 
persons due to outstanding warrants or other 
reasons. 

During the permanent Brady period, over 8,000 
persons have been arrested, according to checking 
agencies reporting arrests to FIST. The number of 
arrests may be higher because some State and local 
agencies did not report their arrests. 

Firearm retrievals

The NICS and several State systems do not prohibit 
a Federal Firearm Licensee from transferring a 
firearm to a buyer, when the dealer has not 
received a response within 3 business days of 
requesting a check (termed a "open" by the NICS). 
A checking agency may continue to research an 
incomplete record even after a transfer has 
occurred. If a disqualifying record is found at a 
later date (termed a "delayed denial" by the ATF), 
the dealer will be contacted to determine if the 
applicant completed the transaction and received 
a firearm.  

ATF is informed when the FBI discovers that a 
firearm was transferred to a prohibited person. 
A State checking agency that discovers a delayed 
denial may inform a statewide firearms unit, 
local law enforcement, or ATF.  

Prosecutions

In 2004 ATF referred for prosecution 1,140 cases 
involving false information provided on 
applications for firearm transfers (ATF form 4473). 
These referrals are based on prosecutorial criteria 
provided by the individual U.S. attorney offices.

Background

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), 18 U.S.C. 
922, prohibits transfer of a firearm to a 
person who --

*  is under indictment for, or has been convicted 
of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for more 
than 1 year
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, any 
controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental defective or 
committed to a mental institution
*  is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the 
United States under a nonimmigrant visa
*  was discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces under
dishonorable conditions
*  has renounced U.S. citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him or 
her from harassing, stalking, or threatening an 
intimate partner or child
*  has been convicted in any court of a 
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.

In addition the GCA prohibits most transfers of 
long guns to persons under 18 and most transfers 
of handguns to persons under 21. The GCA categories 
of prohibited persons are the prevailing minimum 
for all States. Many States have similar prohibitions 
and have enacted additional categories of prohibited 
persons, such as those who have committed alcohol-
related or juvenile offenses. (See Survey of 
State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 2004 <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/ssprfs04.htm>.)

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the GCA and included 
interim provisions, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), in effect 
from February 29, 1994, until November 29, 
1998. The U.S. Department of Justice, with the 
States, developed the NICS during the 57-month 
interim period, as authorized by the permanent
provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t). 

Since November 30, 1998, the NICS has allowed 
a licensee to contact the system by telephone 
or other electronic means for information, to 
be supplied immediately, on whether receipt of 
a firearm by a prospective transferee would 
violate Federal or State law. 

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the 
permanent Brady provisions mandate that licensees 
request background checks on long gun purchasers 
and persons who redeem a pawned firearm. 
Licensees have the option of requesting a NICS 
check on persons who attempt to pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement 
Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established the grant program 
NCHIP to ensure immediate availability of 
complete and accurate State records. The 
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST), 
collecting statistics on background checks, 
is one of many NCHIP programs.

NCHIP is designed to assist States to develop or 
improve existing criminal history records systems 
and to establish an interface with the NICS and 
other national record systems. Grant funds have 
also supported direct technical assistance, 
evaluation, and research related to improving
nonfelony records within the States.

To date, over $495 million has been awarded to 
States to assist them in establishing and 
enhancing criminal records which support the 
FBI's record system. All States have received 
funding under the NCHIP program.

Components of the national firearm 
check system

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local agencies 
conduct background checks on persons who apply 
to purchase a firearm or for a permit that can 
be used to make a purchase. Variations in Federal 
and State procedures for determining firearm 
possession eligibility are summarized below.

Overview of the NICS 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a NICS 
check requested by a dealer or present a State 
permit that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has qualified as 
an alternative to the point-of-transfer check. 
Qualifying permits are those that -- 

(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or 
carry a firearm, and 
(2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier 
by the State in which the transfer is to take 
place, after verification by an authorized 
government official that possession of a 
firearm by the transferee would not be a 
violation of law.

A permit issued after November 29, 1998, qualifies 
as an alternative only if its approval process 
included a NICS check. Many qualifying permits 
may be used for multiple purchases while valid. 
However, State laws often provide that a permit 
will be revoked if the holder is convicted of an
offense or otherwise becomes ineligible after 
receiving the permit.

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to 
permanent Brady requirements, a licensee must 
receive a completed Firearm Transaction Record 
(ATF form 4473).

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting 
either the FBI or a point of contact(POC) agency 
designated by State government. Most inquiries 
are initiated by telephone. In 2002 the FBI 
added online checking (known as E-Check)as 
another means to contact the NICS, and about 
50,000 inquiries were made by this method in 
2004.

The FBI or POC checks available Federal, State, 
and/or local databases and responds with a 
notice to the licensee that the transfer may 
proceed, may not proceed, or is delayed pending 
further review of the transferee's record.

State and local NICS participation

Each State government determines the extent of 
its involvement in the NICS process. Three forms 
of State involvement currently exist:

*  A full POC requests a NICS check on all 
firearm transfers originating in the State.
*  A partial POC requests a NICS check on all 
handgun transfers; licensees in the State are 
required to contact the FBI for NICS checks 
for long gun transfers.
*  The State does not maintain a POC; licensees 
are required to contact the FBI for NICS checks 
on all firearm transfers originating in the State.

The FBI conducts all NICS checks for 28 States 
and POC agencies conduct all NICS checks in 14 
States. In eight States NICS checks are conducted 
by POC agencies on handgun transfers and by the 
FBI on long gun transfers. The FBI also conducts 
all NICS checks for the District of Columbia, 
Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands.  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies 
includes initiating checks on persons who apply 
for qualified State permits. Generally, POC 
agencies conduct a background check that 
incorporates Federal and State requirements. In
a few States with full or partial participation, 
the FBI conducts the NICS check on certain pawn 
transactions instead of the POC. Most States have 
designated a single agency with statewide 
jurisdiction as their NICS point of contact; some 
States have multiple points of contact, which
are usually county sheriffs or local police 
departments. (For agencies conducting firearm 
checks, see Appendix B on the BJS website
<http://www.Ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft04.htm>.) 

The NICS is integrated with most State instant 
approval, purchase permit, or other approval 
systems. Twenty-nine States maintained approval 
systems for purchase or permits required for 
purchase during 2004. Sixteen States operated 
instant check systems; 12 required purchase
permits; and 5 maintained other types of approval 
systems. (Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey 
are each counted twice because they operated 
separate purchase permit and instant check systems; 
Minnesota is counted twice because it gives the 
buyer the options of a purchase permit or an "other 
approval" process). During 2004, 19 States issued 
carry permits that exempted the holder from a
check under the permanent Brady law or a State 
law or both.

In addition to the Brady Act's regulation of sales 
by licensed dealers, some States require background 
checks for firearm transfers that occur between 
unlicensed persons at gun shows or other locations. 
A few States require a mandatory waiting period 
after a purchaser applies and before a firearm 
transfer can be made, regardless of when a 
background check is completed.

Parallel State systems

If agencies that conduct checks under State law are 
unable to access the NICS, licensees in that State 
are required to contact the FBI for approval of 
transfers. Thus, prospective transferees in these 
States are required to undergo a permit or point-
of-transfer check by a State or local agency and 
a NICS check by the FBI. Seven States in 2004
(Delaware, Indiana, Massachusetts, Minnesota, 
Missouri, New Jersey, and Rhode Island) 
maintained firearm check systems that can be 
described as parallel to the NICS process. 

For more information on approval systems in 
specific States, see Survey of State 
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 
2004 <www.ojp.usdoj.Gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs04.htm>.

Definitions

Appeal is an objection by the denied person to an 
agency's decision. 

Application for firearm transfer is information 
submitted by a person to a State or local checking 
agency to purchase a firearm or obtain a permit 
that can be used for a purchase; includes 
information submitted directly to a checking 
agency or forwarded by a prospective seller.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit 
(issued after a background check) that exempts 
the holder from a check at the time of purchase 
under an ATF regulation or State law.

Instant check (instant approval) systems require a 
seller to transmit a purchaser's application to a 
checking agency by telephone or computer; the 
agency is required to respond immediately or as 
soon as possible.

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit 
a purchaser's application to a checking agency by 
telephone or other electronic means; the agency is 
not required to respond immediately but must 
respond before the end of the statutory time limit.

Permanent Brady period is the period that began on
November 30, 1998, when the permanent provisions 
of the Brady Act became effective.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective 
firearm purchaser to obtain, after a background 
check, a government-issued document (called a 
permit, license, or identification card) that 
must be presented to a seller to receive a 
firearm.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is prohibited 
from receiving a firearm or a permit that can be 
used to receive a firearm, due to the finding of 
a disqualifying factor during a background check.  

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal NICS 
system and may include more than one inquiry 
per application.

Methodology

Data collection procedures

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), 
through a cooperative agreement with BJS under 
the Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program, 
collected the data from Federal, State, and 
local agencies.  

Participating agencies supplied data on paper or 
diskette, or electronically. Several different 
forms were provided to meet the varying office 
procedures of the agencies. In addition REJIS 
wrote special software distributed free of
charge to requesting agencies. This software 
was designed to simplify the record tabulating 
functions of the agency. It also helped to reduce 
the burden of keeping the statistical data because 
a capability of the software was to automatically 
report the data needed for the study. In all cases 
the data that the agency sent to REJIS contained
only statistical information and would not allow 
the identification  of an individual. The software 
also assists agencies in purging records after the 
delay time specified by law.

Information collected included counts of firearm 
transfer or permit applications made to an agency, 
applications rejected by the agency, and the 
reasons for rejection. Other data collected included 
the number of denials appealed by applicants and the 
number of persons who were arrested by an agency 
after a background check caused a denial. Many 
checking agencies do not handle appeals and arrests 
through the entire process and may have only 
limited information on the outcomes of such events.

Determining populations

To estimate the application and rejection rates 
within a given area, the agency population was 
needed and was determined as follows: The 
stratification classification of the county was 
based on the size of the largest city within the 
county. If cities within a county were conducting 
their own background checks, their populations 
were subtracted from the county population. If a 
municipal agency provided services for other 
selected municipalities, then populations for 
those municipalities were added to the populations 
of the reporting municipality. If an agency 
participating in the study relied upon other 
jurisdictions to conduct background checks, they 
were replaced by those other jurisdictions.

State and local checking agencies were stratified 
by size of the population served: State agencies 
that served an entire State population; local 
agencies that served a population greater than 
100,000; local agencies that served a population 
between 10,000 and 100,000; and local agencies 
that served a population of less than 10,000.
Population size was based on 2000 Census Bureau
information. The population categories were 
chosen to be consistent with those used by the 
FBI when conducting similar studies. 

All agencies serving a population greater than 
100,000 were asked to contribute data in 2004. 
The number of agencies in the survey is shown 
by population category:

In some States one statewide agency conducts
background checks for purchase and another 
agency (or division within an agency) issues 
ATF-approved permits. Care was taken not to 
count State populations twice in the 
estimation process. This situation of dual 
agencies conducting background checks did not 
occur among local agencies.     

Estimation procedures

Based on data provided by both sets of agencies, 
national estimates were developed using population 
weighting factors. When an agency did not provide 
data for all months, a simple linear extrapolation 
or interpolation was used to generate a 12-month 
total.

Agencies with rejection rates over four standard 
deviations above the average standard rejection 
rate were classified as outliers and their data 
were not used for projection of estimates. In 
addition, rejection rates that could not be
determined with sufficient accuracy were not 
used. The estimates do not include U.S. 
Territories or the District of Columbia.

Estimation based on State population was used 
to determine the number of carry permit 
applications and rejections in Mississippi. 

Pennsylvania reported 379,369 instant checks, 
included in the FIST national estimate, and 
123,721 applications for nonexempt carry permits. 
Pennsylvania provided the combined number of 
denials of all applications, which was prorated 
to obtain the number of denials of instant 
checks.

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this 
report depends on two types of errors: 
nonsampling and sampling. In this study, 
nonsampling error may occur from the following:  
nonresponse; differences in the methods
checking agencies use to process, code, store, 
and retrieve their information; differences in 
interpretation of the survey questions; and 
activities that delay personnel from completing 
the survey.

In any sample survey, the full extent of 
nonsampling error is never known. However, steps 
were taken to minimize the potential for error. 
Extensive telephone follow-ups were made to 
encourage responses, answer questions about
misunderstood requests, and generally assist 
in assembling the information in a useable form. 
Extensive verification of the data ensured the 
accuracy of the numbers. Agencies providing data 
were asked to review and revise their reports, 
and various quality checks were performed in 
receiving and processing the data.

-----------------------------------------------
The online version of this report offers 
the Methodology and a State-by-State 
appendix table describing the agencies doing 
background checks. Access the report at
<http://www.usdoj.gov/bjs/ abstract/bcft04.htm>.
-----------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is 
the statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. Lawrence  
A. Greenfeld is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of 
findings from permanent data collection 
programs such as the Firearm Inquiry 
Statistics program. State and local 
officials have cooperated in reporting the 
data presented.

Michael Bowling and Gene Lauver of REJIS and 
Devon B. Adams and Matthew J. Hickman of BJS 
wrote this Bulletin. David M. Naglich and 
Ronald J. Frandsen of REJIS collected and 
analyzed the FIST data presented. Terry 
Tomazic, Ph.D., professor of research 
methodology at St. Louis University, provided 
statistical consultation. At BJS, Steven K. 
Smith reviewed the report. Tom Hester edited
the report.

October 2005, NCJ 210117
-------------------------------------------

End of file
Revised 10/21/05 ih