U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Trends for Permanent Brady Period, 1999-2003

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2003


September 2004, NCJ 204428


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1)and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft03.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#bcft
---------------------------------------------------------------

Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver 
Regional Justice Information Service
                     
Matthew J. Hickman
Devon B. Adams
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Background checks of applications for firearm transfers since 
implementation of the Brady Act

*  From the inception of the Brady Act on February 29, 1994, to 
December 31, 2003, more than 53 million applications for firearm 
transfers were subject to background checks. About 1,102,000 
applications were rejected.

*  State and local agencies conducted background checks on about 
half of the applications for firearm transfers or permits in 2003, 
while the FBI was responsible for the remainder.

*  790,000 applications were rejected during the 5 years of the 
permanent provisions of the Brady Act(1999-2003),a rate of 1.9%.

*  In 2003, 126,000 (1.6%) of approximately 7,831,000 applications for
firearm transfers or permits were rejected by the FBI or State and local
agencies. This national rejection rate continues the decline that has
occurred each year since 1999, when the rate was 2.4%.

*  During the 5 years of the permanent provisions of the Brady Act, the
rejection rate for applications checked by the FBI(1.5%)was lower than
for checks by State and local agencies (2.4%). Rejection rates for
individual State points of contact(POC's)ranged from 5% to less than 1%.

*  From 1999 to 2003, the majority of rejections for State and 
local agencies, (58%) were due to applicants' felony convictions 
or indictments; about 13% were rejected for a domestic violence
misdemeanor conviction or restraining order. Other reasons for 
rejection included State or local law prohibitions, fugitive 
status, mental illness or disability, drug addiction, dishonorable 
military discharge, and illegal alien status. 

*  An estimated 8,000 persons were arrested from 1999 to 2003 for 
an outstanding warrant or submission of false information on an 
application, according to ATF and checking agencies reporting 
arrests to FIST.
--------------------------------------------------------------
                     
The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (Brady Act) mandates
criminal history background checks on persons applying to purchase
firearms from federally licensed firearm dealers, Federal Firearm
Licensees (FFL's). This Bulletin reports the number of applications 
for firearm transfers and permits, rejections that resulted from 
background checks, and reasons for rejection for selected States 
in the period since the permanent provisions of the Brady Act 
became effective.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act became effective on
November 30, 1998. The act established the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) and requires a back-ground check by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation(FBI)or a State point of contact
(POC) on persons applying to receive firearms from an FFL. 
 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) began the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics (FIST) program in 1995 to collect information on background
checks conducted by State and local agencies. The State and local data
-- when combined with FBI NICS data -- provide national estimates of
the total number of applications and rejections resulting from the 
Brady Act and similar State laws. 

In 2003 FIST collected information from 19 statewide POC's and
approximately 700 State and local agencies that conduct their own
checks under Federal and State laws. The FBI also compiled data on 
the inquiries or transactions handled by the NICS section. ***Footnote 
1: The number of background checks handled by State POC's, as reported 
in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) may be 
higher than the estimates reported here because multiple inquiries or
transactions for the same application (which may be done at the 
discretion of the agency) are processed. FIST only counts the first of
multiple inquiries.***

Nearly all applications included in the 2003 FIST survey were subject 
to a NICS check, as well as checks to fulfill any additional State
requirements. A small number of applications were subject only to 
checks required by State laws. (See Components of the national firearm 
check system on page 11 for further details.)

National estimates

In 2003, 7,831,000 applications were filed, increasing from 7,806,000 
in 2002, or 0.3%. In addition to the nearly 4.5 million applications 
for firearm transfers processed by the FBI in 2003, State and local 
checking agencies processed 3.4 million applications.

In the 5-year period of the permanent provisions, the FBI and State 
and local agencies received about 41 million applications. This can 
be compared to the 12.7 million applications during the interim period
(1994-98). Most of the applications in the interim period were for 
handgun transfers. Under the permanent provisions, background checks 
for long guns were added, greatly increasing the volume of checks.  

Since the inception of the Brady Act, State and local agencies have 
conducted more than 31 million background checks. The FBI accounted
for more than 22 million background checks under the permanent
provisions of the Brady Act.

When a background check produces evidence of factors that disqualify
an applicant from owning a firearm, the application is rejected. (See
Definitions on page 11 for more detail.) 

Rejections fell to 126,000 in 2003 from 136,000 in 2002, a decrease 
of 7%. This decrease continued an overall numerical decrease for each
year since 1999. 

In 2003 the FBI rejected 61,000 firearm transfer applications, a 1.4%
rejection rate, while State and local agencies rejected 65,000, a rate 
of 1.9%.

Together, approximately 126,000 firearm transfer applications were
rejected in 2003, a rate of 1.6%. This overall rate of rejection 
continued a 5-year decline for both the FBI and State and local 
agencies.

Since the inception of the Brady Act (the interim provisions went into
effect on March 1,1994), more than 53 million applications for firearm
transfers have been checked, of which 1,102,000 were rejected, a
rejection rate of 2.1%.  Even with the addition of checks for long guns
and pawn redemptions, the national rejection rate continues the decline
that has occurred each year under permanent Brady (2.4% during the
interim period and 1.9% during the first 5 years of permanent Brady).

Approval systems

State systems for approval of a prospective firearm purchaser can be
classified as "instant approval," "purchase permit," "exempt carry 
permit," or "other approval" systems.

Instant approval systems

Instant approval (instant check) systems require a seller to transmit 
the applicant's information to a checking agency by telephone or 
computer.  The checking agency is required to respond to the seller at 
once or as soon as possible (generally within 3 days). State agencies
conducted 2 million instant checks in 2003, and about 40,000 (2.1%) of 
the applications were rejected. From 1999 to 2003 State instant approval
systems received 11.2 million applications, rejecting 311,000 (2.8%). 

The FIST survey also included all State permits required to purchase
firearms and certain "exempt carry permits" that can be used to make
purchases without a background check at the actual time of purchase.
(Federal law does not mandate a permit to purchase firearms.)

Purchase permit systems

State purchase permit systems require firearm purchasers to obtain, 
after a background check, a government-issued document(such as a permit,
license, identification card, or other document) that must be presented 
to a seller in order to receive a firearm. Most agencies issuing purchase
permits operate under Sate statutes that allow between 7 and 30 days to
complete a background check. There were 729,000 applications filed for
State and local purchase permits in 2003, while 16,000, or about 2%,
were rejected. Under the permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 3.6
million applications for purchase permits were received by State and 
local agencies, of which 76,000 were rejected (2.1%).

Exempt carry permit systems

An exempt carry permit is not required for purchase but can be used 
to exempt the holder from a background check at the point of sale. A 
permit is exempt if it is issued after a check that includes the NICS, 
and meets other requirements of the Brady Act under a Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) regulation and 18 U.S.C. 922(A)
(3). Agencies issuing exempt carry permits usually request a check by 
sending information to the FBI.

In 2003 State agencies received an estimated 173,000 exempt carry
permit applications, of which 2,700 were rejected (1.6%). Besides the
State agencies, local agencies received 172,000 applications for exempt
carry permits. Local agencies rejected about 2,400 applications for
exempt carry permits for a rejection rate of 1.4%. Nine States reported
statewide data on exempt carry permits for 2003. From 1999 to 2003
State and local agencies received 1,662,000 applications for exempt
carry permits, rejecting 36,000 or 2.1%. Some permits are only exempt
under State law, including Indiana and Minnesota carry permits.

Other types of approval systems

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit the applicant's
information to a checking agency by mail, telephone, or computer. 
The checking agency is not required to respond immediately but must
respond before the end of a State statutory time limit, generally 
within 7 to 10 days. Other types of approval systems processed 394,000
applications in 2003 (predominately in California), and about 1% of 
them were rejected. From 1999 to 2003 these systems received 2.3 
million applications, rejecting 24,000 (or 1%).

Rejection rates varied by type of statewide approval system from 1999 
to 2003. Instant check systems had the highest rate (2.8%). Several 
State instant check systems (notably Colorado, Georgia, and Tennessee)
entered the 5-year period in 1999 with relatively high rejection rates 
that gradually declined. Rejection rates for instant checks were 
followed by carry permits (2.4%), purchase permits (2.2%), and other 
approvals (1.1%).

Analysis of rejection rates

Among the States for which the FBI conducted both long gun and handgun
background checks for transfers from 1999 to 2003, rates ranged from 
more than 2% for Alaska, Arkansas, and Idaho, to less than 1% for
Massachusetts, Maine, and Rhode Island.

Rejection rates in Massachusetts and Rhode Island may have been low
in part because these States require a background check by a local
agency that is separate from the NICS check. The local background
check may eliminate some applicants before a NICS check is necessary.

Delaware is similar because the State Police conduct a check that 
is separate from the NICS process. For this check Delaware reported 
a rejection rate of 3.2% to FIST in 2003, but the FBI rejection rate 
for Delaware was 1.6% overall from 1999 to 2003.

Statewide reporting

In 2003 the FIST survey obtained statewide data from 20 NICS points of
contact (including Hawaii) and Delaware. The 17 States that provided
complete statewide data processed checks for 2.1 million applications 
in 2003, rejecting 43,000. From 1999 to 2003, the 16 States that 
provided FIST with complete statewide data conducted checks for 11 
million applications, of which 266,000 were rejected. 

The many interrelated factors that influence rejection rates have not 
been fully quantified, but a few observations are possible from the data
available. The rejection rates in States surveyed by FIST in 2003 ranged
from 0.3% in Connecticut to nearly 4% in Tennessee.

From 1999 to 2003, among the lowest rates for instant checks were
those in New Jersey (0.4%) and Illinois (0.8%), where an instant check
at the time of transfer is the second step required for approval of
prospective firearm owners. During the first step of the process --
application for the requisite permit or ID card -- the rejection rate 
is considerably higher in New Jersey (1.9%) and Illinois (2.5%), more
similar than the second step to the national average of 1.9%.

Generally, the higher rejection rates occurred in States that implemented
an instant approval system on or after the effective date of the Brady 
Act. During the 5-year period these States included Colorado (4.6%),
Tennessee (5.1%), and Georgia (4.0%).  

Approval systems established before passage of the Brady Act, such as
California (1%), Virginia (1.3%), and Wisconsin (1.5%), generally had
lower rates that varied little from year to year. 

Local reporting

Local agencies mainly conduct checks for purchase and exempt carry
permits. In 2003 local agencies received 660,000 applications, of which
11,000 (1.7%) were rejected. From 1999 to 2003, 3 million applications
for purchase and exempt carry permits were received by local agencies,
of which 62,000 (2.1%) were rejected.

Rejection rates varied among local agencies by size of the population
served, by the jurisdiction, and by the type of permit. For purchase
permits in 2003, rejection rates were highest in jurisdictions over 
100,000 and lowest in those under 10,000. Similarly, rejection rates 
for exempt carry permits were highest in the largest jurisdictions and 
lowest in the smallest jurisdictions.

Overall, rejection rates in 2003 were higher for purchase permits than 
for exempt carry permits. Over the period of the permanent provisions 
of the Brady Act, a pattern similar to that in 2003 held. Rejection 
rates for purchase and exempt carry permits were highest in jurisdictions 
over 100,000 and lowest in those under 10,000.

Availability of records

During the first 5 years of the permanent Brady Act, all States maintained 
databases that recorded felony convictions, and many maintained data on 
other disqualifying factors such as fugitive status, court restraining 
orders, mental illness, and domestic violence misdemeanor convictions. 
States differ as to the degree of automation used in record searching 
and whether records are in a central database or in county courts or 
other local agencies. 

----------------------------------------
BJS priorities for mental health and domestic violence records

BJS has encouraged States to upgrade their ability to consult mental
health information during background checks:

*  Formulate a data sharing agreement for making State mental health
records accessible.

*  Work with selected States to develop a "Best Practices" guide to
highlight the critical issues.
 
*  Expand data collection to provide information on the ability of 
the States to examine records.

*  Target efforts to provide National Criminal History Improvement
Program (NCHIP) funds for the improvement of access.

*  Increase submissions to denied person files.

BJS has also promoted five initiatives to improve access to 
misdemeanor domestic violence records and protection orders:

*  Improve flagging of domestic violence misdemeanor records.
 
*  Encourage States to link NIBRS data on offenders to RAP sheet and
disposition transactions.

*  Enhance BJS data collection concerning domestic violence misdemeanors 
and protection orders.

*  Improve misdemeanor domestic violence conviction reporting from the 
`courts.

*  Improve the National Protection Order Database.
--------------------------------------------

As of December 31, 2001, 49 States had automated at least some records 
in their criminal history files. Automation expanded from 1999 to
2001, as the number of States with fully automated criminal history 
files increased from 21 to 27. (See Survey of State Criminal History
Information Systems, 2001, NCJ 200343 <http://www.ojp.usdoj.Gov/bjs/
abstract/sschis01.htm>.)

Checking agencies often encounter delays when they access incomplete
records. The most frequent delays occur when researching the final
disposition of a criminal charge indicated in an arrest or indictment
record. If the final disposition cannot be found during the time 
allowed for a background check, the agency must decide, based on Federal 
or State law, whether the application will be approved, denied, or delayed
pending further research.

The Brady Act allows a transfer to proceed if a disqualifying record is 
not found within the 3-day limit for a NICS check. Some States have laws
and regulations that allow their agencies to deny or delay a transfer if 
an incomplete record is being researched when the time limit expires. 

Reasons for rejection

About 45% of rejections for firearm transfer among State and local
checking agencies (about 29,000 applications in 2003) occurred 
because the applicant either had a felony conviction or was under 
felony indictment. The second most common reason for rejection was a
domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or restraining order (about
16% of rejections or approximately 10,000 applications). A portion of 
all rejections reported by State and local agencies fall under the 
categories of State and local law prohibitions (12% of rejections) 
and mental illness (2.4%).

The FBI reported that 39% of their rejections were for felony-related
reasons (about 24,000 of the total rejections in 2003), followed by 
other criminal history (24%). As among State and local checking 
agencies, a domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or restraining 
order was the next most common reason for rejection (nearly 17% or 
about 10,000 rejections).

Fugitive status and mental illness accounted for smaller proportions 
of FBI rejections than among State and local checking agencies, while
drug-related rejections represented a larger proportion (8%). 

From 1999 to 2003, 27% of rejections by local agencies were for
felony-related reasons, compared to 60% for State agencies.

Local agencies were more likely during this period to reject for other
reasons (23%) than were State agencies (12%).  Further, local agencies
rejected for mental reasons (4.3%) and drug-related reasons (6%) at a
higher rate than State agencies (1% and less than 1%). Local agencies
rejected far fewer fugitives than did State agencies. 

During the 5-year period, the number of rejections by State and local
agencies for reasons other than felony convictions increased 28% from
1999 to 2003. The percentage of rejections for nonfelony reasons
increased from 28% to 58%. Over the same period the total number of
rejections fell 38%, and the number of rejections for felony 
convictions decreased 64%.   

States have used funds from NCHIP to initiate the flagging of criminal
history records evidencing convictions for domestic violence or the
issuance of a protection order. Forty-five States submit data to the 
NCIC Protection Order File, which became operational in May 1997 and
includes over 874,000 records of protection orders. Since 1999 five
States have begun submitting data on mental health to the FBI. 

Appeals of denials

Specific appeal procedures for persons denied a firearm or permit are 
codified in Federal law and in the laws of nearly all States that process
background checks. 

The most common procedure provides an appeal to the checking agency
and a subsequent appeal to a court. Eighteen States provide an appeal
to the checking agency for a person who is denied a firearm purchase or
a permit required for a purchase. (In eight other States, local agencies
may reconsider their decisions although they are not required to do so 
by law.) 

Eighteen States provide an appeal to a court. In two States a government
officer in a department separate from the checking agency performs an
administrative review. 

Procedures for an initial appeal may be relatively informal, with some
checking agencies allowing a denied person to initiate a review with a
telephone request. Other agencies involved in firearm appeals are those
which maintain criminal histories or other records which could disqualify
an applicant. An appellant may be required to contact the agency that
supplied a criminal history or another record that caused a denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant denies being the individual named
in a disqualifying record found by the checking agency. To resolve the
identity question, the appellant will ordinarily submit fingerprints for
comparison with Federal and/or State arrestee records. If the appellant's
prints do not match any records on file, the denial can be reversed.

Another common appeal arises when an applicant is denied because of
a felony arrest or charge without a recorded disposition. The applicant
can have the denial reversed by submitting court records to prove that
the charge was subsequently dismissed. Whether a checking agency is
required to approve, delay, or deny a person with a missing disposition
(as dictated by State law) may affect the number of appeals filed. Data
indicate that the vast majority of disputed denials are resolved at the
administrative level, and turn on the accuracy of records rather than
interpretation of law.

The FBI NICS Appeal Services Team(AST)reviews and investigates appeals 
of NICS denials. Of the 345,000 denials issued from 1999-2003, 51,000 
or 15% were appealed. About 3 in 10 appeals resulted in the denial 
being overturned.  

From 1999 to 2003 checking agencies received 115,000 appeals, of
which 36%, or 41,000, were reversed. State agencies received more
appeals than the FBI, and the States reversed a higher percentage 
of appealed rejections (40%) than did the FBI (30%).

Denied persons subject to arrest

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm or a permit by a background
check may be subject to arrest and prosecution if they are wanted in 
an outstanding warrant or have submitted false information on their
application. When a check identifies a wanted person, the checking 
agency generally will inform the agency that entered the warrant, in 
addition to notifying the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive's 
present location or place of residence. A statewide fugitive 
apprehension unit may also be informed.

Many checking agencies notify ATF of persons who submit false
information on a Federal firearm transaction record or fail to 
disclose required information. If a misrepresentation violates 
State law, the checking agency will inform either the agency with 
jurisdiction over the location of the transaction (usually a dealer's
premises) or the agency with jurisdiction over the applicant's 
residence, or both.  

In seven States those who falsify an application or attempt an illegal
purchase are reported to a special police unit to make an arrest
determination. In some States, all persons denied a firearm are reported 
to a special police unit.

Of the States reporting for 2003, Virginia had the largest number of
arrests of denied persons due to outstanding warrants or other reasons.

Among those local agencies participating in the FIST survey, an
estimated 190 arrests were made as a result of a background check 
from 1999 to 2003.

Under the permanent provisions of the Brady Act, an estimated 8,000
persons were arrested, according to ATF and checking agencies
reporting arrests to FIST. ATF arrested an estimated 1,000 during this 
period, but States and local agencies made the majority of arrests, an
estimated 7,000, or 80%. The number of arrests may be higher, as not 
all State and local agencies responding to the FIST survey reported 
their arrests. 

Firearm retrievals

The NICS and several State systems do not prohibit a Federal firearms
Licensee from transferring a firearm to a buyer, when the dealer has 
not received a response within 3 business days of requesting a check 
(termed a "default proceed" by the NICS). A checking agency may continue 
to research an incomplete record even after a default proceed has 
occurred. If a disqualifying record is found at a later date (termed a
"delayed denial" by the NICS), the dealer will be contacted to determine 
if the applicant completed the transaction and received a firearm.  

ATF is informed when the FBI discovers that a firearm was transferred
to a prohibited person after a default proceed. A State checking agency
that discovers a delayed denial may inform a statewide firearms unit,
local law enforcement, or ATF.

For the 5-year permanent Brady period, ATF reported to FIST an
estimated 20,000 retrievals, and Virginia authorities reported 59.

Significant events, 1999-2003

1999. The first full year of the permanent Brady period marked the
beginning of trends that would continue during much of the next 5 
years. Colorado discontinued serving as a POC in March, but resumed 
this function in August. South Carolina discontinued serving as a 
POC in October and turned over responsibility for sales checks to 
the FBI (but continued to check applicants for exempt carry permits). 

The Connecticut POC implemented a new electronic checking system in
October, which included checks on persons who purchase firearms at
gun shows.

2000. On January 1 California began limiting a person's handgun
purchases to one in a 30-day period. A New York law that became
effective in June required all firearm purchasers at a gun show 
to undergo a NICS check through a licensed dealer. In December 
the Oregon POC began conducting background checks on all long 
gun transfers and gun show transactions, as a result of a ballot 
referendum approved earlier in the year.

2001. A Colorado ballot referendum effective in March required licensed
dealers to process background checks on all persons who purchase a
firearm at a gun show.  An amendment to Tennessee's instant check law,
effective in June, mandated denial of a prospective purchaser who has
an arrest for a disqualifying offense without a recorded disposition. 
This amendment further provided that if the denied person appeals and no
disposition is found within 15 days, the firearm transfer may proceed at
the discretion of the dealer. In July an amended NICS regulation reduced
the period during which limited approval data may be retained for system
auditing: the period decreased from 180 to 90 days.

2002.  Vermont discontinued its POC operations in February and Arizona
followed suit in August (but continued to check applicants for exempt
carry permits). The FBI implemented two additions to the NICS checking
process during the summer of 2002. The NICS "E-Check" program allowed
firearms dealers to initiate a background check through the Internet.  

A new automated process enabled the NICS to initiate a query databases 
managed by the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement(ICE)when 
an applicant is not a citizen of the United States.

2003.  Homeland security legislation effective in January authorized the
transfer of firearms law enforcement functions from the Treasury
Department to the Department of Justice. The new division within Justice
is known as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
(still referred to as "ATF"). In October Indiana discontinued its POC
operations but continued to conduct checks required by State law. The
Federal ban on undetectable firearms was renewed in December.

From 1999 to 2003 nearly all States enacted new legislation related to
firearm sales. The most frequent subjects of legislation were prohibited
persons and the records used to identify them. New laws or amendments
were enacted regarding convicted felons or other specific offenders 
(10 States), minors (7 States), juvenile offenders (5 States), persons
restrained by court orders (5 States), domestic violence offenders (5
States), and other categories of prohibited persons. Legislation that
increased State checking agency access to records of prohibited persons
was enacted in 11 States. Six States passed measures to facilitate
transmission of prohibitory records to the FBI.

For additional information on the first 5 years of permanent Brady, see
Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales (midyear 1999 through
midyear 2003 editions), available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/guns.htm.

Background

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), 18 U.S.C. 922, prohibits transfer of
a firearm to a person who --

*  is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime punishable
by imprisonment for more than 1 year
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, any controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a mental
institution
*  is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United States under a
nonimmigrant visa
*  was discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions
*  has renounced U.S. Citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him or her from harassing,
stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child
*  has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence.

In addition, the GCA prohibits most transfers of long guns to persons
under 18 and most transfers of handguns to persons under 21. The GCA
categories of prohibited persons are the prevailing minimum for all
States. Many States have similar prohibitions and have enacted
additional categories of prohibited persons, such as those who have
committed alcohol-related or juvenile offenses. (See Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 2003
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ abstract/ssprfs03.htm>.

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the GCA and included interim provisions, 18
U.S.C. 922(s), in effect from February 29, 1994, until November 29,
1998. The U.S. Department of Justice, with the States, developed the
NICS during the 57-month interim period, as authorized by the 
permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t).

Since November 30, 1998, the NICS has allowed a licensee to contact
the system by telephone or other electronic means for information, 
to be supplied immediately, on whether receipt of a firearm by a 
prospective transferee would violate Federal or State law. 

In 2002 the FBI added online checking (known as E-Check) as another
means to contact the NICS, and 72,000 inquiries were made by this
method in 2002 and 2003.

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the permanent Brady
provisions mandate that licensees request background checks on long
gun purchasers and persons who redeem a pawned firearm. Licensees
have the option of requesting a NICS check on persons who attempt to
pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement 
Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established the grant program NCHIP to ensure immediate
availability of complete and accurate State records. The Firearm 
Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST), collecting statistics on background 
checks, is one of many NCHIP programs.

NCHIP is designed to assist States to develop or improve existing
criminal history records systems and to establish an interface with 
the NICS and other national record systems. Grant funds have also
supported direct technical assistance, evaluation, and research 
related to improving nonfelony records within the States.

To date, over $438 million has been awarded to States to assist them 
in establishing and enhancing criminal records which support the FBI's
record system. All States have received funding under the NCHIP
program. 

Components of the national firearm 
check system

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local agencies conduct background checks 
on persons who apply to purchase a firearm or for a permit that can be 
used to make a purchase. Variations in Federal and State procedures for
determining firearm possession eligibility are summarized below.

Overview of the NICS 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a NICS check requested by a
dealer or present a State permit that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has qualified as an alternative to the
point-of-transfer check. Qualifying permits are those that -- 

(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm, and 
(2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State in which 
the transfer is to take place, after verification by an authorized 
government official that possession of a firearm by the transferee 
would not be a violation of law.

A permit issued after November 29, 1998, qualifies as an alternative 
only if its approval process included a NICS check. 

Many qualifying permits may be used for multiple purchases while valid.
However, State laws often provide that a permit will be revoked if the
holder is convicted of an offense or otherwise becomes ineligible after
receiving the permit.

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI or a point
of contact (POC) agency designated by State government. The FBI or POC 
checks available Federal, State, and/or local databases and responds with 
a notice to the licensee that the transfer may proceed, may not proceed, 
or is delayed pending further review of the transferee's record. In 2003, 
13 statewide POC's reported at least some of their denials to the FBI.  

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to permanent Brady requirements,
a licensee must receive a completed Firearm Transaction Record (ATF
form 4473).  

State and local NICS participation

Each State government determines the extent of its involvement in the
NICS process. Three forms of State involvement currently exist:

*  A full POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers originating 
in the State.
*  A partial POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers; licensees 
in the State are required to contact the FBI for NICS checks for long gun
transfers.
*  The State does not maintain a POC; licensees are required to contact
the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm transfers originating in the 
State.

Handgun checks are conducted by the FBI for 27 States and by POC
agencies for 23 States; long gun checks are conducted by the FBI for 
36 States and by POC agencies for 14 States (Appendix A
<http://www.ojp.usdoj. gov/bjs/abstract/bcft03.htm>). Indiana
discontinued its status as a POC in 2003. The FBI also conducts checks
for the District of Columbia, Guam, N. Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, 
and the U.S. Virgin Islands.  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies includes initiating checks on
persons who apply for qualified State permits. Generally, POC agencies
conduct a background check that incorporates Federal and State
requirements. In a few States with full or partial participation, the 
FBI conducts the NICS check on certain pawn transactions instead of 
the POC. Most States have designated a single agency with statewide
jurisdiction as their NICS point of contact; some States have multiple
points of contact, which are usually county sheriffs or local police
departments. (For agencies conducting firearm checks, see Appendix B
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft03.htm>). 

The NICS is integrated with most State instant approval, purchase
permit, or other approval systems. Twenty-nine States maintained
approval systems for purchase or permits required for purchase during
2003. Sixteen States operated instant check systems; 12 required
purchase permits; and 4 maintained other types of approval systems.
(Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey are each counted twice because
they operated separate purchase permit and instant check systems).
During 2003, 19 States issued carry permits that exempted the holder
from a check under the permanent Brady law or a State law or both.

In addition to the Brady Act's regulation of sales by federally licensed
dealers, some States require background checks for firearm transfers
that occur between unlicensed persons at gun shows or other locations.
A few States require a mandatory waiting period after a purchaser 
applies and before a firearm transfer can be made, regardless of when 
a background check is completed.

Parallel State systems

If agencies that conduct checks under State law are unable to access the
NICS, licensees in that State are required to contact the FBI for approval
of transfers. Thus prospective transferees in some States are required
to undergo a permit or point-of-transfer check by a State or local agency
and a NICS check by the FBI. Seven States (Delaware, Indiana,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, and Rhode Island)
maintained in 2003 firearm check systems that can be described as parallel 
to the NICS process. 

For more information on approval systems in specific States, see Survey
of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 2003
<www.ojp.usdoj. gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs03.htm>.

Definitions

Appeal is an objection by the denied person to an agency's decision. 

Application for firearm transfer is information submitted by a person to 
a State or local checking agency to purchase a firearm or obtain a permit
that can be used for a purchase; includes information submitted directly
to a checking agency or forwarded by a prospective seller.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit(issued after a background
check) that exempts the holder from a check at the time of purchase
under an ATF ruling or State law.

Instant check(instant approval)systems require a seller to transmit a
purchaser's application to a checking agency by telephone or computer;
the agency is required to respond immediately or as soon as possible
without delay.

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit a purchaser's
application to a checking agency by telephone or other electronic 
means; the agency is not required to respond immediately but must 
respond before the end of the statutory time limit. 

Purchase permit systems require a prospective firearm purchaser to
obtain, after a background check, a government-issued document(called
a permit, license, or identification card)that must be presented to 
a seller to receive a firearm.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is prohibited from receiving a firearm
or a permit that can be used to receive a firearm, due to the finding of 
a disqualifying factor during a background check.

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal NICS system and may include
more than one inquiry per application.

------------------------------------------
The on-line version of this report offers the Methodology and two
State-by-State appendix tables describing the agencies doing
background checks. Access the report at <http://www.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/bcft03.htm>.
---------------------------------------

----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is 
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from 
permanent data collection programs such as the Firearm 
Inquiry Statistics program. State and local officials have 
cooperated in reporting the data presented.

Michael Bowling and Gene Lauver of REJIS and Devon B. Adams 
and Matthew J. Hickman of BJS wrote this Bulletin. David M. 
Naglich, Ronald J. Frandsen of REJIS collected and analyzed 
the FIST data presented. Terry Tomazic, Ph.D., professor of 
research methodology at St. Louis University, provided 
statistical consultation. At BJS, Steven K. Smith reviewed 
the report. Tom Hester edited the report.
 
September 2004, NCJ 204428    E
-----------------------------------------------

End of file
09/23/04 ih