U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Background Checks for Firearm 
Transfers, 2001

September 2001, NCJ 195235

----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format.
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft01.htm
This report is one in a series.  Most recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#Background Checks for
Firearm Transfers
----------------------------------------------------------------
Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver 
Regional Justice Information Service
             
Matthew J. Hickman
Devon B. Adams
Bureau of Justice Statistics
------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*  From the inception of the Brady Act on
March 1, 1994, to December 31, 2001, nearly 
38 million applications for firearm 
transfers were subject to background checks.  
About 840,000 applications were rejected.

*  Total applications for firearm transfers 
or permits nationwide increased 3%, from 7.7
million in 2000 to 8.0 million in 2001.  

*  State and local agencies conducted
background checks on about half of the
applications for firearms transfers or 
permits in 2001, while the FBI was 
responsible for the remainder.

*  In 2001, 151,000 (1.9%) of approximately
7,958,000 applications for firearm transfers
or permits were rejected by the FBI or State
and local agencies.  This national rejection
rate in 2001 remained similar to that in 2000
(2.0%). 

*  The rejection rate for applications checked
by the FBI (1.5%) was lower than the rate
for checks by State and local agencies
(2.3%).  Rejection rates for individual State
points of contact ranged from over 4% to
less than 1%.

*  58% of rejections in 2001 were due to
applicants' felony convictions or indictments;
14% were rejected for a domestic violence
misdemeanor conviction or restraining 
order.  Other reasons for rejection 
including State or local law prohibitions,
fugitives, mental illness or disability, 
drug addiction, juveniles, dishonorable
military discharge, and illegal aliens 
accounted for the remaining 28%.
 
*  The number of rejections for reasons
other than prior felony conviction history 
increased 256% from the beginning of the 
Brady Act to yearend 2001, evidence of 
enhanced access to databases of prohibited 
purchasers.

*  Nearly all local checking agencies have 
a policy to arrest or notify law enforcement
when an applicant is rejected because of an
active warrant; two-thirds have a policy to
arrest or notify law enforcement when an
applicant submits false information or fails 
to disclose required information.

-------------------------------------------------

The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act 
(the Brady Act) mandates criminal history 
background checks on persons applying to 
purchase firearms from federally licensed 
firearm dealers (Federal Firearm Licensees 
or FFL's).  This Bulletin reports the number 
of applications for firearm transfers and 
permits, rejections that resulted from 
background checks, reasons for rejection, 
and rates of rejection for selected States 
in 2001.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act
became effective on November 30, 1998. 
The act established the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
and requires a back-ground check by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or 
a State point of contact (POC) on persons
applying to receive firearms from a FFL.  

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
began the Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST)
program in 1995 to collect information on
background checks conducted by State and
local agencies.  The State and local 
data -- when combined with FBI NICS 
data -- provide national estimates of the 
total numbers of applications and rejections
resulting from the Brady Act. 

In 2001 FIST collected information from 19
statewide POC's and approximately 700
State and local agencies that conduct their
own checks under Federal and State laws. 
The FBI also compiled data on the inquiries
or transactions handled by the NICS
operations center.***The number of background
checks handled by State POC's, as reported in 
draft National Instant Criminal Background
Check System (NICS) 2001 Operations Report,
February 2001, may be higher than the 
estimates reported here because multiple
inquiries or transactions for the same
application (which may be done at the 
discretion of the agency) are a normal part
of FBI operations.  The methodology used by
FIST allows these to be deleted.***

Nearly all applications included in the 2001
FIST survey were subject to a NICS check,
as well as checks to fulfill any additional
State requirements.  A small number of
applications were subject only to checks
required by State laws.  (See Components
of the national firearm check system on
page 8 for further details.)

National estimates

More applications were filed in 2001 than in
2000, increasing from 7.7 to 8.0 million, or
3%.  Rejections fell from 153,000 in 2000 to
151,000 in 2001, a decrease of 1.3%.  
In addition to the nearly 4.3 million
applications for firearm transfers processed
by the FBI in 2001, State and local checking
agencies processed 3.7 million applications.
When a background check produces evidence of 
factors that disqualify an applicant from 
owning a firearm, the application is rejected.  
(See definitions in the Methodology section 
on page 10 for more detail.) 

In 2001 the FBI rejected 65,000 firearm
transfer applications, a 1.5% rejection rate,
while State and local agencies rejected
86,000, a rate of 2.3%.  Together, 
approximately 151,000 firearm transfer
applications were rejected in 2001, a rate 
of 1.9%. This overall rate of rejection was
similar to that in 2000 (2.0%).

Since the inception of the Brady Act (the
interim provisions went into effect on March
1, 1994), nearly 38 million applications 
for firearm transfers have been checked, 
of which 840,000 were rejected, a rejection
rate of 2.2%.

Permanent Brady addition of long gun and
pawn redemption checks resulted in an
increase in the volume of background
checks but did not appear to substantially
affect the national rejection rate (2.5%
during the interim period and 2.1% during
the first 3 years of permanent Brady).

Approval systems

State systems for approval of a prospective
firearm purchaser can be classified as
"instant approval," "permit," or "other
approval" systems.

Instant approval systems

Instant approval (instant check) systems
require a seller to transmit the applicant's
information to a checking agency by telephone 
or computer.  The checking agency is required 
to respond to the seller at once or as soon 
as possible (generally within 3 days). 
State agencies conducted over 2.2 million
instant checks in 2001, and about 2.5% of
the applications were rejected.

The FIST survey also included all State
permits required to purchase firearms and
certain "exempt carry permits" that can be
used to make purchases with-out a
background check at the actual time of
purchase.  (Federal law does not mandate a
permit to purchase firearms.) 

Purchase permit systems

State purchase permit systems require
firearm purchasers to obtain, after a 
background check, a government-issued
document (such as a permit, license,
identification card, or other document) 
that must be presented to a seller in order 
to receive a firearm.  Most agencies issuing
purchase permits operate under statutes
that allow between 7 and 30 days to complete 
a background check.  There were 739,000 
applications filed for State and local 
purchase permits in 2001, an increase of 
10% from 2000. These State and local
agencies rejected 15,300 or 2.1%. 

Exempt carry permit systems

An exempt carry permit is not required for
purchase but can be used to exempt the
holder from a background check at the point
of sale.  A permit is exempt if it is issued
after a check that includes the NICS, and
meets other requirements of the Brady Act
under an ATF ruling (see Overview of the
National Instant Criminal Background Check
System).  Agencies issuing exempt carry
permits access the NICS Index themselves
or request a check by sending information 
to the FBI.

State agencies in 2001 received an
estimated 170,000 exempt carry permit
applications, of which 5,000 were rejected
(2.9%).  Besides the State agencies, local
agencies received an additional 169,000
applications for exempt carry permits, an
increase of 43% from 2000.  Local agencies
rejected about 3,800 applications for exempt
carry permits for a rejection rate of 2.2%. 
Eight States reported statewide data on
exempt carry permits for 2001, with Indiana
providing the largest number.

Other types of approval systems

Other approval systems require a seller to
transmit the applicant's information to a
checking agency by mail, telephone, or
computer.  The checking agency is not
required to respond immediately but must
respond before the end of a statutory time
limit, generally within 7 to 10 days. Other
types of approval systems processed 432,000 
applications in 2001 (predominately in 
California), and about 1% of them were
rejected.

Rejection rates vary for types of statewide
approval systems, with exempt carry permits
having the highest rate (2.9%), followed by
instant checks (2.5%), purchase permits
(2.0%), and other approvals (1.1%).

Reporting of applications and 
rejections

Although State points of contact received
the majority of applications made to State
and local checking agencies, local agencies
accepted a significant number.  Moreover,
rejection rates among State and local
checking agencies varied by age and type of
approval system.  Within the overall FBI
rejection rate of 1.5%, rejection rates may
vary by State and local area. 

Statewide reporting

In 2001 the FIST survey obtained statewide
data from the 19 NICS points of contact. 
The 18 POC's that provided complete
statewide data processed checks for 2.9
million applications in 2001, rejecting
66,000.  In 2000 the same agencies
conducted checks for 2.7 million
applications, of which 71,000 were rejected. 
For these 18, this represents a 6% increase
in applications and a 7% decrease in
rejections between 2000 and 2001.  
The change in applications ranged from a
19% increase in Florida to a decrease
of 8% in California.  Similarly, the change 
in rejections varied from a 21% increase in
Connecticut to a decrease of 41% in Tennessee. 
Although applications and rejections
increased in Oregon, the State added long
gun checks in December 2000, and thus,
2000 and 2001 are not comparable.
The many interrelated factors that influence
rejection rates have not been fully
quantified, but a few observations are
possible from the data available.  The
rejection rates in States surveyed by FIST
ranged from 0.3% in Connecticut to 4.6% in
Colorado.  Among the lowest rates for
instant checks were those in New Jersey
(0.3%) and Illinois (0.8%), where an instant
check at the time of transfer is the second
step required for approval of prospective
firearm owners.  Both States require that
before an instant check for a sale can be
conducted, prospective owners must obtain
an identification card or a permit. 
 
During the first step of the process -- 
application for the requisite permit or ID 
card -- the rejection rate is considerably 
higher in New Jersey (2.1%) and Illinois 
(2.1%), more similar to the national average 
than the second step.

Generally, the higher rejection rates
occurred in States that implemented an
instant approval system on or after the
effective date of the Brady Act. These
States included Colorado (4.6%), Tennessee 
(4.2%), and Georgia (4.1%).  

Approval systems established before passage 
of the Brady Act generally had lower rejection 
rates.  In addition to Connecticut, Illinois, 
and New Jersey, these systems include 
California (1%), Virginia (1.4%), and Wisconsin 
(1.4%).  The older systems are also associated 
with relatively stable rates; two of the oldest 
systems, California and Illinois (the instant 
approval step), have only slight variations in 
yearly rejection rates since 1996. 

Local reporting

Local agencies mainly conduct checks for 
purchase and exempt carry permits.  In
2001 local agencies received 693,000
applications, of which 14,000 (2.0%) were
rejected.

Rejection rates varied among local agencies
by size of the population served, by the
jurisdiction, and by the type of permit. For
purchase permits, rejection rates were
highest in jurisdiction over 100,000 and
lowest in those under 10,000.  No similar
pattern appeared in rejection rates for
exempt carry permits, although rejection
rates were highest in jurisdictions over
100,000.  Overall, rejection rates in 2001
were higher for exempt carry permits than
for purchase permits.

Availability of records

During 2001 all States maintained databases 
that record past felony convictions, and many 
maintained data on other disqualifying factors 
such as fugitive status, court restraining 
orders, mental illness, and domestic violence 
misdemeanor convictions.  States differ as to 
the degree of automation used in record searching 
and whether records are in a central database 
or in databases maintained by county courts or
other local agencies.

Checking agencies often encounter delays
if they attempt to access records in other
jurisdictions.  The most frequent delays
occur when researching the final disposition
of a criminal charge indicated in another
jurisdiction's arrest or indictment record.  
If the final disposition cannot be found 
during the time allowed for a background check,
the agency must decide, based on Federal
or State law, whether the application will be
approved, denied, or delayed pending further 
research.

The Brady Act allows a transfer to proceed
if a disqualifying record is not found within
the 3-day limit for a NICS check.  Some
States have laws and regulations that allow
their agencies to deny or delay a transfer 
if an incomplete record is being researched
when the time limit expires. 

Reasons for rejection

About 58% of rejections for firearm transfer
among State and local checking agencies
(about 49,000 applications in 2001)
occurred because the applicant either had 
a felony conviction or was under felony
indictment.  The second most common reason 
for rejection was a domestic violence
misdemeanor conviction or restraining order
(about 14% of rejections or  approximately
12,000 applications).  A portion of all
rejections reported by State and local
agencies fall under the categories of State
and local law prohibitions (7.5% of 
rejections) and mental illness (1%).

The number of rejections for reasons other
than felony convictions increased 256%
from the first year of the Brady Act to 2001. 
This represents an increase from 28% of all
rejections to 43% in 2001.  Several factors
likely contributed to these increases,
including greater accessibility to records 
of disqualifying factors other than felonies. 
(See table 4 for other prohibitions).

Appeals of denials

Specific appeal procedures for persons
denied a firearm or permit are codified in
Federal law and in the laws of nearly all
States that require background checks.  The
most common procedure provides an appeal to 
the checking agency and a subsequent appeal 
to a court.  Twenty States provide an 
appeal to the checking agency for a person 
who is denied a firearm purchase or a permit 
required for a purchase.  (In eight other 
States, local agencies may reconsider their 
decisions although they are not required to 
do so by law.)  Eighteen States provide an 
appeal to a court.  In four States, a 
government officer in a department separate 
from the checking agency performs an adminis-
trative review.

Procedures for an initial appeal may be
relatively informal, with some checking
agencies allowing a denied person to 
initiate a review with a telephone request.  
Other agencies involved in firearm appeals 
are those which maintain criminal histories 
or other records which could disqualify an
applicant.  An appellant may be required to
contact the agency that supplied a criminal
history or another record that caused a
denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant
denies being the individual named in a
disqualifying record found by the checking
agency.  To resolve the identity question,
the appellant will ordinarily submit
fingerprints for comparison with Federal
and/or State arrestee records.  If the
appellant's prints do not match any records
on file, the denial can be reversed.  
Another common appeal arises when an
applicant is denied because of a felony
arrest or charge without a recorded
disposition.  The applicant can have the
denial reversed by submitting court records
to prove that the charge was subsequently
dismissed.  Whether a checking agency is
required to approve, delay, or deny a person
with a missing disposition (as dictated by
State law) may affect the number of appeals
filed. Data indicate that the vast majority 
of disputed firearm denials are resolved at 
the administrative level and are rarely 
appealed to the courts.  Most disputed denials 
turn on the accuracy of records, not on an
interpretation of law. 

In October 2001 a questionnaire inquiring
about appeal and arrest procedures was
sent to all checking agencies that provided
FIST with data at midyear.  All but three
State agencies (89% of those contacted)
responded.  Of local checking agencies,
nearly half responded.  The final set of 
local responses reflected balance by 
geography (every State in the FIST survey 
being represented) and by size of the 
population served by the checking agency 
(see Methodology). 

Nearly all agencies indicated that denied
applicants asked them about procedural
issues or application status.  All State
agencies and the majority of local agencies
received requests for reversal of denials. 
About a third of agencies serving places
with populations under 100,000 said that
denied applicants contacted another agency
(generally a court) with requests for
reversal. 

The majority of agencies responded that
they will reconsider a decision to deny. 
Many of these agencies will correct errors
(usually related to identification or an
inaccurate record) or consider other
circumstances.  About 39% of agencies
serving smaller places said that another 
unit was responsible for reversals.  Few
agencies scheduled formal hearings.
The FBI NICS Appeal Services Unit (ASU)
reviews and investigates appeals of NICS
denials.  Of the 64,500 denials issued in
2001 (see table 2), 9,336 or 14.5% were
appealed.  About 3 in 10 appeals resulted 
in the denial being overturned.  For greater
detail on the ASU and the ASU review
process, see the NICS 2001 Operations
Report.
--------------------------------------------
Denied persons subject to arrest

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm
or a permit by a background check may be
subject to arrest and prosecution if they 
are wanted in an outstanding warrant or have
submitted false information on their
application.  When a check identifies a
wanted person, the checking agency generally 
will inform the agency that entered the 
warrant, in addition to notifying the agency 
with jurisdiction over the fugitive's
present location or place of residence. A
statewide fugitive apprehension unit may
also be informed.

Many checking agencies notify ATF of
persons who submit false information on a
Federal firearm transaction record or fail 
to disclose required information.  If a
misrepresentation violates State law, the
checking agency will inform either the
agency with jurisdiction over the location 
of the transaction (usually a dealer's 
premises) or the agency with jurisdiction 
over the applicant's residence, or both.  
In seven States those who falsify an
application or attempt an illegal purchase
are reported to a special police unit that
determines who will be arrested.  In some
States, all persons denied a firearm are
reported to a special police unit.
In the supplemental survey, 85% of local
checking agencies indicated that they
always arrested a denied person or notified
another unit about an active warrant. 
Another 12% responded that action was
sometimes taken, depending on circumstances 
such as whether the warrant involved a 
felony.  Less than 3% of local agencies 
took no action on an active warrant.  

With regard to false or missing information,
22% indicated that they always arrested or
notified another unit.  Another 41% said that
action was sometimes taken, while 35%
responded that their agency never arrested
or notified another unit.  In certain States, 
no laws allow for the arrest of applicants for
false or missing information.  Further,
checking agencies often notify an enforcement 
or prosecutorial agency which may take action 
at their discretion.  

Of the States reporting for 2001, Virginia
had the largest number of arrests of denied 
persons due to outstanding warrants or other 
reasons.

In addition, ATF made 175 arrests while 
enforcing the Brady Act during fiscal year 
2001.***Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms,
correspondence to BJS, April 2002.***
---------------------------------------------------------
Background 

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), 18 U.S.C. 
922, prohibits transfer of a firearm to
a person who --
*  is under indictment for, or has been
convicted of, a crime punishable by
imprisonment for more than 1 year
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to,
any controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental
defective or committed to a mental
institution
*  is an illegal alien or has been admitted to
the United States under a nonimmigrant visa
*  was discharged from the U.S. Armed
Forces under dishonorable conditions
*  has renounced U.S. citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him
or her from harassing, stalking, or
threatening an intimate partner or child
*  has been convicted in any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.
In addition, the GCA prohibits most transfers
of long guns to persons under 18 and most
transfers of handguns to persons under 21. 
The GCA categories of prohibited persons
are the prevailing minimum for all States. 
Many States have similar prohibitions and
have enacted additional categories of
prohibited persons, such as those who have
committed alcohol-related or juvenile
offenses.  (See Survey of State Procedures
Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 2001,
NCJ 192065.)

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the GCA and
included interim provisions, 18 U.S.C.
922(s), in effect from February 29, 1994,
until November 29, 1998.  The U.S.
Department of Justice, with the States,
developed the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) during
the 57-month interim period, as authorized
by the permanent provisions of the Brady
Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t).  Since November 30,
1998, the NICS has allowed a licensee to
contact the system by telephone or other
electronic means for information, to be
supplied immediately, on whether receipt 
of a firearm by a prospective transferee 
would violate Federal or State law.  The 
States are encouraged to maintain points 
of contact that receive transfer or permit 
applications and conduct checks of FBI and 
State records.

In addition to regulation of handgun sales,
the permanent Brady provisions mandate
that licensees request background checks
on long gun purchasers and persons who
redeem a pawned firearm.  Licensees have
the option of requesting a NICS check on
persons who attempt to pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement
Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established a grant program
(NCHIP) to ensure immediate availability 
of complete and accurate State records. The
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST),
which collects statistics on background
checks, is one of many NCHIP programs.
NCHIP is designed to assist States to develop 
or improve existing criminal history records 
systems and to establish an interface with the 
NICS. Grant funds have also supported direct 
technical assistance, evaluation, and research 
related to improving nonfelony records within 
the States.

To date, over $354 million has been awarded 
directly to States to assist them in
establishing and enhancing criminal records
which support the FBI's record system. All
States have received funding under the NCHIP 
program.

Components of the national firearm
check system

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local
agencies conduct background checks on
persons who apply to purchase a firearm 
or for a permit that can be used to make 
a purchase.  Variations in Federal and 
State procedures for determining firearm
possession eligibility are summarized 
below.

Overview of NICS 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a
NICS check requested by a dealer or present 
a State permit that the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) has qualified 
as an alternative to the point-of-transfer 
check.  Qualifying permits are those that -- 
(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire,
or carry a firearm, and 
(2) were issued not more than 5 years
earlier by the State in which the transfer 
is to take place, after verification by an
authorized government official that
possession of a firearm by the transferee
would not be a violation of law.  A permit
issued after November 29, 1998, qualifies
as an alternative only if its approval 
process included a NICS check. 
A licensee initiates a NICS check by
contacting either the FBI or a point of
contact (POC) agency designated by State
government.  The FBI or POC checks
available Federal, State, and/or local
databases and responds with a notice to 
the licensee that the transfer may proceed, 
may not proceed, or is delayed pending 
further review of the transferee's record. 
Prior to transferring a firearm subject to
permanent Brady requirements, a licensee
must receive a completed Firearm Transaction 
Record (ATF form 4473).  For more information, 
see Commerce in Firearms in the United States, 
February 2000 <www.atf.treas.
gov/pub/fire-explo_pub/
020400report.pdf>. 

State and local participation in the 
NICS

Each State government determines the
extent of its involvement in the NICS
process.  Three forms of State involvement
currently exist:
*  A POC requests a NICS check on all
firearm transfers originating in the 
State.
*  A POC requests a NICS check on all
handgun transfers; licensees in the State
are required to contact the FBI for 
approval of long gun transfers. 
*  The State does not maintain a POC;
licensees are required to contact the 
FBI for NICS checks on all firearm 
transfers originating in the State.
Handgun checks are conducted by the FBI
for 24 States and by POC agencies for 26
States; long gun checks are conducted by
the FBI for 34 States and by POC agencies
for 16 States (see Appendix A).  The FBI
also conducts checks for the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands.  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies
includes initiating checks on persons who
apply for qualified State permits.  Generally,
POC agencies conduct a background check
that incorporates Federal and State
requirements.  In a few States with full or
partial participation, the FBI conducts the
NICS check on certain pawn transactions
instead of the POC.  Most States have
designated a single agency with statewide
jurisdiction as their NICS point of contact;
some States have multiple points of contact,
which are usually county sheriffs or local
police departments.  (For agencies
conducting firearm checks, see Appendix
B.)

The NICS is integrated with most State
instant approval, purchase permit, or other
approval systems (see Approval systems). 
Thirty-one States maintained approval
systems for purchase or permits required 
for purchase during 2001.  Eighteen States
operated instant check systems; 12 required
purchase permits; and 4 maintained other
types of approval systems.  (Connecticut,
Illinois, and New Jersey are each counted
twice because they operated separate
purchase permit and instant check systems).  
During 2001, 19 States issued carry permits 
that exempted the holder from a check under 
the permanent Brady law or a State law or 
both.

In addition to the Brady Act's regulation of
sales by federally licensed dealers, some
States require background checks for firearm 
transfers that occur between unlicensed persons 
at gun shows or other locations. A few States 
require a mandatory waiting period after a 
purchaser applies and before a firearm transfer 
can be made, regardless of when a background 
check is completed. 

Parallel State systems

If agencies that conduct checks under State 
law are unable to access the NICS, licensees 
in that State are required to contact the FBI 
for approval of transfers. Thus prospective 
transferees in some States are required to 
undergo a permit or point-of-transfer check 
by a State or local agency and a NICS check 
by the FBI.  Six States (Delaware, 
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New 
Jersey, and Rhode Island) maintain firearm 
check systems that can be described as 
parallel to the NICS process. 
For more information on approval systems
in specific States, see Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 2001, NCJ 192065.

Methodology

Definitions

State instant approval (instant check)
systems require a seller to transmit a
purchaser's application to a checking
agency by telephone or computer; the
agency is required to respond immediately
or as soon as possible without delay.

Purchase permit systems require a
prospective firearm purchaser to obtain,
after a background check, a government-
issued document (called a permit, license,
identification card, and so on) that must 
be presented to a seller to receive a 
firearm.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit
(issued after a background check) that
exempts the holder from a check at the time
of purchase under an ATF ruling or State
law.

Other type of approval systems require a
seller to transmit a purchaser's application 
to a checking agency by mail, telephone, or
computer; the agency is not required to
respond immediately but must respond
before the end of the statutory time limit.

Application for firearm transfer is informa-
tion submitted by a person to a State or local
checking agency to purchase a firearm or
obtain a permit that can be used for a
purchase; includes information submitted
directly to a checking agency or forwarded
by a prospective seller.

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal
NICS system and may include more than
one inquiry per application.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is
prohibited from receiving a firearm or a
permit that can be used to receive a 
firearm, due to the finding of a disqualifying 
factor during a background check.

Appeal is an objection by the denied person
to an agency's decision.

Data collection procedures

The Regional Justice Information Service
(REJIS), through a cooperative agreement
with BJS under the Firearm Inquiry Statistics
(FIST) program, collected the data.  
The agencies supplied data on either paper
or diskette.  Several different forms were
provided to meet the varying office
procedures of the agencies.  In addition
REJIS wrote special software distributed
free of charge to requesting agencies.  This
software was designed to simplify the record
tabulating functions of the agency.  It also
helped to reduce the burden of keeping the
statistical data because a capability of the
software was to automatically report the
data needed for the study.  In all cases the
data that the agency sent to REJIS
contained only statistical information and
would not allow the identification of an
individual.  The software also assists
agencies in purging records after the delay
time specified by law.

FIST data are collected directly from State
agencies conducting background checks
and from local checking agencies.  Data are
collected from local checking agencies by
mail and telephone contact.

Information collected included the following: 
firearm applications made to the agency,
firearm applications rejected by the agency,
and the reasons for rejection.  Although
many local checking agencies may not
handle arrests and appeals through the
entire process and may have only limited
information on outcomes, arrest and appeal
data were requested from local agencies.
Determining populations

To estimate the application and rejection
rates within a given area, the agency
population was needed and was determined
as follows:  
The stratification classification of the 
county was based on the size of the largest 
city within the county.  

If cities within a county were conducting
their own background checks, their
populations were subtracted from the county
population.  

If a municipal agency provided services for
other selected municipalities, then
populations for those municipalities were
added to the populations of the reporting
municipality. 

If an agency participating in the study 
relied upon other jurisdictions to conduct
background checks, they were replaced by
those other jurisdictions (for example, a
town being replaced by a county).
State and local checking agencies were
stratified by size of the population served: 
State agencies that served an entire State
population; local agencies that served a
population greater than 100,000; local
agencies that served a population between
10,000 and 100,000; and local agencies that
served a population of less than 10,000. 
Population size was based on 2000 Census
Bureau information.  The population
categories were chosen to be consistent
with those used by the FBI when conducting
similar studies. 

All agencies serving a population greater
than 100,000 were asked to contribute data
in 2001.  The number of agencies in the
survey are shown by population category in
the table below. 

In some States one statewide agency
conducts background checks for purchase
and another agency (or division within an
agency) issues ATF-approved permits. 
Although both agencies conducted
background checks, care was taken not 
to count State populations twice in the
estimation process.  This situation of 
dual agencies conducting background checks 
did not occur among local agencies. 
    
Estimation procedures

Based on data provided by both sets of
agencies, national estimates were
developed using population weighting
factors.  When an agency did not provide
data for all months, a simple linear
extrapolation or interpolation was used 
to generate a 12-month total.
Estimation based on State population was
used to determine the number of carry
permit applications and rejections in
Mississippi.  Extrapolation was used to
estimate carry permit applications and
rejections in Arkansas and purchase
applications and rejections in Maryland.
Fourteen agencies with rejection rates
over four standard deviations above the
average standard rejection rate were
classified as outliers and their data were
not used for projection of estimates. In
addition, rejection rates that could not 
be determined with sufficient accuracy were
not used.

The accuracy of the estimates presented in
this report depends on two types of errors:
nonsampling and sampling.  In this study,
nonsampling error may occur from the
following:  nonresponse; differences in the
methods checking agencies use to process,
code, store, and retrieve their information;
differences in interpretation of the survey
questions; and activities that delay
personnel from completing the survey.
In any sample survey, the full extent of
nonsampling error is never known. However, 
steps were taken to minimize the potential 
for error.  Extensive telephone follow-ups 
were made to encourage responses, answer 
questions about misunderstood requests, and 
generally assist in assembling the information 
in a useable form.  Extensive verification 
of the data ensured the accuracy of the 
numbers. Agencies providing data were asked 
to review and revise their reports, and various
quality checks were performed in receiving
and processing the data.  The estimates do
not include U.S. Territories or the District 
of Columbia.

Sources of additional information
Additional information on State firearm
laws is available from BJS in the Survey 
of State Procedures Related to Firearm
Sales, Midyear 2001, NCJ 192065.  Further 
information on Federal law and BJS-related 
publications is available from the following 
Internet sites: 
ATF <http://www.atf.treas.gov/core/
firearms/firearms.htm>
BJS  <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
guns.htm>
FBI <http://www.fbi.gov/programs/
nicsfact.htm>
--------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is 
the statistical agency of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  Lawrence  A.
Greenfeld is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release 
of findings from permanent data collection
programs such as the Firearm Inquiry
Statistics program.  State and local 
officials have cooperated in reporting the 
data presented.

Michael Bowling and Gene Lauver of REJIS
and Matthew J. Hickman and Devon B. Adams 
of BJS wrote this Bulletin.  David M.
Naglich, Ronald J. Frandsen, and Joann M.
Laws of REJIS collected and analyzed the
FIST data presented.  Terry Tomazic, Ph.D.,
professor of research methodology at St.
Louis University, provided statistical
consultation.
  
At BJS, Steven K. Smith reviewed the
report, and Carol G. Kaplan supervised the
project.  Tom Hester edited the report.  
Further information on the FIST program
can be obtained from --
Carol G. Kaplan, Chief
Criminal History Improvement Programs
U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics
810 Seventh Street, NW
Washington, DC 20531
Gene Lauver, Project Manager
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program
Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard
St. Louis, MO 63108
September 2002, NCJ 195235
------------------------------------------------
End of file
08/12/02 ih