U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2002


September 2003, NCJ 200116


-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1)and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft02.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may 
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#bcft
--------------------------------------------------------

Michael Bowling, Ph.D.
Gene Lauver 
Regional Justice Information Service
              
Matthew J. Hickman
Devon B. Adams
Bureau of Justice Statistics

---------------------------------------------
Highlights

Background checks of applications for firearm transfers 
since implementation of the Brady Act

*  From the inception of the Brady Act on March 1, 1994, 
to December 31, 2002, nearly 46 million applications for 
firearm transfers were subject to background checks. About
976,000 applications were rejected.

*  Total applications for firearm transfers or permits 
nationwide decreased 2%, from 7,958,000 in 2001 to 
7,806,000 in 2002.  

*  State and local agencies conducted background checks on 
about half of the applications for firearms transfers or 
permits in 2002, while the FBI was responsible for the
remainder.

*  In 2002, 136,000 (1.7%) of approximately 7,806,000 
applications for firearm transfers or permits were 
rejected by the FBI or State and local agencies. This 
national rejection rate in 2002 declined from 2001 
(1.9%).

*  The rejection rate for applications checked by the 
FBI (1.4%) was lower than the rate for checks by State 
and local agencies (2.1%).  Rejection rates for 
individual State points of contact(POC's) ranged from 
over 4% to less than 1%.

*  In 2002 the majority of rejections for State and 
local agencies, (52%) were due to applicants' felony 
convictions or indictments; about 14% were rejected 
for a domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or
restraining order.  Other reasons for rejection -- 
including State or local law prohibitions, fugitives, 
mental illness or disability, drug addiction, juveniles,
dishonorable military discharge, and illegal aliens -- 
accounted for the remaining 34%. 

*  Checking agencies reported an estimated 2,000 arrests 
of persons with outstanding warrants or who submitted 
false information on an application.
-------------------------------------------------
              
The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (Brady Act) 
mandates criminal history background checks on persons 
applying to purchase firearms from federally licensed
firearm dealers, Federal Firearm Licensees (FFL's).  
This Bulletin reports the number of applications for 
firearm transfers and permits, rejections that resulted 
from background checks, reasons for rejection, and rates 
of rejection for selected States in 2002.

The permanent provisions of the Brady Act became effective 
on November 30, 1998. The act established the National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) and
requires a background check by the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) or a State point of contact (POC) 
on persons applying to receive firearms from a FFL.  

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) began the Firearm 
Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program in 1995 to collect 
information on background checks conducted by State and 
local agencies. The State and local data -- when combined
with FBI NICS data -- provide national estimates of the 
total numbers of applications and rejections resulting 
from the Brady Act and similar State laws. 

In 2002 FIST collected information from 19 statewide 
POC's and approximately 700 State and local agencies 
that conduct their own checks under Federal and State 
laws. The FBI also compiled data on the inquiries or
transactions handled by the NICS operations center.
***Footnote 1: The number of background checks 
handled by State POC's as reported in the National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)2002 
Operations Report, published in May 2003, may be 
higher than the estimates reported here because 
multiple inquiries or transactions for the same 
application (which may be done at the discretion of 
the agency)are a normal part of FBI operations. FIST
only counts the first of multiple inquiries.***

Nearly all applications included in the 2002 FIST 
survey were subject to a NICS check, as well as 
checks to fulfill any additional State requirements.  
A small number of applications were subject only to 
checks required by State laws. (See Components of the 
national firearm check system on page 9 for further 
details.)

National estimates

Fewer applications were filed in 2002 than in
2001, decreasing from 7,958,000 to 7,806,000,
or 2%. Rejections fell from 151,000 in 2001 to
136,000 in 2002, a decrease of 10%.  

In addition to the nearly 4.2 million applications
for firearm transfers processed by the FBI in 2002, 
State and local checking agencies processed 3.6 
million applications.

When a background check produces evidence of factors 
that disqualify an applicant from owning a firearm, 
the application is rejected. (See Definitions on page 
9 for more detail.) 

In 2002 the FBI rejected 60,739 firearm transfer 
applications, a 1.4% rejection rate, while State and 
local agencies rejected 75,000, a rate of 2.1%.

Together, approximately 136,000 firearm transfer 
applications were rejected in 2002, a rate of 1.7%. 
This overall rate of rejection continued a 4-year 
decline.

Since the inception of the Brady Act (the interim 
provisions went into effect on March 1,1994), nearly 
46 million applications for firearm transfers have 
been checked, of which 976,000 were rejected, a 
rejection rate of 2.1%. Permanent Brady's addition of 
long gun and pawn redemption checks resulted in an
increase in the volume of background checks but did 
not appear to substantially affect the national 
rejection rate (2.5% during the interim period and 
2.0% during the first 4 years of permanent Brady).

Approval systems

State systems for approval of a prospective firearm 
purchaser can be classified as "instant approval," 
"purchase permit," "exempt carry permit," or "other 
approval" systems.

Instant approval systems

Instant approval (instant check) systems require a 
seller to transmit the applicant's information to a 
checking agency by telephone or computer. The checking 
agency is required to respond to the seller at once 
or as soon as possible (generally within 3 days). State
agencies conducted over 2.1 million instant checks in 
2002, and about 48,000 (2.2%) of the applications were 
rejected.

The FIST survey also included all State permits required 
to purchase firearms and certain "exempt carry permits" 
that can be used to make purchases without a background 
check at the actual time of purchase. (Federal law does 
not mandate a permit to purchase firearms.) 

Purchase permit systems

State purchase permit systems require firearm purchasers 
to obtain, after a background check, a government-issued 
document (such as a permit, license, identification card, 
or other document) that must be presented to a seller in
order to receive a firearm.  Most agencies issuing 
purchase permits operate under statutes that allow between 
7 and 30 days to complete a background check. There were
739,000 applications filed for State and local purchase 
permits in 2002, similar to the number filed in 2001, 
while 14,000, or about 2%, were rejected.

Exempt carry permit systems

An exempt carry permit is not required for purchase but 
can be used to exempt the holder from a background check 
at the point of sale. A permit is exempt if it is issued 
after a check that includes the NICS, and meets other
requirements of the Brady Act under an ATF ruling. (See 
Overview of the NICS on page 8.) Agencies issuing exempt 
carry permits access the NICS Index themselves or request 
a check by sending information to the FBI.

In 2002 State agencies received an estimated 176,000 exempt 
carry permit applications, of which 5,300 were rejected 
(3.0%). Besides the State agencies, local agencies 
received an additional 182,000 applications for exempt
carry permits, an increase of more than 7% from 2001. 
Local agencies rejected about 3,200 applications for 
exempt carry permits for a rejection rate of 1.7%.  
Nine States reported statewide data on exempt carry 
permits for 2002.

Other types of approval systems

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit the 
applicant's information to a checking agency by mail, 
telephone, or computer. The checking agency is not 
required to respond immediately but must respond
before the end of a State statutory time limit,
generally within 7 to 10 days. Other types of approval 
systems processed 427,000 applications in 2002 
(predominately in California), and about 1% of them were
rejected.

Rejection rates vary for types of statewide approval 
systems, with exempt carry permits having the highest 
rate (3.0%), followed by purchase permits (2.2%), 
instant checks (2.2%), and other approvals (1.1%).
Analysis of rejection rates

Although State points of contact received the majority 
of applications made to State and local checking 
agencies, local agencies accepted a significant number. 
Moreover, rejection rates among State and local checking 
agencies varied by type and age of approval system.
Within the overall FBI rejection rate of 1.4%, rejection 
rates may vary by State and local area.  

Statewide reporting

In 2002 the FIST survey obtained statewide data from 
20 NICS points of contact (including Hawaii) and 
Delaware. The 16 States that provided complete statewide 
data processed checks for 2.1 million applications in 
2002, rejecting 45,000. In 2001 the same agencies
conducted checks for 2.2 million applications, of which 
52,000 were rejected. For these 16, this represents a 
2% decrease in applications and a 14% decrease in 
rejections between 2001 and 2002.  

The change in applications ranged from a 19% increase 
in New Jersey to a decrease of 9% in Georgia. Similarly, 
the change in rejections varied from a 19% increase in 
Illinois to a decrease of 36% in Georgia. 

The many interrelated factors that influence rejection 
rates have not been fully quantified, but a few 
observations are possible from the data available. 
The rejection rates in States surveyed by FIST 
ranged from 0.2% in Connecticut to nearly 4% in 
Colorado and over 4% in Delaware.  

Among the lowest rates for instant checks were
those in New Jersey (0.2%) and Illinois (0.9%),
where an instant check at the time of transfer is
the second step required for approval of
prospective firearm owners. Both States require that 
before an instant check for a sale can be conducted, 
prospective owners must obtain an identification card 
or a permit. During the first step of the process -- 
application for the requisite permit or ID card -- the 
rejection rate is considerably higher in New Jersey
(2.0%) and Illinois (2.5%), more similar to the
national average of 1.7% than the second step.

Generally, the higher rejection rates occurred
in States that implemented an instant approval
system on or after the effective date of the
Brady Act. These States included Colorado (3.8%), 
Tennessee (3.3%), and Georgia (2.9%). In each of 
these States, the rejection rate has been decreasing 
since the instant check system began operation.  

Approval systems established before passage
of the Brady Act generally had lower rejection
rates. In addition to Connecticut, Illinois, and
New Jersey, these systems include California
(1.1%), Virginia (1.3%), and Wisconsin (1.6%).
The older systems are also associated with
relatively stable rates; two of the oldest
systems, California and Illinois (the instant
approval step), have had only slight variations
in yearly rejection rates since 1996.

Local reporting

Local agencies mainly conduct checks for purchase and 
exempt carry permits. In 2002 local agencies received 
672,000 applications, of which 11,000 (1.7%) were 
rejected.

Rejection rates varied among local agencies by size of 
the population served, by the jurisdiction, and by the 
type of permit. For purchase permits, rejection rates 
were highest in jurisdiction over 100,000 and lowest in 
those under 10,000. Overall, rejection rates in 2002
were higher for purchase permits than for exempt carry 
permits.

Availability of records

During 2002 all States maintained databases that 
record felony convictions, and many maintained 
data on other disqualifying factors such as fugitive 
status, court restraining orders, mental illness, 
and domestic violence misdemeanor convictions. States 
differ as to the degree of automation used in record
searching and whether records are in a central
database or in databases maintained by county
courts or other local agencies.

In 2001 States held approximately 63.6 million
criminal records on individuals, about 90% of
which were automated. About 75% of automated records 
were accessible for conducting presale firearm and 
other background checks.  From 1995 to 2001, the
number of criminal records accessible for background 
checks has increased 60%, about twice the rate of 
growth in the number of automated records over the 
same time period. (See Improving Criminal History 
Records for Background Checks, May 2003 <www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc.htm>.)

Checking agencies often encounter delays if they 
attempt to access records in other jurisdictions. 
The most frequent delays occur when researching the 
final disposition of a criminal charge indicated in 
another jurisdiction's arrest or indictment record. 
If the final disposition cannot be found during the
time allowed for a background check, the agency must 
decide, based on Federal or State law, whether the 
application will be approved, denied, or delayed 
pending further research.

The Brady Act allows a transfer to proceed if a
disqualifying record is not found within the
3-day limit for a NICS check. Some States
have laws and regulations that allow their
agencies to deny or delay a transfer if an
incomplete record is being researched when
the time limit expires. 

Reasons for rejection

About 52% of rejections for firearm transfer among 
State and local checking agencies (about 39,000 
applications in 2002) occurred because the applicant 
either had a felony conviction or was under felony 
indictment. The second most common reason for rejection 
was a domestic violence misdemeanor conviction or 
restraining order (about 14% of rejections or 
approximately 11,000 applications).  A portion of all 
rejections reported by State and local agencies fall 
under the categories of State and local law prohibitions 
(11% of rejections) and mental illness (1.4%).

------------------------------------------------
Mental health and domestic violence records

During 2002-03, REJIS conducted a survey of mental 
health and domestic violence records accessed during 
background checks. One goal of the survey was to 
identify impediments and improvements to the availability 
and accessibility of these records. Forty-nine State 
contacts returned the survey.

Nearly all States reported at least one impediment to 
sending records to the FBI or to checking agency access 
to records. Common impediments included the following:

 * Privacy laws
 * Incomplete automation
 * Incomplete records
 * Inability to distinguish domestic violence
   misdemeanors from other misdemeanors

Despite these impediments, more than half the
States reported at least one initiative underway
to improve access to mental health records,
domestic violence misdemeanor convictions,
and/or restraining order records.

Overall, the survey results indicated that --

 * Domestic violence restraining orders are
   the most readily available of the record
   types identified above;
 * Accessing and sending mental health data
   pose the greatest challenge;
 * Several impediments hinder access to domestic
   violence misdemeanor convictions, but the 
   impediments are not widespread among
   States.
-----------------------------------------------

The FBI reported that 42% of their rejections
were for felony-related reasons (about 26,000
of the total rejections in 2002). As among State
and local checking agencies, a domestic violence 
misdemeanor conviction or restraining order was the 
next most common reason for rejection (nearly 18% 
or about 11,000 rejections).  Fugitive status and 
mental illness accounted for smaller proportions of 
rejections than among State and local checking 
agencies, while drug-related rejections represented a
larger proportion (6.6%).


The number of rejections by State and local
agencies for reasons other than felony
convictions increased 294% from the first year
of the Brady Act to 2002, compared to a 119%
increase in total rejections and a 48% increase
in rejections for felony convictions. This
represents an increase from 29% of all
rejections in 1994 to 52% in 2002. Several
factors likely contributed to these increases,
including greater accessibility to records of
disqualifying factors other than felonies.

States have used funds from the National
Criminal History Improvement Program
(NCHIP) to initiate the flagging of criminal
history records evidencing convictions for
domestic violence or the issuance of a
protection order. Forty-two States submit data
to the NCIC Protection Order File, which
became operational in May 1997 and includes
over 750,000 records of protection orders.
(See Improving Criminal History Records for
Background Checks.)

Appeals of denials

Specific appeal procedures for persons denied
a firearm or permit are codified in Federal law
and in the laws of nearly all States that require
background checks. The most common procedure provides 
an appeal to the checking agency and a subsequent 
appeal to a court. Eighteen States provide an appeal 
to the checking agency for a person who is denied a
firearm purchase or a permit required for a purchase). 
(In eight other States, local agencies may reconsider 
their decisions although they are not required to do 
so by law.) Eighteen States provide an appeal to a 
court. In four States, a government officer in a
department separate from the checking agency performs 
an administrative review.

Procedures for an initial appeal may be relatively 
informal, with some checking agencies allowing a denied 
person to initiate a review with a telephone request. 
Other agencies involved in firearm appeals are those
which maintain criminal histories or other records which 
could disqualify an applicant. An appellant may be 
required to contact the agency that supplied a criminal 
history or another record that caused a denial.

Appeals often arise when an applicant denies being the 
individual named in a disqualifying record found by the 
checking agency. To resolve the identity question, the 
appellant will ordinarily submit fingerprints for 
comparison with Federal and/or State arrestee 
records. If the appellant's prints do not match any 
records on file, the denial can be reversed.  

Another common appeal arises when an applicant is 
denied because of a felony arrest or charge without 
a recorded disposition. The applicant can have the 
denial reversed by submitting court records to prove 
that the charge was subsequently dismissed. Whether
a checking agency is required to approve, delay, or 
deny a person with a missing disposition (as dictated 
by State law) may affect the number of appeals filed. 
Data indicate that the vast majority of disputed
denials are resolved at the administrative level,
and turn on the accuracy of records rather than
interpretation of law.

The FBI NICS Appeal Services Unit(ASU)reviews and 
investigates appeals of NICS denials. Of the 61,000 
denials issued in 2002, 10,398 or 17% were appealed. 
About 3 in 10 appeals resulted in the denial being
overturned.

Denied persons subject to arrest

Persons prevented from receiving a firearm or
a permit by a background check may be
subject to arrest and prosecution if they are
wanted in an outstanding warrant or have
submitted false information on their application.
When a check identifies a wanted person, the
checking agency generally will inform the
agency that entered the warrant, in addition to
notifying the agency with jurisdiction over the
fugitive's present location or place of
residence. A statewide fugitive apprehension
unit may also be informed.

Many checking agencies notify ATF of persons
who submit false information on a Federal
firearm transaction record or fail to disclose
required information.  If a misrepresentation
violates State law, the checking agency will
inform either the agency with jurisdiction over
the location of the transaction (usually a
dealer's premises) or the agency with
jurisdiction over the applicant's residence, or
both.

In seven States those who falsify an application or 
attempt an illegal purchase are reported to a special 
police unit that determines who will be arrested. In 
some States, all persons denied a firearm are
reported to a special police unit.  

Of the States reporting for 2002, Virginia had
the largest number of arrests of denied
persons due to outstanding warrants or other
reasons.

Among those local agencies participating in the
FIST survey, it is estimated that about 100
arrests were made as a result of a background
check.

In addition, ATF made 200 arrests while enforcing the 
Brady Act during fiscal year 2002.***Footnote 2: Bureau 
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, correspondence to
BJS, 2003. On November 23, 2002, the ATF was renamed
as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives, and was administratively moved from the
U.S. Department of the Treasury to the U.S. Department
of Justice.***  

Firearm retrievals

The NICS and several State systems allow a firearms 
transfer to proceed if a dealer has not received a 
response within 3 business days of requesting a check 
(termed a "default proceed" by the NICS). A checking 
agency may continue to research an incomplete record 
even after a default proceed has occurred. If a 
disqualifying record is found at a later date (termed 
a "delayed denial" by the NICS), the dealer may be 
contacted to determine if the applicant completed the 
transaction and received a firearm.  

ATF is informed when the FBI discovers that a
firearm was transferred to a prohibited person
after a default proceed. An ATF investigation
may result in retrieval of the firearm or a
transfer back to the dealer. A State checking
agency that discovers a delayed denial may
inform a statewide firearms unit, local law
enforcement, or ATF.

In 2002 ATF reported more than 4,000 retrievals to 
FIST, and Virginia reported 11.

Background 

Prohibited persons

The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), 18 U.S.C. 922, 
prohibits transfer of a firearm to a person who --

* is under indictment for, or has been convicted
of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for
more than 1 year
* is a fugitive from justice
* is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, any
controlled substance
* has been adjudicated as a mental defective
or committed to a mental institution
* is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the
United States under a nonimmigrant visa
* was discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces
under dishonorable conditions
* has renounced U.S. Citizenship
* is subject to a court order restraining him or
her from harassing, stalking, or threatening an
intimate partner or child
* has been convicted in any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.

In addition, the GCA prohibits most transfers of
long guns to persons under 18 and most transfers of 
handguns to persons under 21. The GCA categories of 
prohibited persons are the prevailing minimum for 
all States. Many States have similar prohibitions 
and have enacted additional categories of prohibited
persons, such as those who have committed alcohol-
related or juvenile offenses. (See Survey of State 
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear 2002,
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs02.htm>.)

Brady Act provisions

The Brady Act amended the GCA and included
interim provisions, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), in effect
from February 29, 1994, until November 29,
1998. The U.S. Department of Justice, with the
States, developed the NICS during the
57-month interim period, as authorized by the
permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 18
U.S.C. 922(t). Since November 30, 1998, the
NICS has allowed a licensee to contact the
system by telephone or other electronic means
for information, to be supplied immediately, on
whether receipt of a firearm by a prospective
transferee would violate Federal or State law. 

In 2002 the FBI added e-mail (known as E-Check) as 
another means to contact the NICS, and 24,413 inquiries 
were made by this method. The States are encouraged to
maintain points of contact that receive transfer or 
permit applications and conduct checks of FBI and 
State records.

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the
permanent Brady provisions mandate that licensees 
request background checks on long gun purchasers 
and persons who redeem a pawned firearm. Licensees 
have the option of requesting a NICS check on 
persons who attempt to pawn a firearm. 

National Criminal History Improvement
Program (NCHIP)

The Brady Act established the grant program
NCHIP to ensure immediate availability of
complete and accurate State records. The
Firearm Inquiry Statistics Program (FIST),
collecting statistics on background checks, is
one of many NCHIP programs.

NCHIP is designed to assist States to develop
or improve existing criminal history records
systems and to establish an interface with the
NICS. Grant funds have also supported direct
technical assistance, evaluation, and research
related to improving nonfelony records within
the States.

To date, over $390 million has been awarded
to States to assist them in establishing and
enhancing criminal records which support the
FBI's record system. All States have received
funding under the NCHIP program.

Components of the national firearm check
system

Over 3,000 Federal, State, and local agencies
conduct background checks on persons who apply 
to purchase a firearm or for a permit that can 
be used to make a purchase. Variations in
Federal and State procedures for determining
firearm possession eligibility are summarized
below.

Overview of the NICS 

Prospective firearm transferees undergo a NICS 
check requested by a dealer or present a State 
permit that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has qualified as 
an alternative to the point-of-transfer check. 
Qualifying permits are those that -- 

(1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or
carry a firearm, and 
(2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier
by the State in which the transfer is to take
place, after verification by an authorized
government official that possession of a firearm
by the transferee would not be a violation of
law.

A permit issued after November 29, 1998, qualifies 
as an alternative only if its approval process 
included a NICS check. 

Many qualifying permits may be used for multiple 
purchases while valid. However, State laws often 
provide that a permit will be revoked if the holder 
is convicted of an offense or otherwise becomes 
ineligible after receiving the permit.

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting
either the FBI or a point of contact (POC)
agency designated by State government. The
FBI or POC checks available Federal, State,
and/or local databases and responds with a
notice to the licensee that the transfer may
proceed, may not proceed, or is delayed
pending further review of the transferee's
record. In 2002, 10 statewide POC's reported
at least some of their denials to the FBI.  

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to
permanent Brady requirements, a licensee
must receive a completed Firearm Transaction
Record (ATF form 4473).  

State and local NICS participation

Each State government determines the extent
of its involvement in the NICS process. Three
forms of State involvement currently exist:

* A POC requests a NICS check on all firearm
transfers originating in the State.
* A POC requests a NICS check on all
handgun transfers; licensees in the State are
required to contact the FBI for NICS checks for
long gun transfers. 
* The State does not maintain a POC;
licensees are required to contact the FBI for
NICS checks on all firearm transfers originating
in the State.

Handgun checks are conducted by the FBI for
26 States and by POC agencies for 24 States;
long gun checks are conducted by the FBI for
36 States and by POC agencies for 14 States.
Vermont and Arizona discontinued their status
as POC's in 2002. The FBI also conducts checks 
for the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands.  

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies
includes initiating checks on persons who
apply for qualified State permits. Generally,
POC agencies conduct a background check
that incorporates Federal and State requirements. 
In a few States with full or partial participation, 
the FBI conducts the NICS check on certain pawn 
transactions instead of the POC. Most States have 
designated a single agency with statewide 
jurisdiction as their NICS point of contact; some 
States have multiple points of contact, which are 
usually county sheriffs or local police departments. 

The NICS is integrated with most State instant
approval, purchase permit, or other approval
systems. (See Approval systems.) Twenty-nine
States maintained approval systems for purchase 
or permits required for purchase during 2002. 
Sixteen States operated instant check systems; 12 
required purchase permits; and 4 maintained other 
types of approval systems. (Connecticut, Illinois, 
and New Jersey are each counted twice because they 
operated separate purchase permit and instant check
systems). During 2002, 19 States issued carry permits 
that exempted the holder from a check under the 
permanent Brady law or a State law or both.

In addition to the Brady Act's regulation of sales 
by federally licensed dealers, some States require 
background checks for firearm transfers that occur 
between unlicensed persons at gun shows or other 
locations. A few States require a mandatory waiting 
period after a purchaser applies and before a 
firearm transfer can be made, regardless of when a
background check is completed.

Parallel State systems

If agencies that conduct checks under State
law are unable to access the NICS, licensees
in that State are required to contact the FBI
for approval of transfers. Thus prospective
transferees in some States are required to
undergo a permit or point-of-transfer check
by a State or local agency and a NICS check
by the FBI. Six States (Delaware, Massachusetts, 
Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, and Rhode Island) 
maintain firearm check systems that can be described 
as parallel to the NICS process. 

For more information on approval systems in
specific States, see Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2002, <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs02.htm>.

Definitions

Appeal is an objection by the denied person to an
agency's decision. 

Application for firearm transfer is information
submitted by a person to a State or local
checking agency to purchase a firearm or
obtain a permit that can be used for a
purchase; includes information submitted
directly to a checking agency or forwarded by
a prospective seller.

Exempt carry permit is a State carry permit
(issued after a background check) that
exempts the holder from a check at the time of
purchase under an ATF ruling or State law.

Instant check (instant approval) systems
require a seller to transmit a purchaser's
application to a checking agency by telephone
or computer; the agency is required to respond
immediately or as soon as possible without
delay.

Other approval systems require a seller to
transmit a purchaser's application to a
checking agency by mail, telephone, or
computer; the agency is not required to
respond immediately but must respond before
the end of the statutory time limit.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective
firearm purchaser to obtain, after a background
check, a government-issued document (called
a permit, license, identification card, and so on)
that must be presented to a seller to receive a
firearm.

Rejection occurs when an applicant is prohibited 
from receiving a firearm or a permit that can be 
used to receive a firearm, due to the finding of 
a disqualifying factor during a background check.

Transactions are inquiries to the Federal NICS
system and may include more than one inquiry
per application.

Methodology

Data collection procedures

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), 
through a cooperative agreement with BJS under 
the Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program, 
collected the data.  

The agencies supplied data on either paper or
diskette. Several different forms were provided
to meet the varying office procedures of the
agencies. In addition REJIS wrote special
software distributed free of charge to
requesting agencies. This software was
designed to simplify the record tabulating
functions of the agency. It also helped to
reduce the burden of keeping the statistical
data because a capability of the software was
to automatically report the data needed for the
study. In all cases the data that the agency
sent to REJIS contained only statistical
information and would not allow the identification 
of an individual. The software also assists agencies 
in purging records after the delay time specified by 
law.

FIST data are collected directly from State
agencies conducting background checks and
from local checking agencies. Data are
collected from local checking agencies by mail
and telephone contact.

Information collected included the following: 
firearm applications made to the agency,
firearm applications rejected by the agency,
and the reasons for rejection. Although many
local checking agencies may not handle
arrests and appeals through the entire process
and may have only limited information on
outcomes, arrest and appeal data were requested 
from local agencies.

Determining populations

To estimate the application and rejection rates
within a given area, the agency population was
needed and was determined as follows: The
stratification classification of the county was
based on the size of the largest city within the
county. If cities within a county were
conducting their own background checks, their
populations were subtracted from the county
population. If a municipal agency provided
services for other selected municipalities, then
populations for those municipalities were
added to the populations of the reporting
municipality. If an agency participating in the
study relied upon other jurisdictions to conduct
background checks, they were replaced by
those other jurisdictions.

State and local checking agencies were
stratified by size of the population served:
State agencies that served an entire State
population; local agencies that served a
population greater than 100,000; local
agencies that served a population between
10,000 and 100,000; and local agencies that
served a population of less than 10,000.
Population size was based on 2000 Census
Bureau information. The population categories
were chosen to be consistent with those used
by the FBI when conducting similar studies. 

All agencies serving a population greater than
100,000 were asked to contribute data in 2002.
The number of agencies in the survey are
shown by population category in the table
below.

In some States one statewide agency conducts
background checks for purchase and another
agency (or division within an agency) issues
ATF-approved permits. Although both agencies
conducted background checks, care was taken
not to count State populations twice in the
estimation process. This situation of dual
agencies conducting background checks did
not occur among local agencies.     

Estimation procedures

Based on data provided by both sets of agencies, 
national estimates were developed using population 
weighting factors. When an agency did not provide 
data for all months, a simple linear extrapolation 
or interpolation was used to generate a 12-month 
total.

Estimation based on State population was used to 
determine the number of carry permit applications 
and rejections in Mississippi. Extrapolation was 
used to estimate handgun license and instant 
check applications and rejections in Indiana.

Agencies with rejection rates over four standard 
deviations above the average standard rejection 
rate were classified as outliers and their data 
were not used for projection of estimates. In 
addition, rejection rates that could not be 
determined with sufficient accuracy were not used.

Pennsylvania reported 378,728 instant checks,
included in the FIST national estimate, and
182,547 applications for non-exempt carry
permits. Pennsylvania provided the combined
number of denials of all applications, which
was prorated to obtain the number of denials of
instant checks.

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this
report depends on two types of errors:
nonsampling and sampling. In this study,
nonsampling error may occur from the
following:  nonresponse; differences in the
methods checking agencies use to process,
code, store, and retrieve their information;
differences in interpretation of the survey
questions; and activities that delay personnel
from completing the survey.

In any sample survey, the full extent of
nonsampling error is never known.  However,
steps were taken to minimize the potential for
error. Extensive telephone follow-ups were
made to encourage responses, answer questions 
about misunderstood requests, and generally assist 
in assembling the information in a useable form. 
Extensive verification of the data ensured the 
accuracy of the numbers. Agencies providing data 
were asked to review and revise their reports, and 
various quality checks were performed in receiving 
and processing the data. The estimates do not
include U.S. Territories or the District of Columbia.

------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is 
the statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection
programs such as the Firearm Inquiry Statistics
program.  State and local officials have
cooperated in reporting the data presented.

Michael Bowling and Gene Lauver of REJIS
and Devon B. Adams and Matthew J. Hickman
of BJS wrote this Bulletin. David M. Naglich,
Ronald J. Frandsen, and Joann M. Laws of
REJIS collected and analyzed the FIST data
presented.  Terry Tomazic, Ph.D., professor of
research methodology at St. Louis University,
provided statistical consultation. At BJS,
Steven K. Smith reviewed the report, and Carol
G. Kaplan supervised the project.  Tina Dorsey
edited the report.
 
September 2003, NCJ 200116
-------------------------------------------------

End of file
09/05/03 ih