U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs

Bureau of Justice Statistics

Executive Summary
Bridging Gaps in Police Crime Data

A Discussion Paper from the BJS Fellows Programs

By  Michael D. Maltz  
Department of Criminal Justice  
University of Illinois at Chicago  
and  
Visiting Fellow, Bureau of Justice Statistics  

This paper is based on a Workshop  
on Uniform Crime Reporting Imputation  
on April 24-25, 1997,  sponsored by the  
Bureau of Justice Statistics 
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program  

Summary

Crime in the United States (CIUS), published annually by the
FBI, is a compilation of the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
provided by over 18,000 policing jurisdictions. It represents
one of the two primary sources of data about crime in the United
States, the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) being the
other. While the NCVS is a very reliable indicator of national
trends in crime, it is based on a survey of under 50,000
households and thus cannot provide local information on crime,
which is provided by the UCR and CIUS. [For a thorough
understanding of the differences between the two statistical
series, see Biderman and Lynch's (1991) Understanding Crime
Incidence Statistics: Why the  UCR diverges from the NCS.
***Footnote 1:  The NCS, or National Crime Survey, was the
predecessor to the NCVS.*** A briefer explanation can be found
in The Nation's Two Crime Measures, found at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ntmc.htm 
and included annually in CIUS.]

Not only does CIUS provide local information about crime
incidence, it also compiles arrest data from these
jurisdictions; these data permit us to form a picture of who is
committing crime (or at least, who is arrested for committing
crime).

Reporting to the FBI remains for many jurisdictions a voluntary 
activity; although many States now mandate that agencies report 
crime and arrest data to them (which they then forward to the FBI), 
even in those States local agencies do not always comply.

Moreover, despite the efforts of the FBI to maintain their
quality, there are many gaps in the data that make their use
questionable. While this has had limited impact in the past, the
fact that the UCR data have, for the first time, been used to
allocate Federal funds brings issues about data quality to
center stage. 

In addition, the FBI is moving to implement an 
improved crime and arrest reporting system, the 
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), to replace the
summary UCR program. It is hoped that the study of deficiencies
in UCR data will be of use in planning toward the full
implementation of NIBRS.

This report describes the history of the UCR system and the data
problems that it deals with in reporting about crime, arrests,
and homicide. It describes the procedures used by the FBI to 
fill in gaps in the data, when they exist, and makes suggestions 
about how they might be improved.

Acknowledgments

I began work on this project because, although I had been using
the UCR for many years, I had never understood all of its
intricacies and felt somewhat embarrassed to ask simple
questions about why certain procedures were used, because
obviously everyone else knew. It turned out, however, that most
people seemed to be as much in the dark as I was, perhaps about
different aspects of the UCR, and during this project we began
to share our knowledge, each of us having an understanding of
different aspects of the data collection and analysis process.
This report is, then, more of a collaboration than a
single-authored effort, a kind of "open source" presentation of
our collective knowledge.

The information contained herein is based on a 2-day meeting
held over 2 years ago; analyses of UCR data conducted since
then; and conversations, letters, faxes, and emails between me
and a number of colleagues. In particular, I wish to acknowledge
the comments and advice of the folllowing:

* From BJS -- Jan Chaiken, Larry Greenfeld, Charles Kindermann, 
Pat Langan, Sue Lindgren, Don Manson, Mona Rantala, Steve Smith, 
Paul White, and Marianne Zawitz

* From the FBI -- Yoshio Akiyama, Bennie Brewer, Ken Candell,
Carlos Davis, Gil Gee, Antonio Hwang, John Jarvis, Dawn Kording,
Vicki Major, Jim Nolan, Sharon Propheter, and Maryvictoria Pyne

* From the research community -- Dan Bibel, Becky Block, Roland
Chilton, Chris Dunn, Bob Flewelling, Jamie Fox, Jim Lynch, Mike
Maxfield, and Howard Snyder.

In addition, I wish to thank the UCR program personnel from the
50 States with whom my  research assistants (Leanne Brecklin,
University of Illinois at Chicago; Chris Kenaszchuk, University
of Maryland; and Todd Minton, BJS) and I corresponded and spoke.
I received cooperation from virtually every State in putting
together this report; I hope that the end result is of use to
them and to others who deal with crime statistics.

This report was written while I was a Visiting Fellow at the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, and completed while I was on
sabbatical from the University of  Illinois at Chicago. While I
greatly appreciate the help I received from BJS, FBI, and State
officials, they should not be held responsible for any errors in
this report, and the opinions, conclusions, and recommendations
expressed herein are my own  and should not be construed as the
policy of any of these organizations. 


Contents

(from the full 76-page report)

I. Introduction          
     Why We Need to Look at the UCR     
     The Information-Gathering Process 
     Report Organization     

II. UCR History and Coverage 
     State-Level Reporting   
     Comparing Crime Data    
     Coverage Gaps and Imputation  

     The UCR and Funding Decisions      
     The UCR and Electronic Access 
     Use of Sub-National UCR Data  0
     The UCR and NIBRS   

III. Incomplete Crime Data    
     Error Checking      
     Reasons for Incomplete Reporting   


IV. Incomplete Arrest Data    


V. Processing and Publishing the Crime Data
     Publishing the UCR  
     Archiving the UCR Data File 


VI. Procedures Used for Imputing Crime Data   
     FBI Imputation Procedures for Crime     
     NACJD Imputation Procedure    
     Imputation Procedures for Arrests  
     Imputation and "Zero-Population"
         Agencies    
     Updating UCR Files  


VII. Inaccuracies Produced by the Imputation 

Procedures          
     Incomplete-Reporting Agencies 
     Non-Reporting Agencies   
     "Zero-Population" Agencies    
     Summary   


VIII. Suggested Alternative Imputation 

Procedures     
     Incomplete Reporting Agencies  
     Non-Reporting Agencies  
     Zero-Population Agencies 

IX. Supplementary Homicide Reports      
     Uses of the SHR     
     Incomplete Provision of SHR Data 
         by Police Departments     
     Updating SHR Files  
     Availability of SHR Data Sets 
     SHR Imputation 
     Weighting the Victim File     
     Weighting the Offender File   
     Problems with This SHR Imputation
        Procedure   
     Suggested Alternative SHR Imputation 
        Procedure   

X. Conclusions and Recommendations      

Appendix A.  Persons Attending the Workshop 
on UCR Imputation Procedures  

Appendix B.  State On-Line Publication 
of Crime Data  



Appendix C.  Extent of Missing Data in 
State UCR Data, 1958-97

Appendix D.  Characteristics of State 
UCR Collection Programs

Appendix E.  Missing Data in UCR Files Used 
for the 1996 LLEBG Formula Calculations      
     Background     
     Extent of Missing Data, by State   
     Characteristics of Agencies with Less 
         than 36  Months of Violent Crime Data     
     Agencies with 0 Months Data   
     Jurisdictions with between 1 and 
        35  Months of Data    
     Impact of Incomplete Data     
     Addendum on "Zeropop" Agencies     

References     

Glossary 


-----------------
Introduction
-----------------

   The Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) ***Footnote 1:  The
first mention of an acronym in this report is printed in bold. 
Also see Glossary, page 72.*** of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) has been collecting crime and arrest data
from police departments throughout the United States since 1930.
The data are published in the annual report, Crime in the United
States (CIUS), and represent one of the more widely used sources
of longitudinal data in the social sciences. The UCR is based on
monthly summary reports of crimes known to the police and
arrests made by the police, that are provided to the FBI by more
than 18,000 police agencies in the United States and its
territories. ***Footnote 2:  Police agencies also report on
other topics to the FBI, including hate crimes, personnel
statistics, and law enforcement officers killed and assaulted.
These topics are not covered in this report.*** 

     The FBI office that deals with the UCR is the Program
Support Section (PSS), a section of the Criminal Justice
Information Services (CJIS) Division. Five of the eight units
within PSS are concerned with various aspects of CIUS: 



*     The Statistical Unit collects, checks, and manages the
data coming in from the police agencies.

*    The Communications Unit is involved in publications and
data dissemination.

*   The Education and Training Services provides training to
local agencies in UCR data collection procedures.

*   The Crime Analysis Research and Development analyzes data
and develops specifications for new methods of presenting the
data.

*    The CJIS Audit Unit performs quality assurance reviews to
maintain the quality of the UCR.

*   The UCR includes a Crime Index, a count of certain specific
crimes occurring over the past year in each jurisdiction. These
are called "Index crimes," and, listed in order of their
presumptive seriousness, are murder and nonnegligent
manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault,
burglary, larceny-theft, and motor vehicle theft.  

    Arson was added to the Crime Index in 1979 although it is
not as likely as the other Index crimes to be reported to the
police, because arsons are often categorized as "fires of
suspicious origin." Except for arson, these particular crimes
were chosen because they were frequent, generally serious in
nature, and most likely to be reported to the police; victims,
their relatives, and/or bystanders who witness the incident are
likely to know that incidents of those types are criminal in
nature and are likely to report them.

     Although the UCR has some limitations (indeed, the aim of
this report is to address some of them), even these limitations
provide important information. For example, incomplete citizen
reporting to the police of certain types of crimes has been used
as an indicator of a number of police-related factors: how the
relationship between offender and victim affects citizen
reporting of crime; the extent to which citizens trust the
police; and the effect of police policies and problems on
reporting behavior. Yet the public is generally unaware that the
UCR system is essentially a voluntary system; there is no
federal legislation that requires States or local jurisdictions
to report their crime data to the FBI.

    The voluntary nature of the UCR, of course, affects the
accuracy and completeness of the data. Although the FBI devotes
a great deal of attention to the quality of the data it
publishes in CIUS, it cannot mandate agencies to provide data on
time (or at all). As a consequence, the FBI must deal with
problems of missing or late data, and has developed a mechanism
to account for these gaps: it imputes (or estimates) data where
gaps exist, which limits the accuracy of the crime statistics
published in CIUS.

Why We Need to Look at the UCR

   Despite these problems with the data, adjustments for missing
data have not been of major consequence in the past, since the
primary purpose of the data was to present national and State
trends -- and the adjustments were adequate for this purpose.
Researchers, police administrators, and some journalists are
aware of the limitations of the UCR, but it mattered little to
others outside the field. However, in the recent past four
changes were made in the environment in which the UCR data are
being employed:

*   UCR data are being used to allocate Federal funds.

*   The data are now instantly accessible on the Internet.

*   Because of the greater accessibility  of the data,
researchers are increasingly analyzing UCR statistics at
sub-national levels, but the results of their analyses may be
suspect because of the way missing data are handled.

*   A new reporting system (the National Incident-Based
Reporting System, or NIBRS) now being implemented to augment –
and ultimately replace -- the UCR, will increase the amount of
data collected on each crime.

   Thus, the collection, analysis, and publication of crime data
are now occurring in a new environment, due to changes in
legislation, changes in the ease of access by citizens and
researchers to the data, and changes in crime reporting. This
means that the FBI's imputation procedures, which were adequate
for handling many of the weaknesses in the current data
collection system, may have to be revised. 

   Toward this end, a Workshop on UCR Imputation Procedures was
held in Washington, DC, April 24-25, 1997, and attended by key
personnel from the FBI and the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS), as well as by researchers familiar with UCR data and
their problems. The list of attendees is given in Appendix A of
the full report. Just prior to the workshop the FBI had moved the
Program Support Section to Clarksburg, West Virginia. The move 
resulted in a turnover of personnel and equipment. The workshop 
thus came at an opportune time for the FBI, which recognizes 
the need to update the procedures it has been using for 40 
years -- when the UCR had its last major revision (FBI, 1958). 

   The workshop provided an opportunity for statisticians and
researchers from both of these Federal agencies and from the
user community to discuss ways of improving UCR data collection
and estimation procedures. The goal of the workshop was to
recommend new ways to ensure that the American public  is
provided with the best possible police- collected information
related to crime and criminality, and to move toward that end in
the most expeditious and feasible way possible. This report is
based on the findings and discussions from that workshop.

    Issues relating to standard UCR data (i.e., crime counts,
arrests) were not the only topics addressed at the workshop.
Attention was also devoted to the Supplementary Homicide Reports
(SHR), forms filled out by police departments that provide a
more detailed description of each homicide than just the raw
statistics of number of homicides. The workshop explored how
these data could be made more useful, and this report discusses
those findings as well.

   Issues related to Federal crime data are not included in this
report. Thus, the accuracy or completeness of the statistics of
crimes committed on Indian reservations, military installations,
and national parks are for the most part excluded. 

   This report also includes information gathered from State
criminal justice agency personnel and data analyses subsequent
to the workshop. 



The Information-Gathering Process

  The information contained in this report has come from a
variety of sources. Much of it is undocumented, and falls more
in the category of "lore" than "information." The voluntary
nature of the UCR system means that different standards and
procedures have been used in different States despite the name
given to the data system – the Uniform Crime Reports are far
from uniform. Some of the material included herein is based on
informal conversations with FBI and BJS personnel and State
officials who use or collect the data, and some of their
statements about the UCR (or my interpretations of what they
meant) may be in error. Although I have tried to verify all
statements, some errors may have slipped through. Should a
reader find mistakes in this report, please notify me
(mikem@uic. edu), and corrections will be added to an errata
sheet that will be posted on the BJS website.

    It seems that every decade or so I look into the intricacies
of crime data (Maltz, [1972] 1999; 1984: 141) and find the
following caution about official statistics from Josiah Stamp
(1929: 258) applicable:

     The individual source of the statistics may easily be the
     weakest link. Harold Cox tells a story of his life as a 
     young man in India. He quoted some statistics to a Judge, an 
     Englishman, and a very good fellow. His friend said, "Cox,
     when you are a bit older, you will not quote Indian 
     statistics with that assurance.  The Government are very keen 
     on amassing statistics – they collect them, add them,
     raise them to the nth power, take the cube root and 
     prepare wonderful diagrams. But what you must never forget 
     is that every one of these figures comes in the first
     place from the chowty dar [village watchman], who just 
     puts down what he damn pleases."

   While strides have been made in improving the coverage and
accuracy of police-reported crime data (in India as well as in
this country), there is still need for a great deal of
improvement. My hope is that this report helps to realize this
goal.

Report Organization

   The organization of this report is as follows: The next
section gives a brief summary of how the coverage of the UCR has
increased over the past few decades, both in terms of population
covered and State collection efforts. Section III describes the
reasons for incomplete crime data and Section IV problems with
arrest data. Section V documents the steps necessary to verify
and publish CIUS. The imputation procedures used by the FBI to
account for these gaps are described in Section VI, and the
problems with these imputation procedures in Section VII. Some
suggested changes in the imputation procedures are described in
Section VIII. Issues related to the SHR data are addressed in
Section IX. Conclusions and recommendations are found in
Section X. 

   Five appendixes are included: Appendix A lists the attendees
at the BJS/FBI workshop. Appendix B is a compendium of
crime-related data available on the Internet from State
agencies. The crime reporting history of each State is charted
in Appendix C. Appendix D lists some of the characteristics of
State UCR collection programs. Appendix E, written by Sue
Lindgren of BJS, describes the procedures used to account for
missing data in calculating the Local Law Enforcement Block
Grant funding for each jurisdiction.


END OF FILE
7/12/99 pm