U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

This Bureau of Justice Statistics report was prepared by Lisa
Price-Grear under the supervision of Maureen A. Henneberg.
Priscilla Middleton edited and produced it, with assistance from
Jayne Robinson and Yvonne Boston.

BJS staff are grateful to everyone who participates in our
surveys.

The data of this report and supporting graphs and spreadsheets
are available on the internet -- http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Contents

About the Bureau of Justice Statistics     
New in FY 1998     
National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR) Assistance Program
Hate crime statistics 
National Survey of DNA Laboratories   
Crime and Justice Database on BJS internet site6
Statistics on the length of stay for prison 
   population
Recidivism study 
Ongoing BJS statistical series and programs    
Crimes and victims     
Criminal offenders      
The justice system      
Firearms and crime   
International statistics
General criminal justice statistics   
State Justice Statistics Program
   for Statistical Analysis Centers   

Visiting Research Fellowship Program Criminal record systems    
 
How to use BJS services  

To order BJS products    

About the Bureau of Justice Statistics 


BJS, a component of the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) in the
U.S. Department of Justice, is the primary source for justice
statistics in the United States. BJS collects, analyzes,
publishes, and disseminates information on crime, criminal
offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of justice
systems at all levels of government. These data are critical 
to Federal, State, and local policymakers in combating crime and
ensuring that justice is both efficient and evenhanded.

This year BJS will --

* Interview almost 100,000 citizens in more than 50,000
households about any experiences they may have had as crime
victims.

* Describe characteristics and consequences of about 37 million
criminal victimizations. 

* Analyze operations of some 50,000 agencies, offices, courts,
and institutions that together comprise the justice system. 

* Count populations and conduct sample surveys among the more
than 5.3 million adults who during an average day are subject to
the care, custody, or control of criminal justice authorities. 

* Maintain more than two dozen major data collection series from
which it publishes and distributes reports nationwide. 

Visit BJS's Internet site on the World Wide Web at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ 

BJS publishes data annually on --

   Criminal victimization
   Populations under correctional supervision
   Federal criminal offenders and case processing.

BJS periodic data series include --

   Felony convictions
   State court case processing
   Characteristics of correctional populations 
   Prosecutorial practices and policies

   Administration of law enforcement agencies 
    and correctional facilities
   Criminal justice expenditures and employment
   Civil cases in State courts
   Special studies on other criminal justice topics. 

A description of the various BJS data series can be found under
the topical sections of this report.

Many BJS data collection activities are carried out by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census. BJS staff also coordinate with other
Department of Justice statistical programs, such as the FBI's
Uniform Crime Reporting program and National Incident-Based
Reporting System.

BJS provides financial and technical support to State
governments in developing capabilities in criminal justice
statistics; improving the automation, accuracy, and completeness
of criminal history records and records of protective orders
involving domestic violence and stalking; developing complete
and accurate intrastate sex offender registries; and
facilitating the interstate exchange of such records through
national systems.

-----------------------------------
New in fiscal year 1998

National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR) 
Assistance Program
-----------------------------------

In FY 1998 BJS began administering the National Sex 
Offender Registry (NSOR) Assistance Program, which supports the
President's goal of establishing an effective national registry
of convicted sex offenders. Although currently all States have
some form of registry in place, many cannot efficiently or
accurately share information. The National Sex Offender Registry
will ensure that accurate and complete information about
released sex offenders is made  available to law enforcement to
protect the public and to prevent further victimizations. BJS
was appropriated $25 million in FY 1998 to carry out this grant
program. 

Specifically the program will ensure that--


* State registries are designed to identify, collect, and
properly disseminate relevant information that is consistent,
accurate, complete, and up to date.

* States establish appropriate interfaces with the FBI's
national system so that State registry information on sex
offenders can be obtained and tracked from one jurisdiction to
another.

The NSOR assistance program will also assist States in
implementing systems to meet relevant requirements of Federal
legislation (Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and
Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act, Megan's Law, and Pam
Lychner Sexual Offender Tracking and Identification Act) and
related State standards. Accordingly, all States will be
eligible for an award from these funds. BJS issued the program
announcement in March 1998.   In each State an agency designated
by the governor is eligible to apply for NSOR-AP funding.

-----------------------------------
Hate crime statistics
-----------------------------------

As part of the Attorney General's Hate Crime Initiative, BJS
will carry out a study to examine ways to improve participation
by law enforcement agencies in collecting and reporting hate
crime statistics to the FBI and will profile locality responses
to hate crime.  

Findings will assist the Federal government in identifying
activities to be undertaken to improve the accuracy of hate
crime statistics, produce accurate trend data on hate crime
statistics, and develop "best practices" models of hate crime
reporting.  

In addition, as part of the City-level Victimization Surveys
project, data will be collected on the prevalence of hate crime
in the 12 selected cities (see page 11 for more information on
these surveys.) Respondents will be asked to identify any crimes
they experienced to which they attribute a racial, ethnic,
religious, or sexual orientation motivation on the part of the
offender. Hate crimes against disabled persons will also be
identified. The Community-Oriented Policing Services (COPS)
office provided funds for data collection in 10 cities.  NIJ
sponsored the city survey in Washington, DC, as part of its
research support to the DC Revitalization Initiative.

-----------------------------------------
National Survey of DNA Laboratories
-----------------------------------------

The 1994 Crime Act included provisions establishing the Combined
DNA Index System (CODIS), a national DNA database program.  As
of December 1997, 48 States had enacted laws requiring the
collection of DNA samples, primarily from sex offenders and
other violent criminals.  At this time, there are no national
data on the operations and capacities of crime laboratories in
the United States that process and store DNA evidence and
samples.  

To fill this data gap, BJS, with funding from the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ), will conduct a national survey of
all public and private DNA laboratories to collect management
and administrative statistics on staff size and characteristics,
staff training, budgets, DNA testing procedures, processing
policies, and archival capacity.  The survey will also obtain
information on the degree of laboratory compliance with national
standards and participation in the national database of DNA
samples.  

BJS is working closely with State and local crime laboratory
directors and the FBI's Forensic Science Systems Unit in the
design of the survey instrument.  This effort will provide a
mechanism for crime laboratory directors to compare procedures
and capacities among the different laboratories, as well as a
tool to measure compatibility between the national (CODIS) DNA
database and State DNA databases.

-------------------------------------------------------
Crime and
Justice Database on BJS Internet site
-------------------------------------------------------

The Attorney General has emphasized the need to provide on-line
and timely crime data to the public.  In response, BJS is
developing an aggressive data distribution plan relying heavily
upon electronic access to data. BJS, in conjunction with NIJ,
will expand Internet access to data by developing a database
interface.

The data dissemination strategy provides a wide variety of data
products to users of all interests and abilities. Currently,
accessibility is limited to data already published on paper or
in electronic form and to spreadsheets prepared by the BJS
staff.  With the advent of the database interface, even
unsophisticated users will have easy access to customized data
online.

The benefits of the Internet Database include --

* meeting the growing needs of many of the users of BJS and NIJ
crime and justice data  

* providing a new resource of information that will permit users
to see trends on a jurisdictional basis 

* expanding services to BJS and NIJ customers.

-------------------------------------------------------
Statistics on the length of stay for prison population
-------------------------------------------------------

With funding from the OJP Corrections Program Office, BJS will
track the sentence length and projected length of stay for
prison admission cohorts as well as the elapsed time served and
projected time to be served by the standing prison population in
States receiving funds through the Violent Offender
Incarceration and Truth-in-Sentencing grant programs.  Key
elements will include offender characteristics, most serious
offense, admission type, maximum sentence length, elapsed time
served, and expected length of stay.  

BJS will use its ongoing National Corrections Reporting Program
(NCRP) to collect and analyze individual records of persons
admitted and released from prison in selected States.  Based on
results of the ongoing Inventory of State and Federal
Correctional Information Systems, the NCRP data series will be
enhanced to include better admissions cohort data.  Prison
release data will also be used to recalibrate projected time to
be served based on time actually served by released offenders.
It is expected that BJS will publish findings by yearend 1999.

-----------------------------------
Recidivism study
-----------------------------------

With funding from the OJP Corrections Program Office and the
FBI, BJS will conduct the first national followup study of
prisoners in 16 years. The study will develop a sample of State
prison releases with oversampling of violent offenders,
particularly those offenders convicted of sexual assault crimes
and crimes against children.  Followups would be carried out
through State and Federal criminal history records for 3 years.  

The most recent national study of post-prison recidivism
conducted by BJS followed for 3 years a sample of offenders
drawn to represent 109,000 prisoners discharged from prisons in
11 States in 1983.  Two areas where recent recidivism data are
particularly needed are for sex offenders and those who
victimize children. Methods to be used for carrying out the
proposed 1998 recidivism study will be far superior to those
employed in the 1983 study due to the substantial improvements
that have been made in the criminal history records
infrastructure under the National Criminal History Improvement
Program (NCHIP) and other Federal initiatives. The sample will
be supplemented with arrestees who are not imprisoned, so that
comparative recidivism statistics can be generated at a future
time. To the maximum extent possible, automated records will be
utilized to track the national sample and will facilitate
analyses of post-prison mobility across States as well as
provide much more complete knowledge of the adjudication of new
arrest offenses.  

-----------------------------------
Ongoing BJS statistical series 
and programs

Crimes and victims 
-----------------------------------

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is the Nation's
second largest ongoing household survey. The NCVS provides data
on the number of rapes, sexual assaults, robberies, assaults,
thefts, household burglaries, and motor vehicle thefts
experienced by U.S. residents age 12 or older and their
households each year.

* In 1996 U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced
approximately 36.8 million crimes. Twenty-seven million (74%)
were property crimes, 9.1 million (25%) were crimes of violence,
and (1%) were personal thefts.

* Murders, as measured by law enforcement data provided to the
FBI's Uniform Crime Reports, were the least frequent violent
victimization -- about 7 murder victims per 100,000 persons in
1996.

* In 1996 for every 1,000 persons age 12 or older, there
occurred --

          -- 1 rape or sexual assault
          -- 2 assaults with serious injury
          -- 5 robberies.

Initiated in 1972 and redesigned in 1992, the NCVS is the
Nation's primary source of information on crime victimization
and the victims of crime. It is the only national crime measure
that includes both those crimes that people experience but do
not report to law enforcement authorities and those that they do
report. The survey redesign incorporated many important changes
to the questionnaire, including the following: additional ways
to help survey participants recall incidents; more direct
questions on rape, sexual assault, and other sexual crimes; and
new questions to measure victimizations by nonstrangers,
including domestic violence. 

During a collection year, data are obtained in 6-month intervals
from a nationally representative sample of roughly 50,000
households, comprising more than 100,000 persons, on the impact,
frequency, and consequences of criminal victimization in the
United States. The survey enables BJS to estimate the likelihood
of victimization by rape, robbery, assault, larceny, household
larceny, household burglary, or motor vehicle theft for segments
of the population such as the elderly, city dwellers, or other
groups. The NCVS is the only national forum for victims to
describe consequences of crime and the characteristics of
violent offenders. Reports in fiscal year 1998 include Violence
by Intimates (NCJ 167237), March 1998, Violent Crime
Victimization in the Workplace, 1992-96 (NCJ 168634) to be
released in the spring 1998, and Injuries from Crime, 1992-95
(NCJ 168633) with joint publication with the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.

Recent reports --

Criminal Victimization 1996: Changes 1995-96 
with Trends 1993-96
     released 11/97 (NCJ 165812)
Sex Differences in Violent Victimization, 1994
     released 9/97 (NCJ 164508)
Age Patterns of Victims of Serious Violent Crime
     released  9/97 (NCJ 162031)

-------------------------------------------------------
City-level victimization and citizen attitude surveys
-------------------------------------------------------

Working in partnership with the Community Oriented Policing
Services (COPS) Office, BJS is conducting city-level
victimization surveys in 12 cities which will provide a unique
city-based dataset to examine attitudes toward community
policing activities, perceptions of crime, police-public contact
and characteristics of victimizations by crime. The U.S. Bureau
of the Census began conducting the survey fieldwork in February
1998 in the following 12 cities: Chicago, IL; Knoxville, TN;
Kansas City, MO; Los Angeles, CA; Madison, WI; New York, NY; San
Diego, CA; Savannah, GA; Spokane, WA; Springfield, MA; Tucson,
AZ; and Washington, DC. The data will also provide a better
understanding of the impact of different community policing
strategies. The COPS office provided funds for data collection
in 10 cities. NIJ sponsored the city survey in Washington, DC,
as part of its research support to the DC Revitalization
Initiative.

-----------------------------------
Software for local surveys
-----------------------------------
BJS is developing a software program using a popular personal
computer database for localities to conduct their own telephone
surveys of residents to collect data on crime victimization,
attitudes toward policing, and other community-related issues.
Using this user-friendly version of the Crime Victimization
Survey, localities can quickly design a questionnaire to reflect
local interests while maintaining a standard core of NCVS
questions.  When completed and tested, the software will be made
available at no charge to the criminal justice community.

-----------------------------------
School crime
-----------------------------------

BJS and the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
collaborated to add a special supplement to the NCVS to collect
data on aspects of school crime. Household members age 12 or
older who attended school were asked questions about their
school environment. These data represent an estimated 22 million
students, age 12 to 19. Information was obtained on availability
of drugs at school, existence of street gangs, prevalence of
gang fights, presence of guns at school, victimizations, and
fear of being attacked or harmed. 

A joint BJS-NCES report entitled Students' Reports of School
Crime: 1989 and 1995, summarizing these findings was released in
April 1998  and will be a component of this year's  Report to
the President on School Crime and Safety. The report on school
crime and safety, using data from the 1995 NCVS School Crime
Supplement and other sources from the Department of Education,
will provide statistics on school crime; examples of model safe
and drug free schools; model programs and strategies to create
safe schools; an overview of available state and local data; and
steps that school officials, community members, including
parents and students can take to ensure that their schools are
safe. 

-----------------------------------
Hospital Emergency Department Statistics 
on Intentional Violence 
-----------------------------------

BJS recently published the first-ever national data on
intentional violence, including domestic violence, rape, and
child abuse, from a national sample of hospital emergency
departments. Through the Consumer Product Safety Commission's
(CPSC) National Electronic Injury Surveillance System,
information was collected on intentional injuries treated in
hospital emergency rooms in 1994. Data include characteristics
of the victim and perpetrator, victim-perpetrator relationship,
alcohol/drug involvement in the incident, and a description of
the circumstances of the injury.

Violence-Related Injuries Treated in Hospital Emergency
Departments, (NCJ 156921) released in August 1997, reports that
a higher percentage of women than men were treated for injuries
inflicted by an intimate -- a current or former spouse,
boyfriend, or girlfriend. Men were more likely than women to be
treated for injuries caused by nonrelatives -- acquaintances and
strangers. 

-----------------------------------
Measuring crime on campus
-----------------------------------

BJS and NIJ jointly sponsored a baseline study on campus sexual
assault, as required by the Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act of 1994. The survey that was carried out by the
University of Cincinnati in spring 1997 collected sexual
victimization data from a national sample of women enrolled at
U.S. post-secondary institutions. Findings from this study are
expected to be released in summer 1998. The BJS component of the
study used an adapted NCVS questionnaire. 

BJS also has recent data available from a survey of campus law
enforcement agencies. This study found that among 4-year schools
with 2,500 or more students, an average of about 7 serious
violent crimes (murder, forcible sexual assault, robbery, and
aggravated assault) and about 256 property crimes occurred per
year. 

-------------------------------------------------------
Research projects on crime and victims
-------------------------------------------------------

BJS works with the American Statistical Association (ASA) to
address specific issues of mutual interest and involve the
broader statistical community in issues relevant to justice
statistics. BJS provides funding to ASA for technical advice and
analysis of substantive and methodological issues.

BJS, in conjunction with ASA, is sponsoring the following
research projects --

Effects of Interview Conditions on Rape and Domestic Violence
Reporting: Are Adjustments Needed in the Rede-sign? The
University of South Carolina is examining the use of statistical
modeling to estimate the annual incidence rates of rape and
domestic violence adjusting for conditions under which the
redesigned National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) was
conducted.

Repeat Victimized Individuals and Households: Hierarchical
Modeling of the 1994 National Crime Victimization Survey The
University of Hull, United Kingdom, is conducting an effort to
(1) expand the understanding of repeat victimization for
effective crime prevention and (2) develop a statistical tool
which will recognize the complex interactions between
individuals and their environment and behavior as they relate to
the victimizations.

The Sexual Assault of Young Children: Incident, Victim and
Offender Profiling Using NIBRS Data The National Center for
Juvenile Justice is utilizing National Incident-Based Reporting
System (NIBRS) data files to describe the characteristics of
youthful victims of sexual assault. The characteristics of the
incident including place of occurrence, time of occurrence,
characteristics of the offender, and victim-offender
relationship will be examined.

-----------------------------------
Criminal offenders
-----------------------------------

BJS collects data about criminal offenders, particularly those
serving time in prison or jail. Frequent statistical analyses of
various national datasets describe offenders committing
particular types of offenses, such as violent offenses,
victimization of children, and sex offenses.

For example --

* If recent incarceration rates remain unchanged, an estimated 1
of every 20 persons (5.1%) will serve time in a prison during
their lifetime.

* Lifetime chances of a person going to prison are higher for --
    -- men (9%) than for women (1.1%)
    -- blacks (16.2%) and Hispanics (9.4%) than for whites (2.5%).

* An estimated 18.6% of inmates serving time in State prisons in
1991 for violent crimes, or about 61,000 offenders nationwide,
had been convicted of a crime against a victim under age 18.

* 1 in 5 violent offenders serving time in a State prison
reported having victimized a child.

* An estimated 24% of those serving time for rape and 19% of
those serving time for sexual assault had been on probation or
parole at the time of the offense for which they were in State
prison in 1991.

* Four datasets (the FBI's UCR arrests, State felony court
convictions, prison admissions, and the NCVS) all point to a sex
offender who is older than other violent offenders -- generally
in his early thirties -- and more likely to be white than other
violent offenders.

BJS data collection programs, primarily related to corrections
and courts and sentencing, provide a wealth of information on
demographic characteristics of offenders, criminal histories,
arrest offenses, criminal case processing, and sentencing, as
well as data on offenders' drug and alcohol use, victims, and
familial and economic backgrounds.
Recent reports --

Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or Federal Prison
     released 3/97 (NCJ 160092)
Sex Offenses and Offenders: An Analysis of Data on Rape
and Sexual Assault
     released 2/97 (NCJ 163392)

-----------------------------------
The justice system

Law enforcement
-----------------------------------

BJS collects data about Federal, State, and local law 
enforcement agencies and their activities.

     Recent findings include -- 

* As of June 1996, Federal agencies employed about 74,500
full-time personnel authorized to make arrests and carry
firearms. Of all Federal law enforcement officers, 14% were
women and 28% were members of a racial or ethnic minority.

*  In 1993, there were more than 17,000 State and local law
enforcement agencies in the United States.  Approximately 21
full-time local police officers were employed for every 10,000
residents served.

*  In 1995, BJS surveyed campus law enforcement agencies serving
4-year universities and colleges with 2,500 or more students and
found that more than 9 in 10 public institutions used sworn
police officers, compared to less than half of the private
institutions.

The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey, collects data from over 3,000 agencies,
including all those that employ 100 or more sworn officers and a
nationally representative sample of smaller agencies. Data are
obtained on the organization and administration of police and
sheriffs' departments, agency responsibilities, operating
expenditures, job functions of sworn and civilian employees,
officer salaries and special pay, demographic characteristics of
officers, weapons and armor policies, education and training
requirements, computers and information systems, vehicles,
special units, drug enforcement activities, and employee drug
testing policies.  Preliminary findings from the 1997 LEMAS are
expected by yearend 1998.

Community Policing Supplement to LEMAS Survey, an enhancement to
the BJS Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey sponsored by the COPS office, collected
information from law enforcement agencies about their community
policing activities. The enhanced survey, for the first time,
gathered information on community policing units, training
activities, and policies related to community policing. Results
from this data collection will be available in the summer of
1998.

Survey of Campus Law Enforcement Agencies, conducted for the
first time in 1995, collects data from campus law enforcement
agencies from 4-year U.S. universities or colleges that had
2,500 or more students. The data collected describe agencies in
terms of their personnel, expenditures and pay, operations,
equipment, computers and information systems, policies, and
special programs. Findings are available in Campus Law
Enforcement Agencies, 1995 (NCJ 161137) released December 1996.

Police use of force data collection is the only official
collaborative source of information on this topic. In November
1997, BJS and NIJ released the second annual report to the
Congress as required by the Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act of 1994. The report, Police Use of Force,
Collection of National Data, presents findings of a pilot survey
on police-public contacts, conducted by BJS in 1996 as a
supplement to the NCVS. The survey, collecting data from 6,421
residents age 12 or older, provides preliminary estimates of the
prevalence of citizen contacts with the police, including
contacts in which police use force. Findings of the 1996 pilot
study include:

*  One in five U.S. residents had some face-to-face contact with
police annually.

*  About 1% of those who came in contact said police used force
or threatened to use force against them, although a majority of
those respondents said their own actions may have provoked the
police.

In 1998 a 2-year project sponsored jointly by BJS and NIJ with
the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) to
develop uniform data collection standards and electronic
software for local police departments to collect police use of
force data will be completed. To meet the 1998 reporting
requirements, NIJ will produce the annual report for release in
late 1998, presenting findings from NIJ's research portfolio on
police use of force and will include a full description of the
IACP use-of-force project activities.

Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies provides
national data on all State and local law enforcement agencies.
Data collected include the number of full-time versus part-time
employees, and the number of sworn versus non-sworn employees.
In May 1998 current data will be available and published in the
Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, 1996 (NCJ
164618).

Census of Federal Law Enforcement Officers, conducted by BJS in
1993 and 1996, obtains data on Federal law enforcement officers
with arrest and firearms authority. The data describe job
function, sex, race, and primary State of employment. Current
data are available in the recently released Federal Law
Enforcement Officers, 1996 (NCJ  164617).

--------------------------------------------
Study of NIBRS implementation by law 
enforcement agencies
--------------------------------------------

BJS and the FBI will continue efforts as part of a comprehensive
project designed to assess the status of incident-based
reporting among law enforcement agencies and address the
impediments to implementing the National Incident-Based
Reporting System (NIBRS). During the initial phase of the
project, SEARCH, the National Consortium for Justice Information
and Statistics, under the joint direction of BJS, the FBI, and
the NIBRS implementation steering committee, conducted a study
which identified the impediments facing local law enforcement
agencies in implementing incident-based reporting. Based on
these findings, recommendations were developed by the steering
committee and unanimously endorsed by the FBI's Criminal Justice
Information Systems Advisory Policy Board.  

In 1998, SEARCH will be undertaking a multi-stage effort to
systematically address the priority impediments and to implement
key recommendations developed by the steering committee. This
will include demonstrating how local agencies can or are using
NIBRS data at the local level for crime analysis, resource
allocation, and other purposes; assess technical issues relating
to data elements, software, and data input; and provide
technical assistance to local agencies in records system
upgrades and NIBRS implementation.  

BJS and the FBI are currently working on a project to develop a
cost matrix for implementing a modern records management system
with NIBRS costs identified at different levels of automation
and for different sizes of law enforcement agencies. The matrix
will include the estimated gross costs of implementing the
automated records management system while identifying the NIBRS
component costs.

-----------------------------------
Prosecution
-----------------------------------

BJS collects data on State and Federal prosecutors and the cases
they prosecute.

For example --

* In 1994, 2,343 State court prosecutors' offices employed about
65,000 attorneys, investigators, and support staff: The total
number represented a 14% increase from 1992. 

* About 70% of the Nation's chief prosecutors occupied full-time
positions. Sixty-one percent of all offices had at least one
full-time assistant attorney.

* In about a quarter of all offices, the chief prosecutor or
assistant prosecutors carried a firearm for personal security.

* Among prosecutors' offices handling juvenile cases, almost
two-thirds reported transferring at least one juvenile case to
criminal court in 1994.

National Survey of Prosecutors collects data on resources,
policies, and practices of local prosecutors from a nationally
representative sample of chief prosecutors who handle felony
cases in State courts. The survey obtains basic information on
staffing and operations and collects data on current topics such
as the use of innovative prosecution techniques, intermediate
sanctions, and work-related assaults and threats. The latest
published findings are available in Prosecutors in State Courts,
1994 (NCJ 151656). 

Results from an analysis of State court prosecutors' handling of
juveniles proceeded against in criminal court are available in
Juveniles Prosecuted in State Criminal Courts (NCJ 164265).

-----------------------------------
Courts and sentencing
-----------------------------------

BJS collects data about the Nation's court systems, including
information about both civil and criminal courts, the cases
brought, and their outcomes. 

For example --

* State courts convicted about 872,200 adults of a felony in
1994, an increase of 31% over 6 years. Among offenses,
convictions for aggravated assault and drug trafficking had
increased the most.

* The number of noncitizens prosecuted in the Federal system
increased three-fold between 1984 and 1995. The increase in the
number of noncitizens prosecuted was primarily the result of an
increase in the number charged with drug offenses.

* At the Federal level, 47,556 defendants were convicted in 1995
-- an increase of 9% over 7 years. The number of defendants
convicted of drug and weapons offenses increased the most.

* Seventy-one percent of those convicted at the State level in
1994 were sentenced to incarceration. More than 77% of those
convicted at the Federal level were sentenced to incarceration.

* About two-thirds of all defendants had been arrested
previously, with 39% having at least five prior arrest charges.
Fifty-six percent of defendants had a felony arrest record,
including 63% of burglary defendants.

National Judicial Reporting Program, conducted every 2 years,
surveys a nationwide sample of felony trial courts in collecting
detailed information on demographic characteristics of felons,
conviction offenses, type of sentences, sentence lengths, and
amount of time from arrest to conviction and sentencing.

Recent and forthcoming reports include --

State Court Sentencing of Convicted Felons, 1994
     released 3/98 (NCJ 164614) 
Felony Sentences in the United States, 1994
            released 8/97 (NCJ 165149)  
Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1994
            released 1/97 (NCJ 163391)

State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) provides data on the
criminal justice processing of persons charged with felonies in
40 jurisdictions representative of the 75 largest counties.
These counties account for about half the serious crime
nationwide. The program tracks felony defendants from charging
by the prosecutor until disposition of their cases or for a
maximum of 12 months. Data are obtained on demographic
characteristics, arrest offense(s), criminal justice status at
time of arrest, prior arrests and convictions, bail and pretrial
releases, decisions, court appearance record, re-arrests while
on pretrial release, type and outcome of adjudication, and type
and length of sentence if convicted.  Findings from the 1994
data collection were released in January 1998 in Felony
Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 1994 (NCJ 164616).

Survey of Civil Trial Cases in State Courts collects civil trial
caseload data for a 1-year period from a sample of counties
representative of the Nation's 75 largest counties. Data include
case type, outcome, jury awards, type of parties, legal
representation, and dates of filing and disposition. BJS will
conduct a survey of State courts in 1998. 

Latest findings are reported in --

Civil Justice Survey of State Courts, 1992, CD-ROM 
     released 7/96 (NCJ 157771)
Contract Cases in Large Counties: Civil Justice Survey 
of State Courts, 1992 
     released 2/96 (NCJ 156664)
Civil Jury Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties: Civil 
Justice Survey of State Courts, 1992 
     released 7/95 (NCJ 154346)
Tort Cases in Large Counties: Civil Justice Survey of State
Courts, 1992
      released 4/95 (NCJ 153177)

Criminal Case-Tracking System for Tribal Jurisdictions Program
is designed to supplement data collected as part of the National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) with data collected by
the tribal courts. The case tracking will allow for better
managed criminal justice resources and enhanced justice
decisionmaking. Using the integrated system, tribal
jurisdictions could track violent offenders, domestic abuse
cases, the impact of drug testing, and probation and other forms
of supervised release. 

With support from the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) Local
Law Enforcement Block Grant Program, and with the cooperation of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), Department of Interior, BJS
selected two tribal jurisdictions in FY 1997 to develop and
implement an automated criminal case-tracking system. This pilot
project is expected to take up to 18 months to implement. When
the prototype has been developed and tested by the demonstration
sites, the BIA will make the system available to all interested
tribes.

The Federal Justice Statistics series provides annual data on
workload, activities, and case outcomes in the Federal criminal
justice system. Information is reported on all aspects of
processing in the Federal justice system, including the number
of persons investigated, prosecuted, convicted, incarcerated,
sentenced to probation, released pretrial, and under parole or
other supervision; initial prosecution decisions; referrals to
magistrates; court dispositions; sentencing outcomes; sentence
length; and time served.

Beginning in 1997 BJS expanded the Federal Justice Statistics
program to include statistics describing the processing of civil
cases of the Federal courts -- including tort trials and civil
rights petitions filed by Federal and State inmates.

Data are acquired from the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys,
the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (which provides
data describing the Federal criminal and civil dockets,
appellate dockets, pretrial services, and probation and parole),
the U.S. Sentencing Commission, and the Federal Bureau of
Prisons.

Under the leadership of BJS, a coordinating committee comprising
the Federal criminal justice agencies was formed. The committee
discusses issues related to the collection of data describing
the Federal criminal justice system and the reporting of Federal
criminal case processing statistics.

With the support of this coordinating committee, beginning in FY
1998, BJS will annually publish Federal Case Processing
Statistics. This report will supplement each agency's annual
statistical report and highlight specific aspects of the Federal
criminal justice system as well as describe significant trends
in Federal criminal case processing. The statistics produced
will be tabulated according to procedures agreed upon by each
participating agency.

Recent and forthcoming reports include --

Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1994 
     released 4/98 (NCJ 163063) 
Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1995 
     released 4/98 (NCJ 164259)
Federal Tort Trials and Verdicts, 1994-95
     released 1/98 (NCJ 165810)
Juveniles Delinquents in the Federal Criminal Justice System
     released 1/97 (NCJ 163066)

Survey of State Court Organization, conducted by the National
Center for State Courts, provides basic descriptive information
relating to the Nation's State court systems. 

Information is collected on the following --

* trial courts -- the role of grand juries, peremptory jury
challenges, jury verdict rules
* appellate courts -- case selection, expedited 
procedures 
* governance of court systems -- budgets, administration
* judges and judicial selection -- number of judges, mandatory
judicial
* education processing of criminal cases -- felony definition,
mandatory minimum sentences and habitual offender sentencing
provisions. 

This data collection will be conducted again in 1998. Latest
published data are available in State Court Organization, 1993
(NCJ 148346). 

National Survey of Indigent Defense Systems Program
BJS, in partnership with BJA, will develop, test, and implement
a national level data collection program to measure the way in
which States and localities provide legal services for indigent
defendants, their caseload levels, related costs, policies, and
practices. Court-appointed legal representation plays a critical
role in the Nation's justice system. Much has changed over the
past decade as States and local defender systems are relying
more on contract and private services. The National Indigent
Defense Survey will assist in developing a better understanding
of the changing nature of public defender services in the United
States. Data collection is scheduled to begin in the summer of
1998.

----------------------------
Corrections
----------------------------

BJS collects data about the Nation's correctional system,
including information about prisoners and correctional
facilities and agencies.

For example --

* State and Federal prisons held about 1.2 million prisoners at
midyear 1997.

* Local jails held or supervised about 637,000 adults who were
awaiting trial or serving a sentence at midyear 1997.

* 5.5 million people were on probation, in jail or prison, or on
parole at yearend 1996, nearly 2.8% of all U.S. adult residents.

The correctional system of the United States includes a range of
agencies and populations. Adequate statistical accounts of the
extent and nature of the system require diverse reporting
programs --

* annual counts and characteristics of persons entering 
or exiting probation or parole 
* annual and midyear counts of incarcerated persons 
in State or Federal prisons or local jails
* annual statistics on persons admitted or released 
from State or Federal prisons and on persons released 
from parole supervision
* annual counts and characteristics of persons 
sentenced to death
* periodic surveys of national samples of prison and jail
inmates and adult probationers 
* periodic censuses of State and local correctional facilities
and parole and probation agencies.

Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities
provides detailed data on individual characteristics of prison
inmates, current offenses and sentences, characteristics of
victims, criminal histories, family background, gun possession
and use, prior drug and alcohol use and treatment, and
educational programs and other services provided while in
prison. In 1997 BJS conducted the survey with personal
interviews of a nationally representative sample of about 14,300
State prison inmates and 4,000 Federal inmates in about 275
State prisons and 40 Federal prisons.  This effort represents
the fifth in a series of national surveys of inmates conducted
every 5 to 6 years. Findings from the 1997 survey are expected
to released early 1999. 

Survey of Inmates in Local Jails is periodically administered to
collect data on the local jail inmate population that includes
persons who belong to all parts of the criminal justice
continuum: those awaiting trial, those sentenced to jail and
serving their sentence, and those sentenced to prison and
awaiting transfer. The survey obtains information on the
personal and family characteristics of jail inmates, past drug
and alcohol use, history of physical abuse, and history of
contact with the criminal justice system. 

BJS findings from the 1996 survey, which consists of personal
interviews with a nationally representative sample of 6,100
inmates, will be reported in Profile of Jail Inmates, 1996 (NCJ
167247) to be released in April of 1998. 

Census of State and Local Probation and Parole Agencies, last
conducted in 1991, is a complete census of Federal, State, and
locally operated probation and parole agencies. The census
gathers data on staffing, expenditures, program operation and
participation levels, and drug and HIV testing policies and
programs. The census serves as the sampling frame for the
national Survey of Adults on Probation.

Survey of Adults on Probation in 1995 obtained for the first
time detailed information on the backgrounds and characteristics
of a national sample of probationers representative of the 3
million adults under supervision in the community. Specific
areas of inquiry include criminal history, prior drug and
alcohol use, participation in drug and alcohol treatment
programs, use of firearms, victim characteristics, the
conditions of supervision, and the extent of contact with
probation authorities. 

Initial findings from the survey, based on the administrative
records of 5,867 probationers in 167 probation departments, were
released in Characteristics of Adults on Probation, 1995 (NCJ
164267) in December 1997. BJS is currently analyzing data from
approximately 2,000 personal interviews with adult probationers,
with the first report to be based on these data, Substance Abuse
and Treatment of Adults on Probation, 1995, (NCJ 166611)
released for March 1998.

Census of State and Federal Adult Correctional Facilities is
conducted every 5 to 6 years, providing detailed information on
the types of inmates housed, facility age and type, security
level, court orders, programs, health and safety conditions,
confinement space, and staff characteristics. The latest data
were published in August 1997 in Census of State and Federal
Correctional Facilities, 1995 (NCJ 164266).

Census of Jails is conducted every 5 years, obtaining
information on each facility, admissions and releases, court
orders, programs that offer alternatives to incarceration,
amount charged to hold an inmate for another jurisdiction,
crowding and use of space, staffing, health care (including
prevalence of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis), and drug testing
policies and practices. The census furnishes the sampling frame
for the nationwide survey of jail inmates. A new data collection
will start in 1999.

Annual Survey of Jails collects data that permit intercensal
estimates of the number of inmates in the Nation's local jails
and data on the relationship between jail populations and
capacities. Information is provided on an annual basis starting
in 1982, excluding the years 1983, 1988, and 1993, in which a
complete census of U.S. local jails was conducted. The latest
data are available in the report Prison and Jail Inmates at
Midyear, 1997 (NCJ 167247) released in January 1998.

The National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program produces annual
and semiannual national and State-level data on the numbers of
prisoners in State or Federal prison facilities.  Since 1926 the
Federal Government has published data annually on the prisoner
count in each State, the District of Columbia, and the Federal
prison system. 

A recent Bulletin, HIV in Prisons and Jails, (NCJ 164260)
released in August 1997 reports that in 1995, 1,010 State
inmates died of AIDS-related causes, up from 955 in 1994.  For
every 100,000 State inmates in 1995, 100 died of AID-related
causes. Between 1991 and 1995 about 1 in 3 inmate deaths were
attributable to AIDS-related causes.

Other reports or releases include --

Substance Abuse and Treatment of Adults 
on Probation, 1995
     released 3/98 (NCJ 166611)
Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear, 1997   
     released 1/98 (NCJ 167247)
Characteristics of Adults on Probation, 1995
     released 12/97 (NCJ 164267)
Prisoners in 1996
     released 6/97 (NCJ 164619)
Profile of Jail Inmates, 1996
     released 4/98 (NCJ 164620)
Correctional Populations in the United States, 1995, 
     released 6/97 (NCJ 163916)

National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) collects data
annually on all prison admissions and releases and on all parole
entries and discharges in participating jurisdictions.
Demographic information, conviction offense, sentence length,
minimum time to be served, credited jail time, type of
admission, type of release, and time served are collected from
individual prisoner records.

Recent NCRP data suggest that the actual time served by State
prisoners is increasing. The Bulletin, Prisoners in 1996, (NCJ
164619) reported that State prisoners released for the first
time on their current offense served on average 24 months in
prison and 5 months in jail in 1995, up from 20 months in prison
in 1985.

Capital Punishment series yields annual national and State-level
data on persons sentenced to death and those executed. Data
collected include offender demographic characteristics, prior
criminal history, criminal justice system status at the time of
the capital offense, and time spent on death row. Data are
available on executions since 1930 and on sentencing since 1974.
The latest data were reported in Capital Punishment 1996,
released 12/97 (NCJ 167031).
 
National Probation and Parole Reporting Program gathers annual
data on local, State, and Federal probation and parole counts
and movements, and the characteristics of persons under the
supervision of probation and parole agencies. BJS staff collects
and analyzes these data, using survey forms completed by
Federal, State and local probation and parole agencies.
Published data include admissions and releases by method of
entry and discharge. 

The latest data available are in a press release describing the
1996 probation and parole populations, released 8/97 (NCJ
166364). Also, detailed data by jurisdictions are published in
the Correctional Populations in the United States, 1995 (NCJ
163916). 

Inventory of State and Federal Corrections Information Systems
is a survey that BJS conducted in collaboration with the OJP
Corrections Program Office. This survey of State and Federal
corrections agencies built a data inventory on offender
profiles, recidivism, program effectiveness, internal order,
public safety, and operational costs. In addition, on behalf of
BJS, the Urban Institute conducted short, unstructured telephone
interviews with each correctional agency to obtain general
information about the organization, structure, and capacity of
the information systems. The final report, expected in summer
1998, will summarize the results of the capacity survey and
inventory.

-----------------------------------
Expenditure and employment 
-----------------------------------

BJS collects expenditure and employment data about the Nation's
criminal justice system. 

For example --

* In fiscal 1992 Federal, State, and local governments spent $94
billion for civil and criminal justice, a 59% increase over
1987. For every resident, the three levels of government
together spent $368.

* 3.8 cents of every government dollar went for  justice
activities, including police protection, jails or prisons, and
the courts.

* In fiscal 1992 the Federal Government spent 14.4% of all
justice dollars, while the State and local governments combined
spent the rest.

* Spending for corrections increased 79.3% from 1987 to 1992,
faster than judicial and legal (67.2%) and police (43.7%).

The Criminal Justice Expenditure and Employment Program
collects, analyzes, and publishes data on the cost of operating
the Nation's criminal justice systems. Using data extracted from
the Census Bureau's ongoing finance and employment survey
series, BJS produces national estimates of expenditures and
employment relating to major criminal justice activities,
including police protection, judicial (including courts,
prosecution, legal services, and public defense), and
corrections. The latest data are available in Justice
Expenditure and Employment Extracts, 1992, released 1/97 (NCJ
148821). The 1993 extracts are expected to be published in the
spring of 1998.

-----------------------------------
Firearms and crime
-----------------------------------

BJS has published a series of reports on firearms, crime, and
criminal justice using several collections of national data,  
including: Guns Used in Crime:  Firearms, Crime, and Criminal
Justice (NCJ  148201), Weapons Offenses and Offenders S
Firearms, Crime, and Criminal Justice: Selected Findings (NCJ
155284), and Firearm Injury from Crime:  Firearms, Crime, and
Criminal Justice (NCJ 160093).

During 1998 BJS intends to continue the series with a report on
where criminals obtained guns and how they used the guns in
crimes. This report will use data from the recently released
Survey of Adults on Probation, as well as several earlier
collections, including the 1991 Survey of Inmates in State and
Federal Correctional Facilities, and the weapons addendum to
NIJ's Drug Use Forecasting System. These sources cover people
who are arrested for crimes as well as those on probation or in
prison.

-----------------------------------
International statistics
-----------------------------------

Through the International Statistics Program BJS cooperates with
the United Nations and with other countries in efforts to
improve the international collection of statistics on crime and
criminal justice systems so that cross-national comparisons can
be made and the relationship between crime trends in the United
States and in other countries can be examined.

BJS also funds international studies that compare aspects of the
U.S. criminal justice system with those of other countries.  In
1997 a study was done comparing prosecution in the United States
and Germany. These findings are published in German and American
Prosecutions: An Approach to Statistical Comparison (NCJ
166610). 

In the summer of 1998, BJS will release findings from a study
comparing crime rates in England and the U.S. from 1981-1995.
Information will also be presented on how the two countries=
justice systems respond to crimes.

The World Factbook of Criminal Justice Systems, developed under
a BJS grant and available electronically through the BJS
Internet site, provides narrative descriptions of the criminal
justice systems of countries around the world. These
descriptions are written to a common template so that
comparisons of similar functions in different countries can be
easily made.

-----------------------------------
General criminal justice statistics 
-----------------------------------

BJS produces a number of statistical documents and other
products that cover more than one criminal justice topic.

Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, first published in
1972, is compiled annually from more than 150 separate sources,
presented with minimal text and extensive tables. Almost all
data are nationwide in scope and, where possible, are displayed
by region, State, and city for comparative analyses. The
Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics can be accessed online
at http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook and is updated as new
information becomes available.

Criminal Justice Agency Survey List is an updated listing of
various State and local jurisdictions and criminal justice
agencies from which sample surveys are selected. 

----------------------------------------
State Justice Statistics Program for 
Statistical Analysis Centers 
----------------------------------------

BJS offers technical and financial support to State governments
for the establishment and operation of State-level Statistical
Analysis Centers (SACs) to collect, analyze, and report
statistics on crime and justice to Federal, State, and local
levels of government and to share State-level information
nationally. 

Under the State Justice Statistics Program, SACs analyze
particular criminal justice issues identified by BJS in
conjunction with other OJP components. These issues are selected
for nationwide consistency and interest across the States and
change every 12 months. In 1998, the Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention will sponsor juvenile justice related
research to be conducted by the SACs. BJS is also encouraging
SACs to collect and analyze data derived from sex offender
registries, criminal history record information, incident-based
crime data, and to conduct research and analyses related to
other themes described in the FY 1998 program announcement.
Detailed program and application guidelines are available in
State Justice Statistics Program for Statistical Analysis
Centers: Program Application Guidelines, Fiscal Year 1998, to be
released in April 1998.

Through the Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA),
BJS offers technical assistance to the State SACs in the
development, collection, analysis, use, and dissemination of
criminal justice statistics. JRSA was organized in 1974 by the
directors of the State SACs. The association was formed to
promote cooperation and the exchange of information, statistics,
and technology among States. In providing technical and liaison
services to the SACs for BJS, JRSA maintains a criminal justice
information clearinghouse; provides an automated Database of
State Activities and Research; and conducts an annual conference
on justice statistics, research, and policy analysis. 

------------------------------------------
Visiting Research Fellowship Program
------------------------------------------

The Visiting Research Fellowship Program promotes criminal
justice statistical research among the academic and professional
criminal justice community. Visiting Fellows participate in a
specifically designed research project of particular operational
relevance to the national or international justice system. The
fellowship program offers criminal justice researchers an
opportunity to have a significant impact on specific BJS
projects as well as a chance to examine innovative approaches to
the analysis and dissemination of BJS data.

Ongoing and new fellowship projects --

The measurement of assaultive behavior -- Murder and aggravated
assault rates sometimes vary enormously from one city to the
next. A suspected reason is differences between police
departments in their record keeping practices. For example, a
particular incident that one department classifies as "simple"
assault might be classified as "aggravated" assault by another.
This project analyzes data from the FBI's newly available
National Incident-Based Reporting System to investigate whether
such inconsistencies in record keeping help explain some of the
variation in crime rates observed in the FBI's Uniform Crime
Reports.

Innovative graphical methods for presenting criminal justice
data -- Tabular presentation of criminal justice data is
sometimes difficult to comprehend. This project experiments with
different ways of presenting criminal justice data graphically
to facilitate understanding. For example, a margin of error
surrounds all estimates from sample surveys. One of the goals of
this grant is to come up with a graphical presentation of such
error margins so that their implications are more readily
understood.

Demonstrating the utility of incident-based data -- A slowly
growing number of police departments across the Nation is
adopting a new system for keeping records on crime. The National
Incident-Based Reporting System produces larger amounts of data
on crime than previously existed. The benefits of this new
system over the old will become clear as researchers gain access
to these data and demonstrate their value. This project is
devoted to making these data more easily accessible to
researchers.

-----------------------------------
Criminal record systems
-----------------------------------

BJS supports several programs aimed at improving criminal
records. Criminal history records are fingerprint cards or their
electronic counterparts, linked with information about arrests,
convictions and sentences when available. Records are
inaccessible electronically to other States if they are not
automated or if a State does not participate in the national
system referred to as the Interstate Identification Index. 

Records without dispositions delay inquiries and handicap law
enforcement. The records are used in identifying individuals
with a prior conviction and those who are prohibited from
purchasing a firearm, are subject to domestic violence
protective orders, or are ineligible to hold positions of
responsibility involving children, the elderly, or the disabled.
 

* Of the 52 million criminal history records in the United
States, 56% are now accessible nationally -- up from 50% a year
ago.
* Approximately a third of the records are both accessible and
include dispositions, an increase of more than 3 million records
over the past 3 years.

Criminal Records Data Quality Program supports surveys, studies,
conferences, and technical assistance on issues relating to
criminal justice records. The primary emphasis is on accuracy
and completeness of records, limitations on dissemination,
commingling of juvenile and adult records, data auditing
techniques, and the interstate exchange of records. Under this
program the 50-State Survey of Criminal History Information
Systems is conducted, providing information on the policy,
technology, and legislative status of criminal history records.
The third update to the survey, reporting 1995 yearend data, was
released in May 1997. The next survey update describing record
status as of yearend 1997 was initiated in January 1998.

Proceedings from the national conference held in July 1997  on
the impact of recent legislation focusing on sex offenders and
establishment of the National Sex Offender Registry will be
issued in the spring of 1998. 

A task force has also been established jointly with the National
Center for State Courts to identify increased demands for court
data created by recent legislation and to develop protocols to
meet these needs.  

National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP) 
assists States in improving the quality of their criminal
history records and supports the timely development of the
capability to perform adequate criminal background checks.
Availability of complete computerized criminal records is vital
for criminal investigations, prosecutorial charging, sentencing
decisions, correctional supervision and release, and background
checks for those applying for licenses, handgun purchases, and
work involving the safety and well-being of children, the
elderly, and the disabled.

Since NCHIP's inception in FY 1995, BJS has awarded over $162
million to assist States in upgrading criminal records to
support operation of the National Instant Criminal Background
Check System (NICS). Awards have been made to all States and
eligible territories to upgrade records  (including protection
orders) to interface with the national criminal history record
system, and to identify persons convicted of crimes involving
domestic violence, crimes against children, the elderly, and the
disabled; and persons subject to protective orders involving
domestic violence.  Funds also have been awarded to provide
direct technical assistance and evaluation. 

The FY 1998 NCHIP program will focus on ensuring that  States
can fully participate in the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS), which will become operational in
November 1998, and systems are adequately interfaced to ensure
that background checks for noncriminal justice purposes, such as
child and elderly care, are complete and include all relevant
data. 

Specifically, the $45 million appropriated in FY 1998 will
support --

* activities that will enable States to serve as a point of
contact to the Federal NICS system or to otherwise communicate
with the Federal system, including acquisition of equipment and
software, training for personnel, and development and
implementation of procedures.

* States in adopting the recently approved FBI Uniform Data
standards and to develop interfaces between the criminal record
and other related systems such as the State sex offender
registry. This will ensure that complete data is provided in
response to applicant screening inquiries and will permit
statistical analysis based on criminal record data.  

* ongoing efforts to improve record quality, and upgrade and
expand the Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS).

* States= activities in collecting, identifying, and making
available records of arrests, warrants, convictions, and
protective orders relating to stalking and domestic violence; to
date, approximately $10 million of the total $162 million has 
been awarded to 32 States to identify domestic violence offenses and
protection orders.

BJS also continues its efforts initiated in 1997 to establish
and promulgate model standards for definitions and data
collection protocols applicable to data describing domestic
violence and sexual assault. Building on work of the Center for
Disease Control (CDC) and the National Research Council report,
Domestic and Sexual Violence Data Collection, BJS will work with
CDC toward development of compatible data systems for the
routine collection of data on sexual and domestic violence at
the State level. 

For further information on the NCHIP program, refer to National
Criminal History Improvement Program: FY 1997 Program
Announcement (NCJ 165589), released June 1997.  The FY 1998
Program Announcement will be released in spring 1998.  

The National Sex Offender Registry Assistance Program is an
additional component of NCHIP in FY 1998.  (See page 3.)

Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program, a component of NCHIP,
is designed to use relevant statistics to assess the impact of
presale firearm checks, as required under the Brady Act and
related State legislation. The statistical data obtained by BJS
under the program focus on the total number of inquiries related
to firearm purchases, the number of rejections, and the basis
for the rejections. Data are also collected separately
concerning the procedures followed by States and law enforcement
officers in connection with presale checks under both the Brady
Act and related State legislation. 

In February 1997 BJS released Presale Firearm Checks: A National
Estimate (NCJ-162787), which provides a national estimate of the
number of presale background checks conducted in connection with
proposed firearm purchases, the number and percent of
rejections, and the basis for the rejections. The data show that
on average during the 28 months between the effective date of
the Brady Act (February 1994) and June 31, 1996, 6,600 attempted
firearm purchases per month were blocked by the results of the
presale check. The report is designed to permit the reader to
estimate the total rejections to any given date by multiplying
the monthly estimate by the relevant number of months. 

A recent report, Presale Handgun Checks, 1996, (NCJ 165704) was
released in September 1997. It reported that approximately
70,000 of an estimated 2,593,000 applications for handgun
purchases were rejected due to a presale background check during
1996.

-----------------------------------
How to use BJS services

What's available on the Internet 
-----------------------------------

The BJS World Wide Web site is located at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ 

Providing information on the Internet has proven to be the most
efficient way BJS can make its data accessible to those who need
it instantly. BJS information is updated frequently. The BJS web
site presents information by crime and justice topics. Summary
findings, statistical graphics, descriptions of the data
collections, publications, and additional work by BJS staff are
listed under each topic and subtopic. Links are provided to
pages on the BJS site and to external related sites.

Visit these areas on the web site --

What's new at BJS  -- The most recent information from BJS is
highlighted in this section, including announcements,  releases,
solicitations, and the latest data. 

About BJS -- An overview of BJS is provided, describing its
mission and responsibilities, criminal justice areas covered by
data collection programs, grant programs, and dissemination
programs maintained. 

Key facts at a glance -- Small versions of the charts and brief
statements of findings are presented with links to full-size
charts, additional information about the charts and findings,
and the data that support the chart.

Publications -- Electronic versions of many BJS reports are also
available on the Internet. To find the publication you are
interested in, you can look under the appropriate criminal
justice topic on the BJS home page. If you know the name of the
publication, go to the publications list, which is in
alphabetical order. In addition to this list of all
publications, a list of periodic reports is available.

The electronic versions of BJS publications are presented in two
formats: in ASCII without formatted graphics and in portable
document format (.pdf) as published with graphics and tables
(viewable on any computer and printable on any printer). Many
tables from our reports and some additional data are available
in the .wk1 format, readable by most spreadsheet software. In
many instances, the spreadsheets have been grouped and
compressed into files using the .zip format to speed downloads.
Except for ASCII documents, our products are in formats that
require interpreter applications you need to install on your
computer as plug-ins to web browsers or stand-alone applications.

Press releases -- The most recent press releases from BJS are
published on the web site at the press release section of the
BJS home page.

-----------------------------------
Data to download  
-----------------------------------

Crime & justice electronic data abstracts -- Aggregated data
from a wide variety of published sources are assembled into
spreadsheets. Intended for analytic use, the files include
crime, justice, and sociodemographic variables. Many of the
files contain data over time and by State, locality, and Federal
district.

Source data & codebooks -- BJS data files are archived,
documented, and made available on the Internet through the
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data of the
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
(ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. BJS reports are linked to
the raw data used in the report, which can be downloaded from
the archive. Users can access over 43 gigabytes of data
collected since the mid-1970's, covering the full range of
criminal justice topics.

Crime & justice data from other sources -- Provides links to
data from other sources, including the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and other Federal agencies. Also provides links to
juvenile justice statistics and international crime statistics.

Comments and inquiries from users -- BJS encourages all users of
its Internet site to send comments, suggestions, and information
inquiries to askbjs@ojp.usdoj.gov. BJS has received over a
thousand inquiries and useful comments since the BJS web site
opened in February 1996.

-----------------------------------
Internet conference
-----------------------------------

Proceedings from the conference "Justice Agencies and the
Internet" held in San Francisco on November 4-5, 1997, are
available online from SEARCH, the National Consortium for
Justice Information and Statistics, at
http://www.97internet.search.org/. Computer industry leaders and
several hundred justice practitioners from around the country
attended the event. Conference sessions explored issues ranging
from linking a few rural justice agency intranets to form
Aextranet@ systems to the exciting opportunities and new Web
applications made possible by the emergence of eXtensible Markup
Language (XML). 

---------------------------------------------
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse
---------------------------------------------

The BJS Clearinghouse, a component of the National Criminal
Justice Reference Service (NCJRS), provides information about
crime and justice statistics. The clearinghouse offers products
and services tailored to the needs of the criminal justice
professional. 

Clearinghouse staff who specialize in BJS statistical resources
can assist you in locating data that best meet your particular
information needs. BJS specialists can also direct users to a
variety of other criminal justice data.

The NCJRS Justice Information Center can be accessed by Internet
at http://www.ncjrs.org. By calling the BJS Clearinghouse at
800-732-3277, you can receive --

* BJS reports and BJS mailing list information 
* Criminal justice statistics over the phone 
* Custom literature searches of the National 
     Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) 
* Database referrals to other sources of crime data 
* Data assistance from information specialists. 

The BJS Clearinghouse responds to data requests from a variety
of audiences --

* Federal policymakers and practitioners  
* State and local criminal justice practitioners 
* private organizations 
* faculty and students 
* media and the public. 

The Clearinghouse has developed several products to assist
researchers, policymakers, and other professionals --

* CD-ROM's 
* statistical information packages 
* slide presentations 
* topical searches 
* topical bibliographies. 

Contact the Clearinghouse to request information or to order 
publications and products.

Internet:  http://www.ncjrs.org
E-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

Mail:   BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
        P.O. Box 179
        Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179

Visit:  BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
        1600 Research Boulevard
        Rockville, Maryland 20850

Call:   1-800-732-3277 

FAX orders:    1-410-792-4358

Access fax-on-demand system: 1-301-519-5550 

National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, on behalf of BJS,
archives data files, documents them, and makes them available to
researchers, scholars, journalists, and other users. Established
in 1978, NACJD headquarters are located with the central staff
of the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) in the Institute for Social Research at the
University of Michigan. 

The central mission of NACJD is to facilitate and encourage
research in the field of criminal justice through the sharing of
data resources. 

Specific goals include --

* Providing machine-readable data for the quantitative study of
crime and the criminal justice system through the development of
a central data archive.

* Supplying technical assistance in analyzing data collections
and selecting the computer hardware and software for analyzing
data efficiently and effectively. 

* Offering training in quantitative methods of social science
research to facilitate secondary analysis of criminal justice
data. 

NACJD routinely receives data from four agencies within the U.S.
Department of Justice: BJS, the National Institute of Justice,
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Individual scholars and
researchers in the criminal justice field may also deposit data
with NACJD, and interested individuals should contact NACJD
staff for more information on this process.

Data files that are maintained by the National Archive of
Criminal Justice Data are available at no charge for search and
download from the NACJD site on the Internet. 
     http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/nacjd/ 

Write or call: National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
      ICPSR
      Institute for Social Research 
      P.O. Box 1248
      Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106 
      1-800-999-0960
      1-313-763-5011 

Ask Archive staff questions via e-mail:
     nacjd@icpsr.umich.edu

-----------------------------------
National Clearinghouse for Criminal 
Justice Information Systems (CJIS) 
-----------------------------------

The clearinghouse was created in 1976 to provide facts on
criminal justice information system resources and to promote and
facilitate the transfer of automated public domain criminal
justice information systems. The clearinghouse --

* Disseminates facts about public domain and 
proprietary criminal justice information systems
* Maintains an index of criminal justice software 
* Facilitates communication among criminal justice practitioners
nationwide. 

BJS supports the clearinghouse, which is dedicated to improving
the administration of justice through information technology.
Operated by SEARCH, the National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, CJIS is accessible through the
Internet at  http://www.search.org/clearinghouse.

CJIS provides online access to the FBI's Law Enforcement
Bulletin, opinions of the United States Supreme Court, all four
volumes of FBI specifications for the National Incident-Based
Reporting System, and publications from other agencies and
associations. 

A library of hundreds of criminal justice shareware programs is
online as well. For more information about the clearinghouse
call 916-392-2550, or send e-mail to webmaster@search.org.

-----------------------------------
Database of State Activities 
and Research
-----------------------------------

Maintained by the Justice Research and Statistics Association
(JRSA), this database covers the activities of State criminal
justice statistical agencies, including current Statistical
Analysis Center (SAC) activities, research efforts and
statistical programs, abstracts of SAC publications, information
on publications in the JRSA library, and data from the SAC
Skills Survey. 

The JRSA staff can search the database for specific topics using
key words and provide printouts of search results. 

Contact JRSA by --
* Internet at http://www.jrsainfo.org/
* e-mail to cjinfo@jrsa.org
* telephone: 202-842-9330

-----------------------------------
To order BJS products

Publications
-----------------------------------

You may order single-copy paper versions of BJS publications
through the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, a
component of the National Criminal Justice Reference Service
(NCJRS). The latest BJS data releases are available 24 hours a
day through the Internet and other electronic means. 

     Order online
        If you have a forms-compatible browser, you
        can place your order directly through the
        Internet at the Online Order Form.
        http://www.ncjrs.org/statordr.htm

     Order via Internet e-mail
        Send a message with the name of the 
        publication, the NCJ number, and your 
        mailing address to askncjrs@ncjrs.org

     Order by telephone
       In the United States, the BJS Clearinghouse
       offers toll-free access at 1-800-732-3277.

     Order via Fax-on-Demand System
       Call 301-519-5550 to order from a touchtone
       menu which automatically faxes your selection 
       to you. (Only shorter publications are on 
       this system.)

     Order by FAX
       FAX your order to the clearinghouse at
       410-792-4358 (include name, address, title,
       and NCJ number) or download an order form 
       in Acrobat format, print it off, complete it, and
       FAX it to the clearinghouse. 

-----------------------------------
Data files and codebooks 
-----------------------------------

In addition to online Internet access, data files and codebooks
can be requested by telephone or mail 
from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data.

     Call or write --
          National Archive of Criminal Justice Data 
          ICPSR 
          Institute for Social Research
          P.O. Box 1248
          Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106
          1-800-999-0960  1-313-763-5011 

     Ask Archive staff questions via e-mail --
     cdunn@icpsr.umich.edu


------------------------------------
Tables in the report --

Characteristics of violence-related injuries treated at hospital 
emergency departments, 1994

Characteristics of injury and violent event      Number  Percent

Injury diagnosis
Total                                           1417500      100%
Gun shot wound                                    70300      5.0
Concussion/head injury                            50900      3.6
Muscular/skeletal injury                         234800     16.6
Cut/stab wound/internal injury                   433500     30.6
Bruise                                           477600     33.7
Burns/chemical injury                             13300      0.9
Poison injury                                      1400      0.1
Rape/sexual assault                               63800      4.5
Other                                             72000      5.1

Note:  Detail may not add to totals shown because of rounding.

------------------------------
Age             Cumulative percent of male U.S. population ever in prison
at first                   White, Non-    Black, Non-
admission       All males  Hispanic       Hispanic       Hispanic
      13              0       0            0                0
      14              0       0            0                0
      15              0       0            0                0
      16              0       0            1                0
      17              0       0            2                0
      18              1       0            3                1
      19              1       0            6                2
      20              2       1            8                3
      21              2       1           10                3
      22              3       1           12                4
      23              3       1           13                5
      24              4       1           15                6
      25              4       2           16                6
      26              5       2           17                7
      27              5       2           18                7
      28              5       2           20                8
      29              6       2           21                8
      30              6       2           21                9
      31              6       3           23                9
      32              6       3           23               10
      33              7       3           24               10
      34              7       3           24               10
      35              7       3           25               11
      36              7       3           25               11
      37              7       3           26               12
      38              8       3           26               12
      39              8       3           26               12
      40              8       3           27               13
      41              8       4           27               13
      42              8       4           27               13
      43              8       4           27               13
      44              8       4           27               14
      45              8       4           27               14
      46              8       4           28               14
      47              8       4           28               14
      48              8       4           28               14
      49              8       4           28               15
      50              9       4           28               15
      51              9       4           28               15
      52              9       4           28               15
      53              9       4           28               15
      54              9       4           28               15
      55              9       4           28               15
      56              9       4           28               16
      57              9       4           28               16
      58              9       4           28               16
      59              9       4           28               16
      60              9       4           28               16
      61              9       4           28               16
      62              9       4           28               16

      63              9       4           28               16
      64              9       4           28               16
      65              9       4           28               16
      66              9       4           28               16
      67              9       4           28               16
      68              9       4           28               16
      69              9       4           28               16
      70              9       4           28               16
      71              9       4           28               16
      72              9       4           28               16
      73              9       4           28               16
      74              9       4           28               16
      75              9       4           28               16
      76              9       4           29               16
      77              9       4           29               16
      78              9       4           29               16
      79              9       4           29               16
      80              9       4           29               16

-------------------------------
Felony convictions in State courts

                              Percent of felons
           Felony             convicted in State courts
           convictions        and sentenced to:
           in State courts    Prison   Jail    Probation

    1988       667,366          44      25       31
    1990       829,344          46      25       29
    1992       893,630          44      26       30
    1994       872,217          45      26       29

Source:  Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1994


--------------------------
Defendants in cases concluded in U.S. district court

         Violent   Property    Drug      Public-order
  1980    2,871     13,544     7,119     15,638
  1981    3,022     13,851     8,077     15,887
  1982    3,111     15,340     8,987     15,301
  1983    2,737     16,384     9,774     16,963
  1984    2,814     15,969    11,361     18,380
  1985    2,871     16,250    12,984     19,009
  1986    2,818     17,286    14,746     19,202
  1987    2,850     17,175    16,443     18,153
  1988    2,697     16,261    16,710     18,524
  1989    2,805     16,188    19,750     18,916
  1990    2,857     16,128    20,035     19,684
  1991    3,124     15,749    21,203     20,115
  1992    3,601     16,876    22,728     19,910
  1993    3,581     17,440    24,127     19,484
  1994    3,367     16,545    21,854     19,907

Note:  Includes all cases handled by U.S. district
court judges and Class A misdemeanors handled by
U.S. magistrates. Beginning with 1994, the data 
are based on the Federal fiscal year beginning O
prior years' data are based on the calendar year

*Public-order offenses include weapons offenses.

Source: Federal Criminal Case Processing, 1982-93
 with Preliminary Data for 1994.

---------------------------------
State and local probation agencies supervised  about 2.6 million adults at the
end of 1995.

                              Percent of adults on probation 
                         Total            Felony         Misdemeanor
       
Offense
Violent                  17.3 %            19.5 %            13.5 %
Property                 28.9              36.6              18.2
Drug                     21.4              30.7               7.6
Public-order             31.1              12.1              59.6

Criminal history
None                     49.9 %            49.2 %            52.1 %
Priors                   50.1              50.8              47.9
   Juvenile               9.0              10.3               5.6
   Adult                 45.1              45.1              44.3

Type of sentence
Probation only           49.8 %            45.7 %            54.8 %
Split                    50.2              54.3              45.2
   Jail                  37.3              36.5              38.3
   Prison                15.3              20.6               9.0

Special conditions
Any                      98.6 %            98.4 %            98.9 %
Fees/fines/costs         84.3              84.2              85.1
Drug testing             32.5              43.0              17.1
Drug/alcohol treatment   41.0              37.5              45.7
Employment               34.7              40.9              27.3
Community service        25.7              27.3              24.0

Number of probationer*  2620560          1491670            991161

*Excludes persons supervised by a Federal probation agency, those only  on
parole, persons on presentence or pretrial diversion, and absconders.    

Source:  Characteristics of Adults on Probation, 1995, NCJ 164267.

----------------------------
Number  of  persons  under
sentence of death, 1953-96

         Number of
         prisoners under
Year     sentence of death

    1953      131
    1954      147
    1955      125
    1956      146
    1957      151
    1958      147
    1959      164
    1960      212
    1961      257
    1962      267
    1963      297
    1964      315
    1965      331
    1966      406
    1967      435
    1968      517
    1969      575
    1970      631
    1971      642
    1972      334
    1973      134
    1974      244
    1975      488
    1976      420
    1977      423
    1978      482
    1979      593
    1980      692
    1981      860
    1982    1,066
    1983    1,209
    1984    1,420
    1985    1,575
    1986    1,800
    1987    1,967
    1988    2,117
    1989    2,243
    1990    2,346
    1991    2,465
    1992    2,580
    1993    2,727
    1994    2,905
    1995    3,064
    1996    3,219

Source: Capital Punishment, 1996,
December 1997, NCJ-167031



END OF FILE
pm 5/13/98