U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report 

Black Victims of Violent Crime 

August 2007, NCJ 214258

---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bvvc.htm
----------------------------------------------------------

by Erika Harrell, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

Blacks were victims of an estimated 805,000 nonfatal violent
crimes and of about 8,000 homicides in 2005. While blacks
accounted for 13% of the U.S. population in 2005, they were
victims in 15% of all nonfatal violent crimes and nearly half
of all homicides. These findings are based on data from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics' National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI)
Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR), Supplementary Homicide
Reports. 

Among blacks the risk of nonfatal violent victimization
varied across demographic characteristics. During the 5-year
period from 2001 to 2005, comparative nonfatal violent
victimizations showed  
  
* Black males were more vulnerable to violent victimization
than black females. 

* Younger blacks were generally more likely than older blacks
to be victims of violence. 

* Blacks who had never married were more likely than all other
blacks to be victims of violence. 

* Blacks in households with lower annual incomes were at a
greater risk of violence than those in households with higher
annual incomes. 

* Blacks living in urban areas were more likely than those in
suburban or rural areas to be victims of violence. 

Black victims of homicide were most likely to be male (85%)
and between ages 17 and 29 (51%). Homicides against blacks
were more likely than those against whites to occur in highly
populated areas, including cities and suburbs. About 53% of
homicides against blacks in 2005 took place in areas with
populations of at least 250,000 people, compared to about 33%
of homicides of white victims. Blacks were killed with a
firearm in about 77% of homicides against them.

Overall, the rates of nonfatal violent victimization against
blacks were stable between 2001 and 2005, after declining
about 57% from 1993 to 2001. During the 5-year period from
2001 to 2005, the average annual rate of nonfatal violent
victimization against blacks was 29 victimizations per 1,000
persons age 12 or older. For whites the rate was 23 per
1,000, and for Hispanics, 24 per 1,000. Among all groups
examined, only American Indians (57 per 1,000) had a higher
average annual rate of nonfatal violent victimization than
blacks. 

Between 2001 and 2005, about half of all nonfatal violence
against blacks was characterized as a serious violent crime,
which includes rape or sexual assault, robbery, and 
aggravated assault and excludes simple assault. Robbery
accounted for about 15% of violent crimes against blacks, a
higher percentage than for whites (9%), but similar to that
for Hispanics (15%). Aggravated assault made up more than a
quarter of violence against black victims, compared to 18% 
of violence against white victims.

Of nonfatal violent crimes against blacks, nearly 14%
involved an offender armed with a firearm and about a 
third resulted in an injury to the victim. About half of 
all nonfatal violent crimes against blacks were reported 
to police.

Violent victimization rates for blacks declined from 
1993 to 2001 but were stable from 2001 to 2005

The overall rate of nonfatal violent victimization against
blacks declined by nearly 57% between 1993 and 2001. The 
rate for the overall population declined 54% during the period. 
Except for persons age 50 or older, the violent victimization 
rates declined for all subgroups of the black population that 
were examined. The decline for black males (61%) was somewhat 
greater than for black females (53%). By location of 
residence, from 1993 to 2001 the decline in the rates of 
violent victimization for blacks in urban areas was smaller 
than for blacks in rural areas and slightly larger than for 
those in suburban areas.
 
Between 2001 and 2005, the rate of nonfatal violent crimes
against blacks did not change significantly despite apparent
fluctuations for some subgroups. For the overall population 
the rate was stable. During this period, there were no 
significant changes in the rates of violent victimization 
by gender, age, or location of residence. 

In 2005 black males were somewhat more vulnerable to violent
crimes than black females. Blacks age 24 and under had higher
rates of violent victimization than blacks age 25 or older.
Blacks living in urban areas had the highest rates of violent
victimization in 2005, and those in rural areas had the
lowest rates. 

---------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization Survey

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source of information 
on the frequency, characteristics, and consequences of 
criminal victimization. One of the largest continuous 
household surveys conducted by the Federal Government, 
the NCVS collects information about crimes both 
reported and not reported to police.

The survey provides the largest national forum for victims 
to describe their experiences of victimization, the impact 
of crime, and the characteristics of violent offenders.

For current overall estimates of criminal victimization in 
the United States, see Criminal Victimization, 2005, at
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cv05.htm>. Other findings 
from the NCVS are also on the BJS website.
---------------------------------------

In 2005 nearly half of all homicide victims were black 

Blacks accounted for 49% of all homicide victims in 2005,
according to the FBI's UCR.***For overall estimates of 
homicides, see Homicide Trends in the United States
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm>.***  Black 
males accounted for about 52% (or 6,800) of the nearly 
13,000 male homicide victims in 2005. Black females made 
up 35% (or 1,200) of the nearly 3,500 female homicide 
victims. The number of black males murdered increased 
between 2004 and 2005, while the number of black females 
murdered remained the same. A higher percentage of black 
homicide victims (36%) than white victims (26%)were ages 
13 to 24. About half (51%) of black homicide victims were 
ages 17 to  29, compared to about 37% of white victims. 

Homicides against blacks were more likely than those against
whites to occur in highly populated areas, including cities
and suburbs. About half (53%) of black homicides in 2005 
took place in areas with populations of at least 250,000 
people. A third (33%) of white homicides occurred in places 
with that size population.

In 2005 most homicides involving one victim and one offender
were intraracial. About 93% of black homicide victims and 
85% of white victims in single victim and single offender
homicides were murdered by someone of their race. Women were
the offenders in about 10% of single victim and single
offender homicides of both blacks and whites. 

Intimate partners (current or former spouses, boyfriends, or
girlfriends, including same-sex relationships) were
responsible for relatively fewer homicides among blacks (6%)
than among whites (12%) in 2005. Gang violence accounted for
about 5% of black homicides and about 7% of white homicides.
Blacks were killed with firearms in about 77% of homicides
against them in 2005, compared to 60% of white homicide
victims.

Violent crime rates between 2001 and 2005 were higher 
for blacks than for whites, Hispanics, and Asians

Between 2001 and 2005 blacks had higher rates of violent
victimization than whites, Hispanics, and Asians.
American Indians were the only group that had rates higher
than blacks.  

Blacks were more likely to experience an aggravated 
assault than whites or Hispanics

Between 2001 and 2005 the average annual rate of aggravated
assault for blacks (8 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) was
nearly twice that of whites (4 per 1,000) and slightly higher
than that of Hispanics (5 per 1,000). While blacks were more
likely than whites to experience aggravated assault, blacks
and whites were equally likely to experience a simple assault
during the 5-year period. Blacks were at a greater risk of
rape or sexual assault than any other racial/ethnic group
except American Indians.

Serious violent crime made up nearly half of nonfatal 
violent crimes against blacks between 2001 and 2005

Serious violent victimization consists of rape or sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault. It usually 
involves serious injury to the victim or an offender 
armed with a weapon. These offenses comprised about 48% of 
the violent crimes against blacks between 2001 and 2005, a 
percentage higher than that for whites, American Indians 
and Hispanics but similar to that of Asians.

Among blacks, males and those in urban areas were 
the most vulnerable to robbery victimization 

Between 2001 and 2005, blacks were victims of an average 
of about 121,000 robberies per year, representing an 
average annual robbery victimization rate of about 4 per 
1,000 blacks age 12 or older. This was higher than the rate 
for whites and similar to that for Hispanics. Between 2001 
and 2005, robberies made up about 15% of all violent crime 
against blacks, a percentage higher than that for whites 
and similar to that for Hispanics. 

Between 2001 and 2005, blacks ages 12 to 19 made up about 
37% of all black robbery victims, a percentage similar to 
that for Hispanics. Males made up the majority of robbery 
victims among blacks, whites and Hispanics. About a
third of black robbery victims lived in households with
annual incomes of less than $15,000. 

Black robbery victims were less likely than white victims 
and as likely as Hispanic robbery victims to live in 
households with annual incomes of at least $50,000. Black 
robbery victims (65%) were more likely than white robbery 
victims (41%) to live in urban areas. 

About 40% of black robbery victims faced an offender armed
with a firearm. They were more likely than white and 
Hispanic robbery victims to face an offender with a 
firearm. Blacks were as likely as Hispanics and whites to 
be injured during a robbery.

The rate of robbery victimization for blacks decreased from
about 13 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 1993 to about 
4 per 1,000 in 2001. There was no difference between the 
2001 and 2005 rates of robbery for blacks. 

Most nonfatal violence against blacks was intraracial;
victim/offender relationship varied by victim gender

About four-fifths of black victims of nonfatal violence
perceived the offenders to be black. About 12% of black 
victims perceived the offender to be white, while about 
8% thought the offender was neither black nor white
(categorized as other races on table 5).  Blacks (78%) 
were more likely to be victims of intraracial violence 
than whites (70%).

Black males were more likely to be violently victimized by
strangers than black females. Black female victims of 
violent crime were more likely than black male victims to be 
victimized by an intimate partner. Intimate partner violence 
accounted for 21% of violent victimizations against black 
females, compared to about 5% of victimizations against
black males. The gender disparity for intimate partner
violence among blacks was similar to that for other 
victims.

Rate of nonfatal gang violence against blacks was 
about 3 per 1,000 between 2001 and 2005

The rate of violent crimes against blacks that were committed
by offenders who were perceived to be gang members was higher
than that for whites and Asians but similar to that for
Hispanics and American Indians.  

Between 2001 and 2005 blacks perceived the offender to be a
member of a street gang in about 9% of violent crimes against
them. In 43% of violence against blacks, the victim did not
know if the offender was a gang member.

A quarter of violence against blacks was committed by
offenders under the influence of alcohol or drugs 

Black victims were less likely than white victims, somewhat
less likely than American Indian victims, and as likely as
Asian and Hispanic victims to face an offender under the
influence of alcohol or drugs. About 25% of nonfatal violence
against blacks involved an offender perceived to be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs. The victim did not know if the
offender was under the influence of alcohol or drugs in 48%
of violence against blacks (not shown on table).

About 1 in 7 black victims of nonfatal violence were
confronted by an offender with a firearm

Between 2001 and 2005, about 35% of all violent crime against
blacks involved offenders with a weapon. Weapons included
firearms, knives, and other objects used as a weapon. Black
victims were more likely than whites, American Indians, and
Hispanics to face an offender with a weapon. They were
somewhat more likely than Asians to face an offender with a
weapon. 

Black victims were as likely as Asian victims and more likely
than victims of other racial or ethnic groups to face an
offender with a firearm. Black victims faced an offender
armed with firearms in about 14% of nonfatal violence against
them. 

About a third of black victims of nonfatal violence were
injured during the crime

Black victims sustained an injury in about 31% of all
nonfatal violent crime between 2001 and 2005. About 54% of
injured black victims of violence did not receive treatment
for their injuries. About a quarter of injured black victims 
were treated as outpatients in a hospital or hospital 
emergency department. 

Injured black victims of serious violent crime (52%) were
more likely to be treated than those injured in a simple
assault (37%). Simple assault usually involves less
serious injuries than serious violent crime.

Use of a weapon in nonfatal serious violence against 
blacks did not change between 1993 and 2005

In 2005 about 72% of serious violent crime against blacks
involved an offender armed with a weapon. This percentage 
was equivalent to that for whites and Hispanics. A similar 
pattern was found in 1993.

Among black victims, in 2005 about 40% of serious violent
crime involved injury to the victim. There was no difference 
in the percentages between blacks, Hispanics, and whites. 
Despite some fluctuations, the percent of serious violent 
crime in which the victim sustained an injury did not
substantially change between 1993 and 2005. A similar pattern
was found among Hispanics, while whites had a slight increase
in the percent injured.

About half of all nonfatal violence against blacks was
reported to police between 2001 and 2005

Between 2001 and 2005, about 55% of all violent crimes
committed against blacks were reported to police. Violence
against black victims was more likely than violence against
white victims and as likely as violence against victims of
other racial/ethnic groups to be reported to police. Among
black victims, robbery (62%) and aggravated assault (67%)
were the violent crimes most likely to be reported.

Violence against blacks that was reported to police varied 
by victim's gender and age. Violence against black females 
was more likely than violence against black males (63% 
compared to 47%) to be reported to police. Violent crime
against the oldest blacks was more likely to be reported 
than violent crime against the youngest. About 73% of 
violence against blacks age 65 or older were reported to 
police, compared to about a third of violent crime against 
black victims ages 12 to 15.

Police responded quickly to the majority of reported 
nonfatal violence against blacks

According to black victims, police responded within an hour
in about 91% of reported violent victimizations. Police
response to nonfatal violence against blacks was similar to
that for whites and Hispanics.

Black victims of violence were slightly more likely than
Hispanics to use services of nonpolice victim agencies

In about 9% of violent crimes against blacks, the victim
sought help from nonpolice agencies that provided services 
to victims of crime. Black victims of rape or sexual assault
were as likely as victims of other types of violent crime to
seek assistance from such agencies. Overall, blacks were as 
likely as whites, but slightly more likely than Hispanics to 
seek help from nonpolice victim agencies.

The percentage of black victims of nonfatal violent crime who
contacted a nonpolice agency for help fluctuated between 1993
and 2005. It reached 11% in 2005 which was similar to the
percentage in 1998 and 2003.

Methodology

Data sources

This report presents data on rape, sexual assault, robbery,
aggravated assault, and simple assault against non-Hispanic
blacks age 12 or older as measured by the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS gathers data on crimes
against persons age 12 or older, reported and not reported to
the police, from a nationally representative sample of U.S.
households. The NCVS provides information about victims (age,
gender, race, Hispanic origin, marital status, income, and
educational level), offenders (gender, race, approximate age,
and victim-offender relationship) and the nature of the crime
(time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of
injury, and economic consequences).

Homicide data are from the Supplementary Homicide Reports
(SHR) to the Uniform Crime Reporting Program, collected by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Between 1993 and 2005, about 2 million individuals age 12 
or older were interviewed for the NCVS. For the overall
population, for the years measured, response rates varied
between 84% and 93% of eligible individuals. In 2005 about
134,000 persons were interviewed for the NCVS, of which 
about 14,000 were non-Hispanic blacks. 

Classification by race and Hispanic origin

Because the racial categories were changed in 2003, caution
is warranted when examining race over time. Since 2003, two
questions on the NCVS are asked to obtain information on the
respondent's race and Hispanic origin: (1) whether they are
of Hispanic origin and (2) which race or races they identify
with. Respondents may chose white, black/African American,
American Indian/Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian/Other
Pacific Islander, and Other. Respondents who select Other 
are asked to specify their race. More than one race may be
selected. 

Prior to 2003, respondents were first asked to identify the
racial group they identified with, including white, black,
American Indian/Aleut/Eskimo, Asian/Pacific Islander, or 
Other. Respondents who selected Other were not able to
specify a race. They were also not able to select more than
one racial group. After the question on race, respondents
were asked if they were of Hispanic origin. 

When nonfatal violence was discussed in this report, black
and black/African American refer to non-Hispanic persons who
chose the black category prior to 2003 and the black/African
American category thereafter. Whites are non-Hispanic persons
who selected the white category. Hispanic and Hispanic/Latino
categories refer to persons of any race. American Indians and
American Indian/Alaska Natives are non-Hispanic persons who
selected the American Indian/Aleut/Eskimo category prior to
2003 or the American Indian/Alaska Native category since
2003. Asians refer to non-Hispanics persons who chose the
Asian/Pacific Islander category prior to 2003 or the Asian 
or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander category since 
2003.

In this report, for homicide data from the Supplementary
Homicide Reports, black and white race categories include
both Hispanic and non-Hispanic persons. 

Standard error computations

Comparisons of percentages and rates made in this report 
were tested to determine if observed differences were
statistically significant. Differences described as higher,
lower, or different passed a hypothesis test at the .05 
level of statistical significance(95% confidence level). 
The tested difference was greater than twice the standard 
error of that difference. For comparisons that were 
statistically significant at the 0.10 level (90% confidence 
level), "somewhat," "slightly," or marginally" is used to 
note the nature of the difference.

Significance testing calculations were conducted at the
Bureau of Justice Statistics using statistical programs
developed specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Census
Bureau. These programs take into consideration many 
aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when calculating 
estimates.

Estimates based on 10 or fewer sample cases have high
relative standard errors. Care should be taken when 
comparing such estimates to other estimates when both 
are based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

---------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. 
Sedgwick is director.

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., wrote this report, under the 
supervision of Michael R. Rand. Wendy Lin-Kelly, 
Cathy Maston and Patsy Klaus verified the report. 
Tina Dorsey and Carolyn C. Williams produced and 
edited the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the 
report for final printing, under the supervision 
of Doris J. James.

August 2007, NCJ 214258
----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII 
and its related statistical data and tables are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bvvc.htm>.
----------------------------------------------------


End of file
08/08/07 ih