U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

National Crime Victimization Survey

Crime Against People with 
Disabilities, 2007

October 2009, NCJ 227814

---------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full
report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/capd07.htm
---------------------------------------------------

Michael R. Rand and Erika Harrell, Ph.D.

BJS Statisticians

Persons age 12 or older with disabilities experienced
approximately 716,000 nonfatal violent crimes and 2.3 million
property crimes in 2007 as measured by the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS). Nonfatal violent crimes include
rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple
assault. Property crimes include household burglary, motor
vehicle theft, and property theft.* 

About one third (34%) of the crimes against persons with or
without a disability in 2007 were serious violent crimes
(rape/sexual assault, robbery, or aggravated assault).
Persons with disabilities were victims of about 47,000 rapes,
79,000 robberies, 114,000 aggravated assaults, and 476,000
simple assaults.

Findings in this report are the first estimates of crime
against people with disabilities measured by the NCVS,
administered by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The
NCVS adopted questions from the U.S. Census Bureau's American
Community Survey (ACS) to identify respondents who had a
disability. Disability is defined as a long-lasting (six
months or more) sensory, physical, mental, or emotional
condition that makes it difficult for a person to perform
daily living activities. The NCVS questions identified six
types of disabilities: sensory, physical, cognitive
functioning, self-care, go-outside-the-home, and employment
(see box, page 3).

This report focuses on the victimization experiences of
persons with disabilities, including comparisons to persons
without disabilities, disability types, victim
characteristics, and crime characteristics, such as reporting
crime to the police and the presence of weapons during the
crime. 

*Estimates of property crimes against households with persons
with disabilities may be an undercount due to the survey
methodology (see box, page 7).

Findings from the NCVS include--

*Age-adjusted rate of nonfatal violent crime against.

*persons with disabilities was 1.5 times higher than the rate
for persons without disabilities.

*Persons with a disability had an age-adjusted rate of rape
or sexual assault that was more than twice the rate for
persons without a disability.

*Females with a disability had a higher victimization rate
than males with a disability; males had a higher rate than
females among those without a disability.

*Persons with a cognitive functioning disability had a higher
risk of violent victimization than persons with any other
type of disability.

*Persons with more than one type of disability accounted for
about 56% of all violent crime victimizations against those
with any disability.

*Nearly 1 in 5 violent crime victims with a disability
believed that they became a victim because of their
disability.

*Victims with a disability perceived offenders to be under
the influence of either alcohol or drugs in about a third of
all violent crimes against them.

*Violent crime victims with or without a disability were
equally as likely to face an armed offender, report the crime
to the police, or suffer an injury.

Females with a disability had a higher victimization rate
than males with a disability

Among persons with disabilities, females had a higher risk of
violence than males (table 3). Age-adjusted rates of violence
for males and females with a disability were higher than the
rates for males and females without a disability. The
age-adjusted rate of violent crime against females with a
disability (35 per 1,000 age 12 or older) was almost twice
the unadjusted rate for females without a disability (19 per
1,000 age 12 or older). 

Both whites and blacks with a disability experienced higher
rates of violence than persons of other races with a
disability. Whites with a disability experienced violence at
a higher age-adjusted rate than whites without disabilities.
No statistically significant difference emerged between the
age-adjusted rate of violence for blacks with a disability
and the rate for blacks without a disability. 

After adjusting for age, non-Hispanic persons with
disabilities (34 per 1,000) had a higher risk of violence
than Hispanics with disabilities (19 per 1,000). The risk of
being victimized did not vary by Hispanic origin among
persons without disabilities. 

Adopting questions from the ACS helped identify victims with
disabilities in the NCVS

The NCVS collects information on crimes of violence and
theft, reported and not reported to the police, against
persons age 12 or older and their household. In 2007 the NCVS
adopted questions from the U.S. Census Bureau's American
Community Survey (ACS) to measure the rate of victimization
against people with disabilities. 

The ACS defines disability as a long-lasting (six months or
more) sensory, physical, mental, or emotional condition that
makes it difficult to perform activities of daily living,
such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing, bathing,
learning, or remembering. NCVS respondents were asked whether
they had any health conditions, impairments, or disabilities.
Using the limitations defined by the ACS, the NCVS survey
identified six types of disabilities:

*Cognitive functioning limitation is a physical, mental, or
emotional condition that makes learning, remembering, or
concentrating difficult.
 
*Sensory limitation is a long-lasting condition, such as
blindness, deafness, or a severe vision or hearing
impairment.
 
*Physical limitation is a condition that substantially limits
one or more basic physical activities, such as walking,
climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying. 

*Self-care limitation is a condition that makes dressing,
bathing, or getting around the home difficult.

*Going-outside-home limitation is a condition that makes
going outside the home alone to shop or visit a doctor's
office difficult. 

*Employment limitation is a physical, mental, or emotional
condition that makes it difficult to work at a job or
business.

For more detailed definitions of the types of disabilities
measured, see U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey,
2005 Subject Definitions.Retrieved August 10, 2009, from
<http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/2005/usedata/Subject
_Definitions.pdf#page=32>

When adjusted for age variation, people with disabilities
experienced higher rates of violence than people without a
disability

The population with disabilities is generally older than
those without disabilities. Also the victimization rate
generally decreases as age increases. To compare crimes
against people with disabilities to those without
disabilities, the rates were adjusted to account for the
differences in the age distribution between the two groups
and the declining rates of violence against people as they
age (see Methodology for more information on age-adjusted
rates).

The NCVS showed an unadjusted rate of violent crime against
people with disabilities (18 per 1,000 persons age 12 or
older) that was slightly lower than the rate against those
without disabilities (21 per 1,000 persons) (table 1). When
the rate was adjusted to account for the age differences
between the two groups, the adjusted rate for people with
disabilities was about 1.5 times higher than the unadjusted
rate for those without disabilities. The age-adjusted rate of
violence for persons with disabilities was 32 per 1,000
persons age 12 or older, compared to 21 per 1,000 persons age
12 or older without disabilities. 

The age-adjusted rate of serious violence against persons
with disabilities was higher than the unadjusted rate for
those without disabilities. For rape or sexual assault, the
age-adjusted rate for persons with disabilities was more than
twice the rate for persons without disabilities. Age-adjusted
rates of robbery were slightly higher for those with
disabilities than the rates for persons without disabilities.
For aggravated and simple assault, the age-adjusted rate of
violence against persons with disabilities was higher than
the rate against persons without disabilities.

Youth ages 12 to 19 with a disability experienced violence at
nearly twice the rate as those without a disability

In general youth experience the highest rates of violence and
seniors experience the lowest rates. Using unadjusted rates
of violence to compare age characteristics of victims with
and without disabilities, youth ages 12 to 19 with a
disability experienced violence at nearly twice the rate as
those ages 12 to 19 without a disability (table 2).
Additionally, persons ages 35 to 49 with disabilities
experienced higher rates of violent crime than persons of
this age group without disabilities. The risk of violent
crime did not differ by disability status for persons ages 50
to 64. Persons age 65 or older experienced the lowest rates
of violent crime, regardless of disability status. 

Comparison of persons with and without disabilities using
unadjusted estimates 

While age-adjusted rates account for variations in age and
risk of victimization among those with and without
disabilities, unadjusted rates are used to compare the two
groups throughout the remainder of the report. Unadjusted
victimization estimates are presented by victim and crime
characteristics, including type of disability, victim and
offender relationship, offender weapon use, victim injuries,
and crimes reported to the police.

More than half of violent crimes against people with a
disability were against those with multiple disabilities

The NCVS questions allowed victims to report more than one
type of disability. Of the violent victimizations against
people with disabilities, 56% were committed against people
who reported having more than one disability. Across the
types of violent crimes measured by the NCVS, victims who
reported having more than one disability were 60% of rape or
sexual assault victims, 45% of robbery victims, 61% of
aggravated assault victims, and 56% of simple assault victims
(not shown in table).

Persons with a cognitive disability experienced violent crime
at a rate higher than persons with other types of
disabilities

People who reported having a cognitive disability had a
higher rate of total violent crime (about 28 per 1,000
persons age 12 or older) than people who reported having any
other type of disability (table 4). Persons with a cognitive
disability experienced higher rates of rape or sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault than those with a
sensory disability. They also had a somewhat higher rate of
robbery than persons with a physical, self-care, or
employment disability. For simple assault, persons with a
cognitive disability had a higher victimization rate than
those having any other type of disability. Few other
differences emerged because the amount of data available for
analysis by type of crime and type of disability were not
sufficient to enable a full examination. 

In evaluating the rate of violence by gender for persons with
disabilities, males and females with a cognitive disability
experienced higher or somewhat higher rates of violent crime
than persons reporting other types of disabilities, with the
following exception: no significant differences emerged
between the victimization rates for males with a cognitive
disability and males with a self-care disability (text table
1). The rate of violence against females with a cognitive
disability was higher than the rates against females with
other types of disabilities. Among those with a self-care
disability, males were more vulnerable to violent crime
victimization than females.
-------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------
Text table 1. Violent victimization rate of persons with
disabilities, by type of disability and gender, 2007        
          
                  Rate of violent victimization per 1,000     
                  persons age 12 or older with disabilities 
                 -----------------------------------------
               
Disability type             Male              Female   
Sensory                     13.4               9.8     
Physical                    15.3              12.2     
Cognitive                   24.1              31.3     
Self-care                   17.1               6.0^
Go-outside-home             13.9              10.5     
Employment                  16.0              15.2
     
Note: Rates include victims with more than one disability. 
Definitions of the types of disabilities are available from
the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2005 
Subject Definitions. Retrieved August 10, 2009, from 
<http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/2005/usedata/Subject
_Definitions.pdf#page=31>.
^Based on 10 or fewer sample cases.                    
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Almost a fifth of violent crime victims with disabilities
believed that they had been victimized because of their
disability 

In 2007 about 19% of violent crime victims with a disability
believed that they were victimized because of their
disability. Seventy-nine percent of violent crime victims
with a disability did not believe that being victimized was
related to their disability, while about 2% did not know
whether their victimization was related to their disability
(not shown in table). 

Among victims of violent crime, females were more likely than
males to have been victimized by an intimate partner,
regardless of disability status

Overall, the percentage of violent crimes committed by an
intimate partner against females was higher than that for
males. While this pattern held true for persons with
disabilities in 2007, differences between the percentages of
intimate partner violence committed against males and females
was greater for persons without disabilities. The NCVS
defines intimate partner as a current or former spouse,
boyfriend, or girlfriend.

Intimate partners were responsible for 16% of nonfatal
violence against females with disabilities, compared to 5%
against males with disabilities (table 5). Among persons
without disabilities, intimate partners were responsible for
27% of nonfatal violence against females and 3% of nonfatal
violence against males. The percentage of violence by a
non-intimate relative was higher for females than males,
regardless of disability status. The NCVS defines other or
non-intimate relatives as parents, siblings, or cousins. 

Regardless of a victim's disability status, strangers were
responsible for a higher percentage of violence against males
than females. Victimization by a stranger made up a slightly
higher percentage of crimes against females with a
disability, compared to females without a disability.
 
Victims with disabilities perceived offenders to be under the
influence of either alcohol or drugs in about a third of all
violent crimes against them

In 2007 the victim perceived the offender to be under the
influence of either alcohol or drugs in about 35% of all
violence against people with disabilities (text table 2).
This is similar to the percentage for victims without
disabilities. An estimated 36% of violent crime victims with
a disability said that they did not know if the offender was
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.






-------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
Text table 2. Percent of violence, by perceived offender
alcohol or drug use and victim's disability status, 2007    

                         Percent of violent crime victims
                         ----------------------------------   
                              Persons with    Persons without 
Offender drug use             disabilities    disabilities  
-------------------------------------------------------------
Victim perceived offender to be--                      
  Using alcohol or drugs          34.8%        29.4%
Not using alcohol or drugs        28.9         32.5    
Victim did not know if offender 
  was using alcohol or drugs      36.3%        38.0%
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Taking action to resist the attacker did not vary by a
victim's disability status

Similar percentages of victims of violent crime with
disabilities (58%) and without disabilities (60%) resisted
their attackers (table 6). Similar percentages of victims
with or without a disability defended themselves by
threatening or attacking an offender with a firearm or other
weapon or by using nonconfrontational tactics, such as
running, yelling, or arguing. Victims with disabilities were
less likely to resist by threatening or attacking an offender
without a weapon compared to victims without disabilities. 

Victims faced an armed offender in nearly 1 in every 5
violent crimes in 2007
Persons with disabilities faced an armed offender in about
18% of violent crimes against them in 2007, and persons
without disabilities faced an armed offender in about 22% of
violent crimes (table 7). Victims with disabilities (4%) were
less likely to face an offender armed with a firearm,
compared to victims without disabilities (9%). 

About a quarter of all victims of violent crime with
disabilities were injured

About 26% of violent crime victims with disabilities
sustained injuries during the crime, a percentage identical
to that for victims without disabilities (table 8). No
differences emerged by disability status in the percentage of
violent crime victims who sought treatment or in the place
where treatment was received.

About 13% of violent crime victims with a disability sought
treatment for their injuries. Violent crime victims with or
without a disability were most often treated at the crime
scene, by a neighbor or friend, or at a hospital without
being admitted. Regardless of a victim's disability status,
less than 1% of violent crime victims were admitted to a
hospital for an overnight stay because of their injuries.

Violent crimes against persons with or without disabilities
were equally likely to be reported to police

Violent crimes reported to the police did not vary by
disability status. Violence against persons with a disability
were reported in about 43% of violent crimes. Of these
violent crimes, robbery was the most likely to be reported to
the police.

Violence against persons without a disability were reported
in about 47% of violent crimes (table 9). The percent of
aggravated assault reported to the police was slightly lower
for persons with a disability, compared to those without a
disability. For rape or sexual assault, robbery, and simple
assault, the percent reported to the police was similar for
persons with or without a disability. 

Police responded to about three-quarters of reported violence
against victims with a disability

The percentage of victims with a disability who said that the
police responded to the reported crime was lower than the
percentage for those without a disability. Seven in 10
victims with a disability, compared to 8 in 10 without a
disability, said that the police responded to the reported
crime. Police did not respond to about 23% of reported
violent crimes against persons with disabilities, compared to
about 10% of reported violent crimes against victims without
disabilities (text table 3).

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
Text table 3. Percent of reported violent crime, by police
response and victim's disability status, 2007

                     Victims with    Victims without 
 Police response     disabilities     disabilities
-------------------------------------------------------------

Police responded to reported violence                  
          
    Yes                    74.1%            84.2%     
    No                     22.9              9.8  
    Did not know            -                1.1^
Respondent went to police   3.0%^           4.9%
-------------------------------------------------------------
^Based on 10 or fewer sample cases.                         
--No cases were present for this category.
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Equal percentages of violent crime victims with and without
disabilities made use of victim assistance agencies

When violent crime victims were asked whether they or someone
in their household received any help or advice from any
office or agency (other than the police) that works with
crime victims, about 9% of those with a disability said they
received assistance. An equal percentage of violent crime
victims without a disability said they used the services of a
victim assistance agency other than the police (text table
4). 

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
Text table 4. Percent of violent crime victims that used a
victim assistance agency other than the police, by victim
disability status and agency type, 2007
                              

Type of agency               Victims with    Victims without 
                             disabilities    disabilities   
Used victim agency               9.4%            8.6%
  Government agency              5.7             5.4   
  Private agency                 2.8^            2.5   
  Did not know type of agency    0.9^         0.6^
-------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Detail may not sum to total due to rounding.          
^Based on 10 or fewer sample cases.                         
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Theft accounted for over 70% of all property crime against
people with or without disabilities

People age 12 or over with a disability reported to the NCVS
that their households experienced approximately 2.3 million
property crimes in 2007 (table 10). Property crimes include
household burglary, motor vehicle theft, and property theft.

The NCVS measure of property crime is a household-based
measure. As described in the Methodology on page 9, the NCVS
questions used to identify whether a person had a disability
were asked only of those respondents who reported that they
had been victimized. If the person who reported the property
crime was a household member with a disability, then the NCVS
identified the property crime as one against a household with
a person with a disability. If a household member without a
disability reported the property crime during the survey, the
NCVS did not ask whether any other household member had a
disability. For this reason the estimate of property crime
against people with disabilities may be an undercount of such
crimes.

Theft accounted for over 70% of property crimes against all
households, regardless of disability status. Burglary
accounted for about 23% of all property crimes against
households with a person with a disability, compared to 18%
against households without a person with a disability. Motor
vehicle theft accounted for about 5% of property crimes
against households with a person with a disability.

The Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act mandated
that the NCVS include statistics on crimes against people
with disabilities and the characteristics of the victims of
those crimes

The Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act (Public Law
105-301), 1998, mandated that the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) measure the victimization of
people with disabilities. Section 5 of the Act directed the
Department of Justice to include statistics relating to "the
nature of crimes against people with developmental
disabilities; and the specific characteristics of the victims
of those crimes" in the NCVS.

In partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) initiated a number of activities
that would lay the foundation for incorporating
disability-related questions into the ongoing NCVS. In
October 1999 BJS and the Census Bureau convened a workshop on
crime and disabilities, bringing together researchers,
advocates, and representatives from other federal agencies to
assist with identifying and measuring crime victimization of
people with disabilities.

The complex and subjective concepts used in defining
disability made it difficult to develop disability-related
survey questions. As codified by 42 U.S. Code 6001, a
developmental disability consists of many elements, including
age of onset, duration, types of functional limitation, and
evaluation of the severity and duration of the disability.
Health-related surveys, such as the Health Interview
Survey***Footnote For more information on the Health
Interview Survey, see <http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm>.
(Last accessed August 27, 2009).***  conducted by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, use a lengthy,
comprehensive set of questions to determine whether a person
has a disability and to identify the nature of the
disability. A long battery of questions was deemed too
burdensome for the NCVS, a crime victimization survey that
measures the characteristics of crime. 

BJS and the Census Bureau tested a number of questionnaire
modules between 2000 and 2004. Each set of questions proved
problematic, either because the modules were too long and
burdensome or because the questions did not adequately
distinguish health conditions from disabling conditions
according to the federal definitions.

In 2007 BJS incorporated the disability-related questions
developed for the American Community Survey (ACS) with the
crime incident reporting section of the NCVS. The questions
produced reliable estimates and allowed BJS to use population
estimates from the ACS to calculate rates of victimization
for people with disabilities. This report presents findings
based on the analysis of the responses to the
disability-related questions in the NCVS.

For a more detailed discussion of the initial work undertaken
by BJS, see Developing the Capability to Measure Crime
Victimization of People with Disabilities, pp. 24-37, in
Sirken, M.G. Integrating Measurements of Disability in
Federal Surveys: Seminar Proceedings. National Center for
Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 4(32). 2002. Retrieved
August 26, 2009, from
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_04/sr04_032.pdf>. 

Methodology

Data sources

Crime Against People with Disabilities, 2007, presents data
on violent and property crimes against people with
disabilities age 12 or older as measured by the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). Violent crimes include
rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple
assault. Property crimes include household burglary, motor
vehicle theft, and theft. 

The NCVS collects information on crimes against persons age
12 or older, reported and not reported to the police, from a
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. The
survey provides information on victims (age, gender, race,
Hispanic origin, marital status, income, and educational
level), offenders (gender, race, approximate age, and
victim-offender relationship), and the nature of the crime
(time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of
injury, and economic consequences).

To identify people with disabilities in the NCVS, BJS adopted
questions from the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community
Survey (ACS). The ACS is conducted in all U.S. counties and
Puerto Rico. It provides economic, social, demographic, and
housing information that was previously available only when
the Census Bureau conducted its population census every 10
years. Included in the information collected by the ACS are
disability status, income, age, housing, race, and Hispanic
origin.

The American Community Survey Subcommittee on Disability
Questions developed the 2007 ACS disability questions based
on questions used in the 2000 Decennial Census and earlier
versions of the ACS. The questions identify persons who may
require assistance to maintain their independence, be at risk
for discrimination, or lack opportunities available to the
general population because of limitations due to a
long-lasting sensory, physical, mental, or emotional
condition. The questions were designed to address six
specific disability domains: sensory, physical, cognitive
functioning, self-care, go-outside-the-home, and employment.
For more information about the ACS and the disability
questions, see <http://www.census.gov/acs/
www/>. (Last accessed August 27, 2009).

Calculation of rates using the NCVS and the ACS

The disability-related questions were not administered to
each person in the NCVS sample in 2007. Questions were
administered as part of the crime incident report to people
who reported being a victim of one of the measured offenses.
To calculate rates of victimization for people with and
without disabilities, BJS obtained data from the Census
Bureau's 2007 report of the ACS. Because the NCVS questions
are the same as those in the ACS, the NCVS estimates of crime
victims with disabilities is, by definition, identical to the
population estimates of people with disabilities from the
ACS.

Age-adjusted violent victimization rates

In general the population with disabilities is older than the
population without disabilities. For that reason, many
comparisons between the victimization experiences of people
with and without disabilities use age-adjusted victimization
rates. Age-adjusted rates account for differences in the age
distributions between both populations. Without this
adjustment, the differences between the rates for people with
disabilities and those without disabilities would be
confounded by differences that may be attributed to the age
distributions rather than disability status.
Direct standardization of populations was used to calculate
the age-adjusted violent victimization rates. Other federal
agencies use similar methods to calculate the age-adjusted
rates of diseases and mortality.

First, the population with disabilities was taken from the
ACS and divided into seven age categories: 12 to 15, 16 to
19, 20 to 24, 25 to 34, 35 to 49, 50 to 64, and 65 or older.
For each age category, the original unadjusted rate of
violent crime was calculated by dividing the number of
violent victimizations for people in that age group in the
NCVS by the number of people in the same age group from the
ACS.

Next, a weight for each age group was computed by dividing
the number of all persons in an age group without
disabilities by the total number of persons without a
disability. The weight computed for a particular age group
was multiplied by the original unadjusted violent
victimization rate for the same age group. This procedure was
done for each age group. 

Results were summed across all age groups to obtain the
age-adjusted rate of violent victimization against persons
with disabilities. This procedure was used to produce the
age-adjusted rates of violent victimization of persons with
disabilities by gender, race, Hispanic origin, and type of
violent crime.

For more information on direct standardization of
populations, see Curtin, Ph.D. and R.J. Klein, M.P.H., Direct
Standardization (Age-adjusted Death Rates). Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Health
Statistics. No. 6 (March 1995). Retrieved August 27, 2009,
from <http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt06rv.pdf>. 

Limitations of the estimates

While a large national sample and the ongoing nature of the
NCVS enhance its ability to produce estimates of people with
disabilities, some attributes in the survey's design limit
the estimates it can produce. The survey was designed to
measure the incidence of crime against the U.S. civilian
noninstitutional population. A significant number of people
with disabilities, especially those with the most profound
and severe conditions, live in institutional settings. The
measures of crime against persons with disabilities as
measured by the NCVS covers only those people with
disabilities living among the general population in household
settings.

In addition, the instruments, modes of interview, and
interviewing protocols used in the NCVS may not be suited for
interviewing people with difficulty communicating, especially
by telephone. Currently, about 70% of the interviews
conducted for the NCVS are by telephone. Some people have
disabilities that limit their verbal communication and use
technology to enhance their ability to communicate, but many
people do not have access to such technology. Additionally,
the survey questionnaire, while avoiding legal terminology,
incorporates some complex concepts and language that may not
be easily understood by people with cognitive disabilities.

The survey also requires direct interviews with eligible
respondents and allows the use of proxy interviews in a
limited set of circumstances. One circumstance under which
proxy interviews are allowed is if the respondent is
physically or mentally incapable of responding. The survey
restrictions on proxy interviews were instituted because
someone else may not know about the victimization experiences
of the respondent and because the person providing the
information via proxy may be the perpetrator of the abuse or
violence experienced by the respondent.

At a national level, the effects on the estimates due to
proxy responses are probably small. When measuring
victimization of people with disabilities, the use of proxies
could be a larger issue. About 1% of the crimes reported to
the NCVS in 2007 were obtained from proxy interviews. Of the
crimes reported against persons with disabilities, about 2%
were obtained from proxy interviews. Since proxy respondents
may be more likely to omit crime incidents or may not know
some details about reported crime incidents, the number of
crimes against persons with disabilities may have been
undercounted. 

While the NCVS and ACS disability questions are identical,
other factors associated with the programs may impact either
the NCVS or ACS estimates and the comparison of those
estimates. In turn, this would effect the calculation of
victimization rates of people with and without disabilities.
Some possible factors include the effects of non-interview
biases and interview modes. The NCVS is conducted by personal
visit and telephone interviews, while the ACS is a
self-administered survey. These possible effects have not
been studied.

For most variables used in this report, there was very low
item non-response and no imputation of data.

Standard error computations

Comparisons of percentages and rates made in this report were
tested to determine if observed differences were
statistically significant. Differences described as higher,
lower, or different passed a hypothesis test at the 0.05
level of statistical significance (95%-confidence level). The
tested difference was greater than twice the standard error
of that difference. For comparisons that were statistically
significant at the 0.10 level (90%-confidence level),
"somewhat," "slightly," or "marginally" is used to note the
nature of the difference.

Significance-testing calculations were conducted at BJS using
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS by
the U.S. Census Bureau. These programs take into
consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design
when calculating estimates. Estimates based on 10 or fewer
sample cases have high relative standard errors. Care should
be taken when comparing such estimates to other estimates
when both are based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

Disability-related questions included in the National Crime
Victimization Survey in 2007

168. Research has shown that people with disabilities may be
more vulnerable to crime victimization. The next questions
ask about any health conditions, impairments, or disabilities
you may have.

169. Do you have any of the following long-lasting
conditions:
(a) Blindness, deafness, or a severe vision or hearing
impairment?
(b) A condition that substantially limits one or more basic
physical activities such as walking, climbing stairs,
reaching, lifting, or carrying?

170. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition
lasting 6 months or more, do you have any difficulty in doing
any of the following activities: 
(a) Learning, remembering, or concentrating?
(b) Dressing, bathing, or getting around inside the home?
(c) Going outside the home alone to shop or visit a doctor's
office?
(d) Working at a job or business?

171. Is "Yes" marked in any of 169a-170d? (That is, has the
respondent indicated that he/she has a health condition or
disability?)
172. During the incident you just told me about, do you have
reason to suspect you were victimized because of your health
condition(s), impairment(s), or disability(ies)? (If yes, ask
173).
173. Which of your health conditions, impairments, or
disabilities do you believe caused you to be targeted for
this incident?

The full NCVS questionnaire and additional methodology are
available at the BJS Website at 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cvict.htm#ncvs>.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is Acting
Director.

This Special Report was written by Michael R. Rand and Erika
Harrell, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians. 

Shannan Catalano, Ph.D. and Diandra S. Hayban verified the
report. 

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report. Tina
Dorsey produced the report and Jayne Robinson prepared the
report for final printing, under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

October 2009, NCJ 227814

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data are available at the BJS World Wide
Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/capd07>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

09/28/2009/ JER