U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

National Crime Victimization Survey
Crime Against People with Disabilities, 2008

December 2010 NCJ 231328

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., and Michael R. Rand
BJS Statistician 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2019

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=65
-----------------------------------------------------------

In households in the United States, persons age 12 or older
with disabilities experienced approximately 730,000 nonfatal
violent crimes and 1.8 million property crimes in 2008 (table
1). This excludes persons living in institutions. Nonfatal
violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and
aggravated and simple assault. Property crimes include
household burglary, motor vehicle theft, and property theft.
Disability is defined as a sensory, physical, mental, or
emotional condition lasting 6 months or longer that makes it
difficult for a person to perform activities of daily living.

About 37% of the violent crimes against persons with
disabilities in 2008 were serious violent crimes: rape or
sexual assault (40,000), robbery (116,000), or aggravated
assault (115,000). Persons with disabilities also were
victims of about 459,000 simple assaults in 2008.

These statistical tables present data on the victimization
experiences of persons with disabilities from the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), including comparisons to
persons without disabilities, comparisons by types of
disabilities, victim characteristics, and crime
characteristics. To identify victims of crime who had
disabilities, the NCVS adopted the survey questions about
disabilities from the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community
Survey (ACS). Because the NCVS does not identify persons in
the general population with disabilities, data from the ACS
were used to estimate rates of victimization for people with
and without disabilities. (See Methodology for more
information on the data sources and data limitations.)

To compare crime victimization rates for persons with and
without disabilities an age adjustment was necessary. In the
United States the population with disabilities tends to be
older than the population without disabilities. When
victimization rates were age-adjusted, people with
disabilities experienced higher rates of violence than people
without disabilities 40 victimizations per 1,000 persons with
disabilities compared to about 20 per 1,000 without
disabilities. In fact, the age-adjusted rates of all crimes
measured were at least twice as high for persons with
disabilities. (See Methodology for more information on the
age adjustment.)

-------------------------------------------------------------
Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act (Public Law
105-301), 1998

The Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act mandated
that the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) include
statistics on crimes against people with disabilities and the
characteristics of the victims of those crimes. The act was
designed "to increase public awareness of the plight of
victims of crime with developmental disabilities, to collect
data to measure the magnitude of the problem, and to develop
strategies to address the safety and justice needs of victims
of crime with developmental disabilities."

Section 5 of the act directed the Department of Justice to
include statistics relating to "the nature of crimes against
people with developmental disabilities; and the specific
characteristics of the victims of those crimes" in the NCVS.
This is the second report in the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) series on crime against people with disabilities. The
first report, Crime Against People with Disabilities, 2007,
NCJ 227814, October 2009, is available on the BJS Website.
Because of changes in the questionnaire, comparisons between
2007 and 2008 should not be made. (See Methodology for more
information on changes to the NCVS and ACS questionnaires.)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Data from the 2008 NCVS and ACS data collections provide
estimates on victim and crime characteristics of persons with
and without disabilities, including crime rate, type of
offenses, age, race and gender distribution, type of
disabilities, and victim injuries.
 
Violent crime rates

*Adjusting for the varied age distributions of persons with
and without disabilities, the violent crime rate against
persons with disabilities was 40 violent crimes per 1,000
persons age 12 or older, which was double the violent crime
rate for persons without disabilities (20 per 1,000)(table
2).

*In 2008 the age-adjusted rate of serious violent crime
against persons with disabilities was about 16 per 1,000
persons age 12 or older, compared to about 6 per 1,000 for
persons without disabilities.

*Persons with disabilities age 12 or older experienced
violent crime at age-adjusted rates that were two to three
times that of persons without disabilities for each violent
crime measured (rape/sexual assault, robbery, aggravated
assault, and simple assault).

Violent crime victim characteristics

*Persons ages 12 to 24 and ages 35 to 49 with disabilities
were nearly twice as likely as persons in these age groups
without disabilities to be victims of violent crime when
comparing rates that were not adjusted for age (table 3). 

*Regardless of disability status, persons ages 25 to 34
experienced violence at about the same rate (not adjusting
for age).

*Among persons with disabilities, females had a higher risk
of violent crime than males (after adjusting for age) in 2008
(table 4).

*Whites and blacks with disabilities were equally likely to
experience a violent crime after adjusting for age.

*After adjusting for age, non-Hispanics with disabilities (42
per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) were more likely to
experience a violent crime than Hispanics with disabilities
(29 per 1,000 age 12 or older) in 2008.

Violent crime characteristics

*About 15% of violent crime victims with disabilities said
that they suspected that they had been targeted due to their
disabilities. Another 35% did not know if they had been
targeted because of their disabilities (not shown in table).

*Males with disabilities were less likely than males without
disabilities to be victims of intimate partner violence.
Among females the likelihood of intimate partner violence did
not vary by disability status (table 5).

*The percentage of crimes against persons with disabilities
committed by well known or casual acquaintances was similar
for male (40%) and female (36%) victims.

*Persons with disabilities were slightly less likely than
persons without disabilities to offer any type of resistance
during a violent crime, including threatening or attacking
the offender and using nonconfrontational tactics, such as
yelling at or running from the offender (table 6).

*About a fifth of violence against persons with disabilities
involved an offender with a weapon (table 7).

*Similar percentages of nonfatal violent crimes involving an
offender armed with a firearm were committed against victims
with (8%) and without (7%) disabilities.

*About 27% of violent crime victims with disabilities were
injured as a result of the crime; 11% sought treatment (table
8).

*Violent crimes against about half of all victims were
reported to the police in 2008, regardless of the victim's
disability status (table 9).

*Violent crime victims with disabilities were almost twice as
likely to seek help from a victim advocacy agency (12%) as
victims without disabilities (6%) (table 10).

Types of disabilities

*Among the types of disabilities measured in 2008, persons
with cognitive disabilities had the highest risk of violent
victimization (table 11).

*No statistically significant differences emerged by type of
disability in the rate of rape or sexual assault or in the
rate of aggravated assault against persons with disabilities. 

*Persons with a cognitive disability had higher rates of
robbery and simple assault than persons with other types of
disabilities.   

*Females with a hearing disability were slightly more likely
than males with a hearing disability to experience violent
crime (table 12).

Property crime ***.(Footnote Estimates of property crime
against people with disabilities may be an undercount. See
Methodology for detailed explanation.)***

*Household burglary made up a higher percentage of all
property crime against households with persons with a
disability (25%) than against households without persons with
disabilities (19%) (table 13).

*Property crime (overall property crime, household burglary,
and motor vehicle theft) against households with persons with
disabilities was less likely to be reported to police than
when it was committed against households without persons with
disabilities (table 14).

-------------------------------------------------------------
------
Statistical Tables

Table 1. Estimated number of violent and property crimes
against persons, by type of crime and victim disability
status, 2008

Table 2. Violent victimization rates, by type of crime and
disability status, 2008

Table 3. Violent victimization rates, by age and disability
status, 2008

Table 4. Violent victimization rates, by gender, race,
Hispanic origin, and disability status, 2008

Table 5. Victim/offender relationship in violent crimes, by
disability status, 2008

Table 6. Victim resistance in violent crimes, by disability
status, 2008

Table 7. Violent crime, by offender weapon use and disability
status, 2008

Table 8. Injury and medical treatment in violent crime, by
disability status, 2008

Table 9. Violent crime reported to police, by type of crime
and disability status, 2008

Table 10. Violent crime victims who used non-police victim
advocacy agencies, by disability status and agency type, 2008

Table 11. Violent victimization rates of persons with
disabilities, by type of crime and type of disability, 2008

Table 12. Violent victimization rates of persons with
disabilities, by type of disability and gender, 2008

Table 13. Property crime occurring in households, by type of
crime and disability status, 2008

Table 14. Property crime reported to police, by type of crime
and household disability status, 2008
-------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------

Methodology

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal crimes, reported and not reported to
the police, against persons age 12 or older from a nationally
representative sample of U.S. households. Survey results are
based on data gathered from residents living throughout the
United States, including persons living in group quarters,
such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group
dwellings. The scope of the survey excludes Armed Forces
personnel living in military barracks and persons living in
an institutional setting, such as a correctional or hospital
facility. For more detail, see the Methodology in the BJS
series, Criminal Victimization in the United States,
Statistical Tables available on the BJS Website. (Criminal
Victimization in the United States, Statistical Tables, 2007,
NCJ 227669, February 2010.)

Data sources

The NCVS adopted questions from the U.S. Census Bureau's
American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the rate of
victimization against people with disabilities. The ACS
Subcommittee on Disability Questions developed the disability
questions based on questions used in the 2000 Decennial
Census and earlier versions of the ACS. The questions
identify persons who may require assistance to maintain their
independence, be at risk for discrimination, or lack
opportunities available to the general population because of
limitations related to a prolonged (6 months or longer)
sensory, physical, mental, or emotional condition. More
information about the ACS and the disability questions is
available on the U.S. Census Bureau Website
(http://www.census.gov/acs/www/).

In this report, disability is defined as a sensory, physical,
mental, or emotional condition lasting 6 months or longer
that makes it difficult for a person to perform activities of
daily living. The questions adopted from the ACS identified
the following six types of disabilities: 

*Hearing limitation entails deafness or serious difficulty
hearing.

*Vision limitation is blindness or serious difficulty seeing,
even when wearing glasses. 

*Cognitive limitation includes serious difficulty in
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions because of a
physical, mental, or emotional condition.
 
*Ambulatory limitation is difficulty walking or climbing
stairs.

*Self-care limitation is a condition that causes difficulty
dressing or bathing. 

*Independent living limitation is a physical, mental, or
emotional condition that impedes doing errands alone, such as
doctor visits or shopping. 

For more detailed definitions of the types of disabilities
measured, see U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey,
2008 Subject Definitions. Retrieved October 26, 2010 from
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/data_documentation/Su
bjectDefinitions/2008_ACSSubjectDefinitions.pdf.

Changes to the disability questions on the NCVS and ACS in
2008

In 2008 the U.S. Census Bureau changed some of the disability
questions on the ACS. The question about sensory disability
was separated into two questions about blindness and
deafness, and the questions about physical disability were
asked only about serious difficulty walking or climbing
stairs. Also, questions on employment disability and about
going outside of the home were eliminated in 2008. Census
Bureau analysis of 2007 and 2008 ACS disability data revealed
significant conceptual and measurement differences between
the 2007 and 2008 disability questions. The Census Bureau
concluded that data users should not compare the 2007 and
2008 estimates of the population with disabilities. Because
the 2007 and 2008 NCVS disability questions mirrored the ACS,
estimates of victimization of people with disabilities from
the 2007 and 2008 NCVS should not be compared. Further
explanation about incomparability of the 2007 and 2008 ACS
disability data is accessible at
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/disability/2008ACS_disability.
pdf.

Disability questions included in the NCVS in 2008
***(Footnote *The full NCVS questionnaire and an expanded
Methodology are available on the BJS Website
(http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=245).)***

Questions 168 through 173 in the NCVS 2008 survey asked
respondents for information related to health conditions,
impairments, or disabilities.

168. Research has shown that people with disabilities may be
more vulnerable to crime victimization. The next questions
ask about any health conditions, impairments, or disabilities
you may have.

169a. Are you deaf or do you have serious difficulty hearing?

169b. Are you blind or do you have serious difficulty seeing
even when wearing glasses?

170a. Because of a physical mental or emotional condition, do
you have serious difficulty: 

 (1) Concentrating, remembering, or making decisions?

 (2) Walking or climbing stairs?

 (3) Dressing or bathing?

170b. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition,
do you have difficulty doing errands alone such as visiting a
doctor's office or shopping?

171. Is "Yes" marked in any of 169a-170b? (That is, has the
respondent indicated that he/she has a health condition or
disability?)

172. During the incident you just told me about, do you have
reason to suspect you were victimized because of your health
condition(s), impairment(s), or disability(ies)?

173. What health conditions, impairments, or disabilities do
you believe cause you to be targeted for this incident?

*The full NCVS questionnaire and an expanded Methodology are
available on the BJS Website
(http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=245).

Calculation of rates using the NCVS and the ACS

The disability-related questions were not administered to
each person in the NCVS sample in 2008. Questions were
administered to people who reported being a victim of one of
the measured offenses (as part of the crime incident report).
To calculate rates of victimization for people with and
without disabilities, BJS obtained 2008 population data about
persons age 12 and older from the Census Bureau's ACS
program. Because NCVS questions mirror the ACS questions, it
is possible to combine victimization estimates from the NCVS
for people with disabilities with population data from the
ACS to produce population based rates of victimization.

Age-adjusted violent victimization rates

In general, the population with disabilities is older than
the population without disabilities. To account for this
difference in the age distribution, many comparisons between
the victimization experiences of the people with and without
disabilities use age-adjusted victimization rates. Without
this adjustment, comparisons would be confounded by
differences that may be attributed to the age distribution
rather than disability status.

Direct standardization of populations was used to calculate
the age-adjusted violent victimization rates. Other federal
agencies use similar methods to calculate age-adjusted rates
of diseases and mortality.

The population with disabilities was taken from the ACS and
divided into seven age categories: ages 12 to 15, 16 to 19,
20 to 24, 25 to 34, 35 to 49, 50 to 64, and 65 or older. For
each age category, the original unadjusted rate of violent
crime was calculated by dividing the number of violent
victimizations for people in that age group in the NCVS by
the number of people in the same age group from the ACS. A
weight for each age group was computed by dividing the number
of all persons in an age group without disabilities by the
total number of persons without a disability. The weight
computed for a particular age group was multiplied by the
original unadjusted violent victimization rate for the same
age group. This procedure was completed for each age group.

Results were summed across all age groups to obtain
age-adjusted rates of violent victimization against persons
with disabilities. This procedure was used to produce the
age-adjusted rates of violent victimization of persons with
disabilities by gender, race, Hispanic origin, and type of
violent crime.

For more information on direct standardization of
populations, see Curtin, L.R., & Klein, R.J. (1995). Direct
Standardization (Age-adjusted Death Rates), Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health
Statistics. Retrieved November 29, 2010, from
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt06rv.pdf.

Potential undercount of property crime

The NCVS measure of property crime is a household-based
measure. The questions NCVS used to identify whether a person
had a disability were asked only of those respondents who
reported that they had been victimized. If the person who
reported the property crime was a household member with a
disability, then the NCVS identified the property crime as
one against a household that has a person with a disability.
If a household member without a disability reported the
property crime during the survey, the NCVS did not ask
whether any other household member had a disability. For this
reason, the estimate of property crime against people with
disabilities may be an undercount of such crimes.

Limitations of the estimates

The NCVS was designed to measure the incidence of crime
against the U.S. civilian population, excluding persons who
live in institutions. A significant number of people with
disabilities, especially those with the most profound and
severe conditions, live in institutional settings. The
measures of crime against persons with disabilities (as
measured by the NCVS) covers only those people with
disabilities who are living among the general population in
household settings.
The survey instruments, modes of interview, and interviewing
protocols used in the NCVS may not be suited for interviewing
people with difficulty communicating, especially by
telephone. Currently, about 70% of the interviews conducted
for the NCVS are by telephone. Some people have disabilities
that limit their verbal communication and use technology to
enhance their ability to communicate, but many people do not
have access to such technology. Additionally, the survey
questionnaire, while avoiding legal terminology, incorporates
some complex concepts and language that may not be easily
understood by people with cognitive disabilities.

The survey also requires direct interviews with eligible
respondents and allows the use of proxy interviews in a
limited set of circumstances. A proxy interview is allowed
when a respondent is physically or mentally incapable of
responding. The survey restrictions on proxy interviews were
instituted because someone else may not know about the
victimization experiences of the respondent, and because the
person providing the information via proxy may be the
perpetrator of the abuse or violence experienced by the
respondent
. 
Overall, the effects on the estimates due to proxy responses
are probably small. However, when measuring victimization of
people with disabilities, the use of proxies could be a
significant issue. About 1% of the crimes reported to the
NCVS in 2008 were obtained from proxy interviews. In the NCVS
data on crimes against persons with disabilities, about 2%
were obtained from proxy interviews. Since proxy respondents
may be more likely to omit crime incidents or may not know
some details about reported crime incidents, the number of
crimes against persons with disabilities may have been
undercounted.

While the NCVS and ACS have identical disability questions,
other factors associated with the surveys may impact the
calculation and comparisons of victimization rates. For
example, the NCVS is conducted by personal visits and
telephone interviews while the ACS is a self-administered
survey. The response rate for the NCVS in 2008 was 90.4% of
households and 86.2% of eligible individuals. The response
rate for the ACS was 97.9%. Response rates for persons with
disabilities could not be calculated because information in
disability is not available for nonrespondents. Possible
non-interview biases that may affect the estimates have not
been studied. Most variables used in this report had a very
low item non-response.

Standard error computations

Comparisons of percentages and rates made in this report were
tested to determine if observed differences were
statistically significant. Differences described as higher,
lower, or different passed a hypothesis test at the 0.05
level of statistical significance (95%-confidence level). The
tested difference was greater than twice the standard error
of that difference. For comparisons that were statistically
significant at the 0.10 level (90%-confidence level), the
terms "somewhat," "slightly," or "marginally" are used to
note the nature of the difference.

Significance-testing calculations were conducted at BJS using
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS by
the U.S. Census Bureau. These programs take into
consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design
when calculating estimates. Estimates based on 10 or fewer
sample cases have high relative standard errors. Care should
be taken when comparing such estimates to other estimates
when both are based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

-------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

These Statistical Tables present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection programs.

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., and Michael R. Rand wrote this report.
Michael Planty, Ph.D., verified the report.

Catherine Bird, Georgette Walsh, and Jill Duncan edited the
report, Tina Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne E.
Robinson prepared the report for final printing under the
supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2010, NCJ 231328
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2019>.
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------

12/7/2010/JER 3:44pm