U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------------
Cybercrime against Businesses, 2005

September  2008,  NCJ 221943

-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cb05.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cyber
-------------------------------------------------------------

By Ramona R. Rantala
BJS Statistician

-------------------------------------------------------------

Among 7,818 businesses that responded to the National Computer Security
Survey, 67% detected at least one cybercrime in 2005 (table 1). Nearly 60%
detected one or more types of cyber attack, 11% detected cyber theft, and
24% of the businesses detected other computer security incidents.
Respondents, representing 36 economic industries, said they detected more
than 22 million incidents of cybercrime in 2005. The vast majority of
cybercrimes (20 million incidents) were other computer security incidents,
primarily spyware, adware, phishing, and spoofing. There were nearly 1.5
million computer virus infections and 126,000 cyber fraud incidents. 

The effects of these crimes were measured in terms of monetary loss and
system downtime. Ninety-one percent of the businesses providing
information sustained one or both types of loss. The monetary loss for these
businesses totaled $867 million in 2005. Cyber theft accounted for more
than half of the loss ($450 million). Cyber attacks cost businesses $314
million. System downtime caused by cyber attacks and other computer
security incidents totaled 323,900 hours. Computer viruses accounted for
193,000 hours and other computer security incidents resulted in more than
100,000 hours of system downtime.

Of the businesses responding to the survey, telecommunications businesses
(82% of these businesses), computer system design businesses (79%), and
manufacturers of durable goods (75%) had the highest prevalence of
cybercrime in 2005. Utilities, computer system design businesses,
manufacturers of durable goods, and internet service providers detected the
highest number of incidents, with a total of more than 10.5 million
incidents. Administrative support, finance, and food service businesses
incurred the highest monetary loss with a combined total of 
$325 million, more than a third of the total for all businesses. 

Forestry, fishing, and hunting (44% of businesses) and agriculture (51%)
had the lowest prevalence of cybercrime in 2005. Agriculture, rental
services, and business and technical schools incurred the least monetary loss
($3 million). 

Insiders (i.e., employees, contractors, or vendors working for the business)
were responsible for the cyber thefts against nearly 75% of businesses
victimized by cyber theft. Conversely, more than 70% of businesses
victimized by cyber attacks or other computer security incidents said the
suspected offenders were outsiders (i.e., hackers, competitors, and other
non-employees).
 
Overall, few businesses that detected an incident (15%) reported
cybercrimes to official law enforcement agencies. More than 50% of
victimized businesses reported cyber thefts to police, while cyber attacks
and other computer security incidents were reported to authorities by 6%
and 12% of victimized businesses, respectively.

The National Computer Security Survey provides the nation's first
large-scale measure of cybercrime

The President's National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace directs the
Department of Justice to develop better data about the nature and prevalence
of cybercrime and electronic intrusions.***1The National Strategy to
Secure Cyberspace, February 2003;Recommendation A/R 2-1***.  Other
data collections address cybercrime, but no large-scale (or
nationally representative) survey collects sufficient information to
accurately measure cybercrime and its consequences or to develop risk
factors. 

The National Computer Security Survey (NCSS) was developed by the U.S.
Department of Justice (DOJ), Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
Statistics in partnership with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
National Cyber Security Division. The DOJ Computer Crime and
Intellectual Property Section and the Computer Intrusion Section of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation Cyber Division and the U.S. Secret Service
also collaborated on the project. The survey was also supported by a wide
variety of trade associations and industry groups. (A complete list is
available online at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/survey/ncss/ncss.htm>.)

The NCSS documents the nature, prevalence, and impact of cyber intrusions
against businesses in the United States. This report examines three general
types of cybercrime: 

* Cyber attacks are crimes in which the computer system is the target. Cyber
attacks consist of computer viruses (including worms and Trojan horses),
denial of service attacks, and electronic vandalism or sabotage. 

* Cyber theft comprises crimes in which a computer is used to steal money
or other things of value. Cyber theft includes embezzlement, fraud, theft of
intellectual property, and theft of personal or financial data. 

* Other computer security incidents encompass spyware, adware, hacking,
phishing, spoofing, pinging, port scanning, and theft of other information,
regardless of whether the breach was successful or damage or losses were
sustained as a result.

More than 8,000 businesses participated in the survey

The National Computer Security Survey sample was a stratified, random
sample of businesses designed to produce national and industry-level
estimates. The sample was stratified by industry, risk level, and size of
business. Thirty-six industries, as defined by the North American Industrial
Classification System (NAICS), were within the scope of the survey. (See
appendix table 1 for a complete list and definitions of industries,
Methodology for a detailed description of the sample design, and page 11
for a glossary.) 

To produce national and industry-level estimates a sample of nearly 36,000
businesses was selected (table 2). Responses were received from more than
8,000 businesses, giving an overall response rate of 23%. Response rates
varied by business size, with larger businesses responding at a higher rate.
Response rates also varied by industry. Response rates were highest for
utility businesses (37%). Telecommunications (16%) had one of the lowest
response rates. (See appendix table 2 for response rates for all industries).
Though response rates were not sufficient to support national or
industry-level estimates, they were the highest of any survey of this kind.
 
Computer virus infections were the most prevalent cybercrime among
businesses in 2005

Of the 8,000 respondent businesses representing 36 economic industries,
more than 7,800 used some type of computer system. Two-thirds of the
businesses that used computers detected at least one computer security
incident (5,081 businesses) in 2005 (table 3). Nearly three-fifths detected
one or more types of cyber attack. A tenth detected a cyber theft. A quarter
of the businesses detected other computer security incidents, such as
spyware or phishing. 

Computer virus infection was the most prevalent type of cyber attack,
detected by 52% of responding businesses. Nearly 90% of respondents
reported that they were able to stop a virus before it caused an infection
(not
shown in a table). Of those businesses able to intercept viruses, 40% said
they were successful in preventing all virus infections.

Cyber fraud was the most common type of cyber theft, having been detected
by 5% of the businesses responding to the survey (table 3). 

Of the businesses detecting theft of intellectual property, 70% indicated at
least one incident involving the theft of trade secrets (table 4). For victims
of theft of personal or financial data, names and dates of birth were taken
from 60% of businesses. More than 75% of the businesses detecting other
computer security incidents indicated that some type of malware (primarily
adware) was installed, and 58% of victims discovered spyware or keystroke
logging applications. Slightly more than 50% of the businesses detecting
other computer security incidents were victims of corporate identity theft in
the form of phishing or spoofing.

Prevalence of cybercrime varied by industry and risk level. In 2005,
telecommunications businesses (82% of these businesses), computer system
design businesses (79%), and manufacturers of durable goods (75%) had the
highest prevalence of cybercrime (appendix table 3.) These three industries
also showed the highest prevalence of cyber attacks. Finance (33% of
businesses) and Internet service providers (21%) had the highest proportion
of businesses detecting cyber theft. About a third of responding
telecommunications businesses, manufacturers of durable goods, and
architecture and engineering businesses detected other computer security
incidents. 

Forestry, fishing, and hunting (44% of businesses) and agriculture (51%)
had the lowest prevalence of cybercrime in 2005. Forestry, fishing, and
hunting also had the lowest proportion of businesses detecting cyber theft
(3%), followed by warehousing (4%) and social services (5%).

86% of victimized businesses detected multiple incidents

The majority of victimized businesses (86%) detected multiple incidents,
with half of these (43%) detecting 10 or more incidents during the year
(table 5). However, the percentage of businesses detecting multiple
incidents varied by type of incident. For victims of computer viruses, denial
of service attacks, fraud, and other computer security incidents, the majority
of victims detected multiple incidents. Conversely, fewer than half of the
victims of vandalism or sabotage, embezzlement, theft of intellectual
property, or theft of personal or financial data detected multiple incidents. 

91% of businesses detecting cybercrime incurred losses

The effects of cybercrime were measured in terms of monetary loss and
system downtime. During testing of the survey instrument, many businesses
indicated that they had no reliable way to estimate the costs associated with
system downtime. The businesses cited various reasons for difficulty in
estimating the cost: employees were able to work offline, customers could
return after systems were restored, and there was no method for measuring
lost sales. For these reasons, the NCSS asked only for duration of downtime
rather than a dollar loss equivalent.

Ninety-one percent of the businesses that detected incidents and answered
questions on loss sustained one or both types of loss. Forty-one percent of
businesses sustained both monetary loss and system downtime.

Type of loss        Percent of businesses*
------------------------------------------------------------------------------    
No loss                       9    %
Any loss                      91   %
    Monetary loss only        38   
    Downtime only             12   
    Both                      41
------------------------------------------------------------------------------    
*Based on 4,083 businesses answering at least one question on monetary
loss or downtime.             

Of the 3,591 businesses that detected incidents and responded to monetary
loss questions, 3,247 (90%) incurred monetary loss from the computer
security incidents (table 6). The amount of monetary loss depended on the
type of incident. Approximately 68% of the victims of cyber theft sustained
monetary loss of $10,000 or more. By comparison, 34% of the businesses
detecting cyber attacks and 31% of businesses detecting other computer
security incidents lost more than $10,000. The other computer security
incidents category had the highest proportion of businesses experiencing
some form of cybercrime but incurring no monetary loss (20%).

There was no downtime for a tenth of the businesses detecting cyber attacks
or other computer security incidents (table 7). System downtime lasted
between 1 and 24 hours for half of the businesses and more than 24 hours
for a third of businesses detecting these types of incidents.  

The duration of system downtime varied by type of incident. Denial of
service attacks noticeably affected the computer systems of 92% of victims.
By comparison, incidents of vandalism or sabotage shut systems down for
73% of businesses, and other computer security incidents caused system
downtime for 68% of victimized businesses.

Cybercrime resulted in monetary loss of $867 million among businesses
responding to the survey

Nearly 4,500 businesses provided information on 22 million cybercrime
incidents in 2005 (table 8). The 3,247 businesses that incurred monetary
loss from cybercrime lost a total of $867 million. About 2,000 businesses
said their business networks, PCs, or web sites (or combinations of the
three) were down for a total of 324,000 hours. 

Cyber attacks accounted for nearly 1.6 million incidents, more than $300
million in loss, and 220,000 hours of system downtime. Computer viruses
accounted for about 90% each of: cyber attack incidents (1.5 million
incidents), monetary loss ($281 million), and system downtime (193,000
hours).   

Cyber theft accounted for less than 1% of all incidents but more than 50%
of the total monetary loss ($450 million). Theft of intellectual property had
the fewest number of incidents (607), and the greatest amount of monetary
loss of all types of cyber theft (nearly $160 million). Embezzlement also
cost businesses nearly $160 million. System downtime data were not
collected for cyber theft.

Although 24% of businesses detected other computer security incidents,
these other incidents accounted for 92% of the total number of incidents, or
20 million incidents. Other computer security incidents accounted for 12%
of all monetary loss ($103 million) and 32% of system downtime (104,000
hours).

Two-thirds of computer security incidents were targeted against critical
infrastructure businesses

The number of incidents varied by risk level and industry.  Ninety-five
percent of victimized scientific research and development businesses
detected multiple incidents (appendix table 4). By comparison, fewer than
80% of victimized businesses operating in management of companies;
forestry, fishing, and hunting; or other services detected more than one
incident.

Critical infrastructure businesses detected 13 million incidents (nearly
two-thirds of the total). High risk industries detected more than 4 million
incidents (a fifth of the total).

Risk level          Number of incidents 
----------------------------------------------------------------------
     All businesses           22,138,250     
Critical infrastructure       13,039,900     
High risk                      4,133,800 
Moderate risk                  1,979,400 
Low risk                       2,985,100 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Utilities, computer system design businesses, durable goods manufacturers,
and internet service providers detected the most incidents. Businesses in
these four industries detected more than 10.5 million incidents in 2005 (not
shown in a table). Forestry, fishing, and hunting; food service; and rental
service businesses detected the lowest number of incidents. Combined,
these 3 industries detected fewer than 10,000 incidents.

Computer system design businesses (98%) incurred monetary loss more
frequently than any other industry (appendix table 5). In 2005 computer
security incidents resulted in losses of $10,000 or greater for more than half
of the finance businesses, manufacturers of durable goods, insurance
businesses, and mining businesses.

Critical infrastructure ($288 million) and low-risk businesses ($298 million)
sustained the greatest monetary loss from cybercrime in 2005.

Risk level          Monetary loss
               (in thousands) 
----------------------------------------------------
     
        All businesses        $866,600  
Critical infrastructure       $287,600  
High risk                      205,100   
Moderate risk                   76,100    
Low risk                       297,800   
-------------------------------------------------------

Specifically, administrative support, finance, and food service businesses
incurred the greatest monetary loss with a combined total of $325 million,
more than a third of the total for all businesses (not shown in a table).
Agriculture businesses, rental services, and business and technical schools
incurred the least monetary loss with a combined loss of $3 million. 

More than half of the manufacturers of durable goods (56%) sustained
system downtime of 25 hours or longer (appendix table 6). By comparison,
more than a third of legal services and accounting businesses had a total of 1
to 4 hours of system downtime. Critical infrastructure industries suffered
152,200 hours of system downtime (nearly half of the total). Health care
businesses reported the greatest duration of system downtime (34,800
hours). Accounting; forestry, fishing, and hunting; and warehousing had the
least downtime--a total of 2,500 hours, with fewer than 1,000 hours each. 

Insiders were involved in cyber theft for 74% of businesses in 2005

A third of the victimized businesses indicated that they were unable to
determine what affiliation any computer security offenders had with the
business (table 9). The type of incident for which businesses had the least
information about the offender was denial of service (50% of businesses).
Conversely, some offender information was known by the majority of
victims of theft of intellectual property, (94% of businesses) and
embezzlement (93%).

In 2005 someone from outside the business, such as a hacker or competitor,
was responsible for at least one computer security incident against 71% of
the businesses that were able to make a determination about the suspected
offender (table 10). For cyber attacks and other computer security incidents,
nearly 75% of businesses said the suspected offender was an outsider. By
comparison, the majority of businesses detecting cyber theft reported that
the suspected offender was an insider (employee, contractor, or vendor
working for the business). For embezzelment, more than 90% of businesses
said the suspected offender was an insider, which is to be expected due to
the nature of the crime. For thefts of intellectual property, nearly 85% of
businesses said an insider was involved. 

Motion picture and sound recording businesses (87% of victimized
businesses) had the highest percentage of outside offenders (see appendix
table 7). By comparison, arts and entertainment businesses had the lowest
(55%). Retail (54%), finance (50%), and utility businesses (50%) showed
the highest percentage of inside offenders. Petroleum businesses (24%),
architecture and engineering businesses (25), and business and technical
schools (26%) had the lowest. Computer system design businesses had the
second highest prevalence of outside offenders (84% of victimized
businesses) and one of the lowest prevalence rates of inside offenders
(29%). 

Most businesses did not report cyber attacks to law enforcement authorities

When a computer security incident was detected, businesses responded in a
variety of ways. The majority of businesses (87%) reported the incident to
some person or organization (table 11). Eighty percent of responding
businesses reported incidents to someone within their business. Fifteen
percent of respondents reported incidents to another organization, such as
their computer security contractor or internet service provider. Fifteen
percent of victimized businesses reported incidents to law enforcement. Law
enforcement includes federal, state and local law enforcement agencies, and
official organizations affiliated with law enforcement such as InfraGard (an
organization that works with the Federal Bureau of Investigation) and
CERT CC (an organization that works with the Department of Homeland
Security). 

Reporting of incidents to law enforcement authorities varied by the type of
incident. The majority of businesses reported embezzlement (72%), fraud
(63%), and theft of personal or financial data (60%). Few businesses
reported theft of intellectual property (27%), any type of cyber attack (6%),
or other computer security incidents (12%) to law enforcement officials. 

Among businesses not reporting incidents to law enforcement authorities,
the majority (86%) indicated that incidents were reported elsewhere (within
the business or to an organization such as their security contractor) rather
than to law enforcement (table 12). Half of the businesses responded that
they thought there was nothing to be gained by reporting an incident to law
enforcement. Other businesses said they did not think to report the incident
(22%), did not know who to contact (11%), or thought the incident was
outside the jurisdiction of law enforcement authorities (7%). 

Few businesses (3%) indicated that their decision not to report an incident
to law enforcement was based on the possibility of negative publicity or
decreased confidence in the business. 

Three-fifths of the businesses detecting cyber attacks reported that the
Internet was involved

One critical aspect of computer security is determining which networks
were accessed in an incident. (Accessed networks include networks that
were breached, used to get into another part of the computer system, or
affected by the incident--for instance, networks vandalized or on which
malware was surreptitiously installed.) NCSS data identify which systems
tended to be targeted. Nearly 1,600 businesses that detected incidents also
provided information on the systems the business used and which ones were
accessed during an incident.

A majority of the businesses detected at least one incident involving the
Internet and/or a local area network (LAN) (table 13). The Internet was the
most prevalent vehicle or target of cyber attacks (64% of businesses), while
cyber thieves tended to access a business's LAN (57% of businesses). For
victims of other computer security incidents, half of the businesses reported
the Internet, half reported their LAN, and more than a quarter said their
wide area network (WAN) was accessed.

Other networks were accessed to a lesser extent. Intranet or Extranet
connections were accessed during computer breaches for 17% of
respondents, stand-alone workstations (15%), other networks such as virtual
private networks (12%) and wireless connections (8%) were also accessed
(not shown in a table).

Another critical aspect of computer security is determining whether laptops
not owned by the business posed more of a security threat than
business-owned laptops. Nearly a third of the businesses said a
business-owned laptop was involved in at least one computer security
incident. Business-owned laptops were cited less frequently as having been
used in cyber attacks (10% of businesses) or cyber thefts (20%) than in
other computer security incidents (38%). In comparison, 8% of the
businesses reported non-business laptops were used in a cyber attack, 7% in
a cyber theft, and 16% in an other computer security incident (not shown in
a table). 

Of the 4,000 businesses detecting a virus infection, 51% provided
information on how viruses were introduced into their computer systems.
E-mail attachments were the most commonly cited vehicle (77% of
businesses) for introducing computer virus infections (table 14). 

Small businesses (83%) were somewhat more vulnerable to virus-laden
e-mails than large businesses (72%). Conversely, large businesses (37%)
were more vulnerable to portable media such as CDs or thumb drives as a
source of virus infections, compared to small businesses (14%). This
difference might be explained by a greater tendency of larger businesses to
use portable media. 

Internet downloads were the second most prevalent source of computer
virus infections. Sixty-one percent of businesses detected virus infections
from Internet downloads. This percent did not vary by business size. 

Insufficient anti-virus software was the most prevalent vulnerability

Overall, 62% of the businesses using anti-virus software said the software
was inadequate in preventing incidents (table 15). Nearly half of the
businesses using anti-spyware or anti-adware said the software did not
prevent an incident. Internal controls (31% of businesses), e-mail logs and
filters (27%), and firewalls (26%) were also commonly cited as insufficient.

Security insufficiencies differed depending on the type of incident. The
most prevalent security deficiencies were anti-virus software for cyber
attacks (66% of businesses), misuse of authorized access for cyber theft
(46%), and anti-spyware and anti-adware for other computer security
incidents (62%).

Other security measures appeared to be more successful in preventing
incidents. Biometrics (5% of businesses), digital certificates (5%), password
generators (6%), and encryption (7%) were least frequently cited as the
mechanisms that were inadequate to prevent incidents (not shown in a
table).

Businesses that outsourced all or part of their computer security had a
greater prevalence of incidents

Businesses that outsourced all or part of their computer security had a
higher prevalence of cybercrime compared to businesses that performed all
security in-house. 

Sixty-four percent of businesses that outsourced at least one security
measure detected one or more cyber attacks in 2005 (table 16). By
comparison, 55% of businesses that kept all security functions in-house
detected a cyber attack that same year. 

The security measure that showed the greatest difference in prevalence of
attacks between outsourcing and in-house was physical security. Businesses
that outsourced physical security had the highest prevalence of cyber attacks
(73%), compared to businesses that managed their own physical security
(60%). Several security measures showed little or no difference between the
businesses that outsourced computer security and those that kept it in-house.
These include business continuity plans and formal audit standards. Two
security measures showed a slightly lower prevalence of cyber attacks when
outsourced: network watch centers and configuration management.

Methodology

Sample design

The National Computer Security Survey sample was a stratified, random
sample of businesses designed to produce national and industry-level
estimates. The sample was stratified by industry, risk level, and size of
business. Thirty-six industries, as determined by the North American
Industrial Classification System (NAICS), were within the scope of the
survey. (See appendix table 1 for a complete list and definition of
industries.) Risk level comprised four groups: critical infrastructure, high
risk, moderate risk, and low risk. Critical infrastructure consisted of
businesses operating in the industries with which the Department of
Homeland Security formed Information Sharing and Analysis Centers
(ISACs). Each of the remaining businesses was designated as high,
moderate, or low risk depending on its industry of operation's risk of
incidents, loss, and downtime. Business size was determined by the number
of employees and was divided into nine size categories. The sampling
frame, Dunn and Bradstreet, contained records for nearly 7.3 million
in-scope businesses. Businesses without employees on their payroll such
as family owned and operated businesses--were out of scope. 

Sampling was done at the enterprise level, except in cases of businesses
with large subsidiaries operating in different economic sectors. To preserve
the ability to provide industry-level findings, these businesses were sampled
at the highest level of subsidiary with distinct lines of business. 

A sample of 35,596 businesses was drawn to produce national and
industry-level estimates and to track changes of more than 2.5% over time.
(See appendix table 2 for a summary of the sample by risk level and
industry.) Businesses with more than 5,000 employees and Fortune 500
businesses were drawn with certainty to ensure the representation of all
industries. Because some industries typically do not have large businesses,
the largest 50 businesses were also included with certainty. Due to the
particular importance of the nation's critical infrastructure, businesses in
these strata were over-sampled. High risk industries such as manufacturing,
retail, and wholesale were also over-sampled.

Tables

Denominators reflect the number of businesses that responded to the
questions relevant to a given table. For example, in table 5 the denominator
represents the number of businesses that responded to questions on
networks used by the business, whether computer security incidents were
detected, and networks that were affected in those incidents (if any). Unless
otherwise noted, missing items or responses of "don't know" have been
omitted. Totals and medians are based on positive responses and exclude
zeroes.

Incident percentages are based on 7,636 businesses that had a computer and
responded to at least 1 incident question; 7,626 businesses responded to at
least 1 question on cyber attacks, 7,561 to at least 1 question on cyber
theft,
and 7,492 to at least 1 question on other computer security incidents. 

For theft of intellectual property, 29% of 198 businesses provided multiple
types; for personal or financial data, 60% of 235 businesses specified more
than 1 type; and for other computer security incidents, 59% of 1,762
businesses identified multiple types.

Missing and excluded data

Of the 8,079 businesses providing information on whether or not they had
computer systems, 14 businesses reported contradictory information.
Because the responses from these 14 businesses could not be reconciled,
they were excluded from all analyses.

Each table underwent a detailed disclosure analysis to ensure the
confidentiality of responses given by individual businesses. As a result,
some responses were excluded from totals and medians. Table 8 and
appendix table 6 were affected. Six responses were excluded from the
number of computer security incidents; six responses were excluded from
monetary loss; and three responses were excluded from system downtime.
The disclosure analysis also resulted in the suppression of values for some
cells in table 10, appendix table 6, and appendix table 7.

Definitions of computer security incidents

Computer virus--a hidden fragment of computer code which propagates by
inserting itself into or modifying other programs. Includes viruses, worms,
and Trojan horses. Excludes spyware, adware, and other malware.  
     
Denial of service--the disruption, degradation, or exhaustion of an Internet
connection or e-mail service that results in an interruption of the normal
flow of information. Denial of service is usually caused by ping attacks, port
scanning probes, or excessive amounts of incoming data.          
Electronic vandalism or sabotage--the deliberate or malicious damage,
defacement, destruction or other alteration of electronic files, data, web
pages, or programs.
          
Embezzlement--the unlawful misappropriation of money or other things of
value, by the person to whom the property was entrusted (typically an
employee), for his or her own purpose. Includes instances in which a
computer was used to wrongfully transfer, counterfeit, forge or gain access
to money, property, financial documents, insurance policies, deeds, use of
rental cars, or various services by the person to whom they were entrusted.
          
Fraud--the intentional misrepresentation of information or identity to
deceive others, the unlawful use of a credit or debit card or ATM, or the use
of electronic means to transmit deceptive information, in order to obtain
money or other things of value. Fraud may be committed by someone inside
or outside the business. Includes instances in which a computer was used to
defraud the business of money, property, financial documents, insurance
policies, deeds, use of rental cars, or various services by forgery,
misrepresented identity, credit card or wire fraud. Excludes incidents of
embezzlement.  
     
Theft of intellectual property--the illegal obtaining of copyrighted or
patented material, trade secrets, or trademarks (including designs, plans,
blueprints, codes, computer programs, software, formulas, recipes, graphics)
usually by electronic copying. Excludes theft of personal or financial data
such as credit card or social security numbers, names and dates of birth,
financial account information, or any other type of information.
          
Theft of personal or financial data--the illegal obtaining of information that
potentially allows someone to use or create accounts under another name
(individual, business, or some other entity). Personal information includes
names, dates of birth, social security numbers, or other personal
information. Financial information includes credit, debit, or ATM card
account or PIN numbers. Excludes theft of intellectual property such as
copyrights, patents, trade secrets, and trademarks. Excludes theft of any
other type of information.
          
Other computer security incidents--Incidents that do not fit within the
definitions of the specific types of cyber attacks and cyber theft.
Encompasses spyware, adware, hacking, phishing, spoofing, pinging, port
scanning, sniffing, and theft of other information, regardless of whether
damage or losses were sustained as a result.
          
Definitions of other terms

Business--a company, service or membership organization consisting of one
or more establishments under common ownership or control. For this
survey, major subsidiaries were treated as separate businesses.
          
CERT C.C--an organization that works with the U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (CERT) and the private sector. CERT C.C. studies
computer and network security in order to provide incident response
services to victims of attacks, publish alerts concerning vulnerabilities and
threats, and offer information to help improve computer and network
security. 
     
DHS National Cyber Security Division (NCSD)--works cooperatively with
public, private, and international entities to secure cyberspace and
America's cyber assets. Its strategic objectives are to build and maintain an
effective national cyberspace response system and to implement a cyber-risk
management program for protection of critical infrastructure.    
     
DOJ Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS)--is
responsible for implementing the Department's national strategies in
combating computer and intellectual property crimes worldwide. The
Computer Crime Initiative is a comprehensive program designed to combat
electronic penetrations, data thefts, and cyber attacks on critical
information
systems. 
          
FBI Cyber Division, Computer Intrusion Section--addresses computer
intrusions, which often have international facets and national economic
implications. The Cyber Division as a whole simultaneously supports FBI
priorities across program lines, assisting counterterrorism,
counterintelligence and other criminal investigations when aggressive
technological investigative assistance is required.    
     
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)--organizations that work
with the U.S. Government, law enforcement agencies, technology providers,
and security associations such as U.S. CERT. ISACs maintain secure
databases, analytic tools and information gathering and distribution
facilities
designed to allow authorized individuals to submit reports about
information security threats, vulnerabilities, incidents and solutions. 
          
InfraGard--an information sharing and analysis effort serving the interests
and combining the knowledge base of a wide range of members. At its most
basic level, InfraGard is a partnership between the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the private sector.   
     
Subsidiary--a company in which another business has more than 50%
ownership or the power to direct or cause the direction of management and
policies.
          
U.S. CERT--The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team is a
partnership between the Department of Homeland Security and the public
and private sectors. Established in 2003 to protect the nation's Internet
infrastructure, U.S. CERT coordinates defense against and responses to
cyber attacks across the nation. 

United States Secret Service (USSS)--Originally founded to suppress the
counterfeiting of U.S. currency, the USSS now investigates many financial
crimes. The USSS has established working partnerships in both the law
enforcement and business communities to address such cybercrime issues as
protecting the critical infrastructure, Internet intrusions, and associated
fraud. These partnerships include the Electronic Crimes Task Forces and the
Cyber Investigative Section.       

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the U.S.
Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director.

This Special Report was written by Ramona R. Rantala, BJS Statistician. 
Mark Motivans verified the statistical information. Elizabeth Billheimer and
Bethany Allen assisted with verification. 

Ramona R. Rantala was project manager for the National Computer
Security Survey. RAND Corporation staff, under a cooperative agreement
and in collaboration with BJS, designed the sample, updated the
questionnaire, and collected the data: Lois M. Davis, Principal Investigator;
Daniela Golinelli, Statistician; Robin Beckman, Research Programmer;
Sarah Cotton, Survey Director; Robert Anderson, Co-Principal Investigator;
Anil Bamezai, Policy Researcher; Christopher Corey, Survey Technical
Support Manager; Megan Zander-Cotugno, Survey Coordinator; and John
Adams, Senior Statistician. Joseph Garrett, Senior Vice President, and Julie
Young, Research Director of Marketing Research, Inc., designed and
monitored the web-based data collection instrument. 

Catherine Bird and Tina L. Dorsey edited and produced the report. Jayne E.
Robinson prepared the report for final printing.

September 2008, NCJ 221943
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its related
statistical data and tables are available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet
site: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cb05.> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/11/2008/ TLD