U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Contract Bench and Jury Trials 
in State Courts, 2005

September 2009, NCJ 225634 

---------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full
report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cbajtsc05.htm
---------------------------------------------------

by Donald J. Farole, Jr., Ph.D.

BJS Statistician

In 2005, state courts of general jurisdiction
disposed of approximately 26,950 tort, contract,
and real property cases by bench or jury trial.
Contract cases (8,917) accounted for about a third
of all disposed trial cases.

This report provides an in-depth examination of
contract cases decided by a judge or jury in 2005.
Contract disputes involve fraud, employment
discrimination or dispute, tortious interference,
or allegations of unfulfilled agreements between
buyers and sellers, lenders and borrowers, or
landlords and tenants.

This report is the second in a series based on
analysis of data collected from the 2005 Civil
Justice Survey of State Courts (CJSSC). The first
report in the series, Civil Bench and Jury Trials
in State Courts, 2005 (NCJ 223851), provides a
general overview of tort, contract, and real
property cases decided by a bench or jury trial.
The CJSSC excluded civil cases that did not go to
trial, trials in federal courts, and trials in
state courts of limited jurisdiction. 

The 2005 CJSSC marked the first time that the
collection examined general civil trials concluded
in a nationally representative sample of urban,
suburban, and rural jurisdictions. The prior data
collections in 1992, 1996, and 2001 had focused on
general civil trial litigation in the nation's 75
most populous counties.

Highlights

*64% of contract cases in general jurisdiction
courts were decided by a judge, and 36% were heard
by a jury.

*Contract trials in the 75 most populous counties
declined by more than a quarter from 1996 to 2005.

*Nearly two-thirds of contract trials in 2005 were
seller plaintiff (32%) or buyer plaintiff (29%)
cases. 

*Contract trials in 2005 most commonly involved an 
individual suing a business (33%), followed by a    
business suing another business (25%). 

*Plaintiffs won in 66% of contract trials.
Plaintiffs had higher win rates in mortgage
foreclosure, seller plaintiff, and partnership
dispute cases (figure 1).

*The median damage award for plaintiff winners in
contract trials was $35,000. Juries awarded a
median of $75,000 and judges a median of $25,000 in
final award amounts.

In the 75 most populous counties, contract trials
declined by a quarter between 1996 and 2005

Prior to the 2005 CJSSC, Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) funded three surveys that examined
general civil trial litigation in the nation's 75
most populous counties in 1992, 1996, and
2001.***Footnote 1  See Civil Jury Cases and
Verdicts in Large Counties, 1992 (NCJ 154346),
Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties,
1996 (NCJ 173426), and Civil Trial Cases and
Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001 (NCJ 202803) at
<http://www.ojpdoj.gov/bjs/civil/htm>.***The 2005
study collected data from a nationally
representative sample of courts. 

All trend analyses in this report are based solely
on the subset of 2005 civil trial litigation data
that were collected in the nation's 75 most
populous counties. Limiting analysis to data
collected in the 75 most populous counties renders
the data comparable to previous collections. 

The number of contract cases concluded in state
courts in the nation's 75 most populous counties
declined by over a quarter (28%) between 1996 and
2005 (table 1). Between 1996 and 2005, the number
of bench trials declined at a greater rate (33%)
than the number of jury (20%) trials.

Seller plaintiff and buyer plaintiff cases
accounted for 61% of contract trials in 2005 

In 2005, 6 out of 10 (61%) contract trials disposed
in state courts of general jurisdiction were either
seller plaintiff cases involving payments owed for
the provision of goods or services (32%) or buyer
plaintiff cases in which the buyer of goods or
services sought the return of money (29%) (table
2). Another 13% involved fraud. Subrogation,
partnership dispute, and tortious interference
cases were the least common contract case types.
Similar patterns were found when examining the
frequency of contract case types among the nation's
75 most populous counties in 2001, 1996, and 1992.

Mortgage foreclosure (96%), subrogation (93%),
seller plaintiff (83%), and rental/lease agreement
(81%) issues were most likely to be heard in a
bench trial. The majority of cases were decided by
a jury in employment discrimination (91%), tortious
interference (62%), and other employment disputes
(62%).

Individuals comprised the majority of plaintiffs in
contract trials, businesses the majority of
defendants

Contract trials most commonly involved an
individual suing a business (33%) or a business
suing another business (25%) in 2005. Twenty
percent of cases involved an individual suing
another individual, and 17% involved a business
suing an individual. In 1% of all contract trials,
a government entity initiated the lawsuit (not
shown in a table).

During 2005, individuals accounted for 55% of
plaintiffs in contract trials (table 3). Nearly all
other contract case plaintiffs were businesses
(43%); governments and hospitals together accounted
for 2% of all plaintiffs. Individuals were most
likely to be plaintiffs in employment
discrimination (98%), partnership dispute (77%),
and buyer plaintiff (74%) cases. By contrast,
businesses were the majority of plaintiffs in
subrogation (98%), mortgage foreclosure (77%),
seller plaintiff (68%), and tortious interference
(60%) cases.

Businesses comprised the majority of defendants
(58%) in contract trials during 2005. In buyer
plaintiff cases 8 out of 10 (81%) defendants were
businesses. Nearly two-thirds (64%) of defendants
in mortgage foreclosure cases were individuals;
another 18% were hospitals or medical companies.
Governments were defendants in 35% of employment
discrimination cases.

Contract trial cases with business plaintiffs were
more likely to be decided by a judge

Contract trials were more likely to be decided by a
judge (64%) than a jury (36%) (table 4). This
difference was more pronounced for certain types of
litigants. Trials involving business plaintiffs
were more likely to be decided by a judge (72%)
than cases involving individual plaintiffs (58%).
More than 8 out of 10 (87%) trials involving a
business plaintiff and an individual defendant were
decided by a judge. Jury trials accounted for half
(51%) of all cases involving individual plaintiffs
and business defendants.  

Approximately 1 out of 10 defendants appeared
without legal representation in contract trials

In civil trials, unlike criminal matters, litigants
generally do not have a right to legal
representation. One or both parties appeared
without legal representation in 13% of contract
trials in 2005 (table 5). Defendants (10%) were
more likely than plaintiffs (3%) to appear without
legal representation. Defendants most often
appeared without legal representation in mortgage
foreclosure (22%) and seller plaintiff (20%) cases.
Plaintiffs were most often unrepresented in
tortious interference cases (10%).

Plaintiffs won 2 out of 3 contract trials

Plaintiffs won in 66% of contract trials in 2005
(table 6). Overall plaintiff win rates were highest
in mortgage foreclosure (89%) and seller plaintiff
(75%) cases. Subrogation (28%) was the only
category of contract cases in which less than a
majority of plaintiffs prevailed in 2005.

Plaintiffs were more likely to prevail in contract
trials decided by a judge (69%) than a jury (62%).
Plaintiffs had higher win rates in mortgage
foreclosure and seller plaintiff cases decided by
the bench. Fraud, partnership disputes, employment
discrimination, other employment disputes, and
other or unknown contract cases had higher win
rates when decided by a jury.

Both individual and business plaintiffs won about 2
out of 3 contract trials brought against business
defendants (text table 1). Business plaintiffs were
more likely than individual plaintiffs to win
against individual defendants and government
defendants.

-----------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------
Text table 1. Winning plaintiffs in state court
contract trials by selected litigant pairings
                All contract trials               
                                Percent plaintiff 
 Total        Number of trials  winner
------------------------------------------------- 
Individual v.--                         
  Individual      1,561          57.2%
  Government      156            52.6    
  Business        2,562          64.2    
  Hospital        119            70.6    
Business v.--                      
  Individual      1,375          76.9%
  Government        114          77.2    
  Business        1,991          65.8    
  Hospital            4            **    
--------------------------------------------
**Too few cases to obtain statistically reliable
data.                         
--------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------

Median awards to plaintiff winners were 3 times
higher in jury trials than bench trials

In 2005 the median damage award for plaintiff
winners in contract trials (including both
compensatory and punitive damages) was $35,000 (not
shown in a table). The median award amount was
greater in jury trials ($75,000) than in bench
trials ($25,000) (table 7). Tortious interference
and partnership disputes were the categories with
the highest median awards for both jury and bench
trials.

Buyer plaintiff and seller plaintiff cases
accounted for nearly two-thirds (65%) of all
contract cases with plaintiff award winners in
2005. Median awards in buyer plaintiff and seller
plaintiff cases were under $75,000 in jury trials
and under $30,000 in bench trials.

Eight percent of plaintiff winners in contract jury
trials received awards of $1 million or more; 1% of
plaintiff winners in contract bench trials received
at least $1 million. Such high award amounts were
particularly likely to occur in tortious
interference and other or unknown contract cases
decided by a jury. At the lower end of award
classifications, 29% of plaintiffs in contract
bench trials were awarded less than $10,000, as
were 1 out of 10 plaintiffs in contract jury
trials. Rental/lease cases decided by a jury and
buyer plaintiff cases decided by a judge were
particularly likely to have awards at the lower end
of the spectrum.

In general, cases brought against business
defendants featured higher awards than cases
brought against individual defendants (table 8).
The highest median awards were in cases in which
businesses brought suit against other businesses.
Cases involving two individual parties had the
lowest median awards.

Median awards for plaintiff winners in the 75 most
populous counties increased by 17% between 1996 and
2005. This growth was driven by a roughly 30%
increase in awards in bench trials between 1996 and
2005. By contrast, the median jury trial award
declined by 6% during this 10-year period.

Punitive damages were awarded to 8% of plaintiff
winners in contract trials

Punitive damages, which are awarded to punish the
defendant and deter similar behavior in the future,
were sought in 17% of the estimated 5,658 contract
cases with plaintiff winners in 2005 (not shown in
a table). Punitive damages were awarded to winning
plaintiffs in 8% of contract cases with plaintiff
winners, with fraud and buyer plaintiff cases
accounting for 65% of all cases in which punitive
damages were awarded (table 9). The median punitive
damage award was $69,000. Punitive damage amounts
awarded to plaintiff winners were greater in jury
trials (median award of $100,000) than in bench
trials (median award of $25,000) (not shown in a
table).

The percentage of cases in which punitive damages
were awarded to plaintiff winners was no greater in
2005 than in 1996.

Punitive damage awards were greater than
compensatory damages in 62% of the cases in which
punitive damages were awarded

In a series of cases since 1996, the United States
Supreme Court has examined what comprises a
constitutionally acceptable ratio between plaintiff
punitive and compensatory damage amounts. In 2003,
the Supreme Court ruled that "few awards exceeding
a single-digit ration between punitive and
compensatory damages ... will satisfy due process."
***Footnote 2 State Farm Automobile Insurance
Company v. Campbell (123 S.Ct. 1513, April 7,
2003).***

Among the 446 contract cases in 2005 in which
punitive damages were awarded, the median ratio
between punitive and compensatory damages was 1.45.
That is, the median punitive damage award was 45%
greater than the compensatory damage award (not
shown in a table). In 62% of cases where punitive
and compensatory damages were awarded, punitive
damages were greater than compensatory damages; in
about a third (36%), punitive damages were at least
4 times greater than compensatory damages (table
9).

Jury trials lasted longer than bench trials

In 2005 the median length of jury trials for
contract cases was 3 days; the median length of
bench trials was 1 day (not shown in a table). The
median overall case processing time--from the
filing of the case until final disposition--was
about 23 months for jury trials and 17 months for
bench trials. Case processing time has not changed
much among the 75 most populous counties from 1996
to 2005, although case processing time did increase
by 11% in contract bench trials.

Motions for new trials were the most common form of
post-trial relief sought among parties that did not
prevail at trial

After a verdict or judgment is rendered, litigants
generally have a right to petition the court for
post-trial relief. Common forms of post-trial
relief include petitions to set aside the verdict
or judgment in favor of a new trial, modify the
award amounts, or overrule the jury's decision
through a judgment notwithstanding the verdict
(JNOV).

In 2005 the plaintiff or defendant sought
post-trial relief in approximately a quarter (26%)
of all cases (not shown in a table). In cases with
plaintiff winners, defendants filed motions for at
least one form of post-trial relief in 23% of
cases; plaintiffs filed in 10% of cases (table 10).
In cases with defendant winners, the plaintiff
sought post-trial relief in 20% of cases, and
defendants sought relief in 5% of cases. 

A new trial was the most common form of post-trial
relief sought among losing parties. Defendants
sought new trials in 55% of cases in which the
plaintiff won and the defendant sought some form of
post-trial relief. Plaintiffs sought new trials in
65% of cases in which the defendant won and the
plaintiff sought some form of post-trial relief. In
half of cases where plaintiffs prevailed, they
filed motions seeking to increase the award amount.
In a quarter of cases where plaintiffs prevailed,
defendants filed motions to decrease the award
amount.

Winning parties were granted post-trial relief in a
higher percentage of trials than were losing
parties

Plaintiffs were granted some form of post-trial
relief in 45% of the cases in which they prevailed
at trial and also sought post-trial relief (table
11).***Footnote 3 Parties may seek more than one
type of post-trial relief. Litigants who were
granted any form of relief in a case were not
necessarily granted all forms of relief that they
sought.***

Defendants were granted relief in 60% of cases in
which defendants prevailed at trial and sought
relief. Parties that did not prevail at trial were
granted post-trial relief in a smaller percentage
of those cases in which they sought relief.

Litigants filed notices of appeal in nearly 1 out
of 4 contract trials

A notice of appeal is a document litigants are
required to file with the trial court in order to
petition an appellate court to overturn or modify
the trial court's verdict or judgment. Plaintiffs
or defendants filed notices of appeal in 22% of
contract trials concluded in 2005 (not shown in a
table).

Both plaintiffs and defendants filed notices of
appeal in about 1 out of 5 contract trials in which
they did not prevail (table 12). Defendants were
most likely to file notices of appeal when they did
not prevail in a partnership dispute or employment
dispute not related to discrimination. Plaintiffs
were most likely to file notices of appeal in
tortious interference and other contract cases with
defendant winners.  

-------------------------------------------------
In 11 jurisdictions, 99% of contract cases were
disposed without trial

Eleven of the surveyed jurisdictions were able to
provide full information on all types of trial and
non-trial contract dispositions in 2005. These 11
sites provided trial and non-trial information on
40,932 contract dispositions (figure 2).

Among the 11 jurisdictions that could provide
complete information, the rate of cases disposed
through trial was approximately 1%. Nearly half of
contract cases were settled or withdrawn prior to
trial.

The 11 jurisdictions able to provide complete
information include the following: Orange and Santa
Clara Counties and Santa Barbara, California;
Fairfield and Hartford Counties and Middlesex,
Connecticut; Orange Circuit Court, Indiana;
Philadelphia County and Pike, Pennsylvania; and
King County and Grant, Washington.
-------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Sample

The sample design for the 2005 Civil Justice Survey
of State Courts (CJSSC) differed somewhat from that
used in previous BJS civil trial studies. Previous
studies were designed so that inferences could be
made about general civil trials litigated in the
nation's 75 most populous counties. The 2005 study
maintained the 75 most populous counties design in
order to examine trends in civil trial litigation.
This sample is a stratified sample with 46 of the
75 most populous counties selected. 

Unlike previous studies, the 2005 CJSSC also
included a second sample of non-metropolitan
counties, from which to estimate civil trial
litigation in counties other than the 75 most
populous counties. This sample was constructed
first by forming 2,518 primary sampling units
(PSUs) from the 3,066 counties that are not among
the nation's 75 most populous. The 2,518 PSUs were
divided into 50 strata according to census region,
levels of urbanization, and population size  (based
on the square root of the estimated 2004 population
in each of the PSUs).

From the 50 strata, 100 PSUs containing 110
counties were selected. Therefore, a total of 156
counties--46 representing the nation's 75 most
populous and 110 representing the remainder of the
nation--were used for the sample.

The second stage of the sample design involved
generating a list of cases to include in the data
set. Participating jurisdictions were asked to
identify cases that had been disposed of by jury or
bench trial between January 1, 2005, and December
31, 2005. Trial cases were to meet the definitional
criteria for jury and bench trials developed by the
National Center for State Courts: A jury trial is
presided over by a judge as a case is presented to
a lawfully selected group of laypersons who issue a
verdict for the plaintiffs or defendants. Unless
otherwise noted, "jury trial" includes jury trials
with a directed verdict or judgment notwithstanding
the verdict (JNOV) and jury trials for defaulted
defendants. A bench trial is not heard by a jury
and culminates in a judge's verdict for plaintiffs
or defendants.

For the sample of civil trials occurring in the
nation's 75 most populous counties, data on 1,027
contract jury and 1,403 contract bench trials met
the study criteria. When these trials were weighted
to the nation's 75 most populous counties, they
represent 3,473 general contract bench and jury
trials.

For the sample of civil trials occurring outside
the nation's 75 most populous counties, data on 123
contract jury trials and 256 contract bench trials
met the study criteria. When these trials were
weighted, they represent 5,443 contract bench and
jury trials disposed of in counties outside the
nation's 75 most populous counties. 

For additional details about the sample design and
procedures used to determine cases to include in
the data set, see Civil Bench and Jury Trials in
State Courts, 2005 (NCJ 223851) at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/civil.htm>

Sampling error

Since the data in this report come from a sample of
civil bench and jury trials rather than the entire
population of civil bench and jury trials, a
sampling error (standard error) is associated with
each reported number. In general, if the difference
between two numbers is greater than twice the
standard error for that difference, there is
confidence that for 95 out of 100 samples a real
difference exists and that the apparent difference
is not the result of measurement error associated
with using the sample rather than the entire
population of cases. All differences discussed in
the text of this report are statistically
significant at or above the 95% confidence level.

Definitions of case types

In general, contract cases address allegations of
breaches of contract. Following are definitions of
terms used to describe the specific types of
contract cases.

Buyer plaintiff--buyer claims no delivery or
delivery of incomplete, incorrect, or poor quality
goods or services.

Employment discrimination--firing, failure to
promote, or failure to hire due to age, race,
gender, or religion.

Fraud--claim of negligent or intentional
misrepresentation of the nature of a person,
product, or service within a legal contract.

Mortgage foreclosure--forced sale of commercial or
residential real property due to failure to pay
mortgage debt.

Other contract claim--any contractual dispute other
than the case categories used in this study, such
as stockholder claims.

Other employment disputes--any dispute between
employer and employee not based on an allegation of
discrimination.

Partnership dispute--dispute over a business not
organized as a corporation but owned by two or more
persons.

Rental/lease agreement--a dispute between a
landlord and a tenant over the terms of a lease or
rental property.

Seller plaintiff--any debt collection for delivery
of goods or services, including lenders seeking
payment of money owed by a buyer or borrowers.

Subrogation--a dispute arising from a contract
provision giving one party (typically the insurer)
the right to act on behalf of another party
(typically the insured) in legal actions related to
the subject of the contract.

Tortious interference--dispute alleging a
defendant's intentional procuring of breach of a
commercial or contractual relationship and damages.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael
D. Sinclair is Acting Director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings
from permanent data collection programs.

This Bulletin was written by Donald J. Farole, Jr.,
Ph.D., BJS statistician. The report was verified by
Sean  Rosenmerkel. Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan
edited the report. Tina Dorsey produced the report.
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
printing.

September 2009, NCJ 225634

This report in portable document format (includes 5
appendix tables) and in ASCII and its related
statistical data are available at the BJS World
Wide Web Internet site: <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cbajtsc05.htm>

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

09/28/2009/JER

