
CONTINUING CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS IMPROVEMENT EVALUATION:
FINAL 1994-1998 Report

------------------------------------------
This file contains the Highlights of this report.
To see the full report go to:
http/www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ascii/cchrie98.txt

------------------------------------------

April 1999  NCJ  179768

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

Acknowledgments. This report was prepared by Queues Enforth 
Development, (Q.E.D.) Inc.  The project director of the report was 
James M. Tien, Ph.D, Vice President; other authors include Michael F. 
Cahn, Vice President, and Robin C. Neray, Senior Analyst.  The 
Federal project monitor was Carol G. Kaplan, Chief, Criminal History 
Improvement Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreements #95-
RU-RX-K002 and #98-RU-VX-K003 awarded to Q.E.D., 432 
Columbia Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02141-1048.  Contents of 
this document do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics or the U.S. Department of Justice.
Copyright/1999 by Queues Enforth Development, Inc. 
The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to reproduce, 
publish, translate or otherwise use all or any part of the copyrighted 
material in this publication with the exception of those items indicating 
they are copyrighted or printed by any source other than Q.E.D.

Foreword

Since 1995, with support from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 
Queues Enforth Development, Inc. (Q.E.D.) has been evaluating the impact 
of three federal programs on state criminal history records; the BJS-funded 
Criminal History Records Improvement (CHRI) Program, the BJS-funded 
National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP), and the five-
percent set-aside of the Edward Byrne Memorial State and Local Law 
Enforcement Assistance Program, funded by the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance.

This report brings Q.E.D.’s evaluation findings current through 1998 and 
addresses the extent to which the efforts funded under the records 
improvement programs have brought the states closer to meeting the 
mandates of the federal statutes concerning the quality and uses of criminal 
history records.

In the course of their evaluation, Q.E.D. has analyzed over 1,500 federally 
funded criminal history records improvement activities undertaken by the 
states.  State responses to questions on data quality and improvement 
strategies, and user perceptions of record accessibility, timeliness and utility 
are reported herein.  The evaluation findings identify areas of progress, 
including promising approaches for continued records improvement.
BJS hopes that the information contained in this report will inform state 
officials about records improvement initiatives across the nation and assist 
them in their future planning efforts.

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director


Highlights

1. Making the Case

The importance of accurate and complete criminal history records to a 
smoothly functioning and secure society cannot be overstated.  These 
records are critical to decision making at virtually every juncture in the 
criminal justice system, and beyond. 

Police officers, prosecutors, defenders, judges, and other court officials, 
corrections officers, probation officers, and parole officers depend on 
timely, complete, consistent, and accurate criminal history information. 
This information provides the glue for holding together a coordinated 
and effective criminal justice system.  Moreover, criminal justice 
records are being accessed increasingly for official purposes outside the 
criminal justice system, including establishing qualifications for 
employment, volunteer programs, and professional licensing.

Each state maintains criminal history records in a central repository, 
coordinating and providing them in response to requests from legitimate 
users.  Repositories process hundreds of thousands of fingerprint and 
arrest records from local arresting agencies, identify offenders, process 
disposition reports, and attempt to match disposition reports to arrests 
in their databases.

Federal, state, and local criminal justice officials have long recognized 
problems in the quality of criminal history records.  This issue was first 
widely discussed in 1967, with publication of the Report of the 
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of 
Justice, which noted that these records were frequently inaccurate, 
incomplete, and inaccessible. 

Over the past three decades, numerous workshops have been held and 
reports published on the quality of such records, and strategies have 
been devised for improving them.  Further, federal and state statutes 
have increased the importance of criminal history records in such areas 
as eligibility to buy firearms, felony convictions of illegal aliens, 
sentencing guidelines, employment, and licensing.  Federal agencies–in 
particular, the former Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the 
Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), and the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS)–have funded state programs designed to enhance data quality.  
Key efforts include the BJS-funded Criminal History Records 
Improvement (CHRI) program, the BJA-funded Byrne 5% set-aside 
program, and the National Criminal History Improvement Program 
(NCHIP).

In 1995, BJS, in conjunction with BJA, authorized Queues Enforth 
Development (Q.E.D.) Inc., to continue the BJA-funded Criminal 
History Records Improvement Evaluation (CHRIE) effort. 
Q.E.D’s current project, entitled “Continuing Criminal History Records 
Improvement Evaluation” (C-CHRIE), assesses the CHRI program, the 
Byrne 5% set-aside program, and the NCHIP through 1998.  Findings 
in this report point to areas where progress in records improvement has 
been substantial, as well as those requiring greater effort, and identify 
promising approaches for improving data quality.  Justice Department 
officials should find the report useful in assessing how federal funds are 
being spent; state officials can use it to find out what’s going on in other 
states.

Federally Funded Programs

The CHRI, Byrne 5% set-aside, and NCHIP programs seek to improve 
the quality of criminal history records. In 1989, the US Attorney 
General recommended using $9 million of Anti-Drug Abuse Act 
Discretionary Funds in each of fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992 to 
fund the CHRI program.  The three overall objectives of this program 
are to:

* enhance state criminal history records to accurately identify convicted 
felons;
* meet the new FBI/BJS voluntary reporting standards for identifying 
such individuals; and
* improve quality and timeliness of criminal history records 
information.

An amendment to the Crime Control Act of 1990 required that states 
spend at least five percent of their annual Edward Byrne Memorial 
State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance formula grant funds–
ordinarily intended for initiatives to control violent and drug-related 
crime–on improving quality of criminal history records.  This amounts 
to a total of approximately $156 million from fiscal years 1992-98.  The 
objectives of the Byrne 5% program are similar to those of the CHRI 
program–specifically, to:

* enhance completeness of criminal history records, especially 
including final disposition of all felony arrest offenses;
* fully automate all criminal justice histories and fingerprint records;
* improve frequency and quality of criminal history reports to the FBI;
* improve state record systems and sharing with the Attorney General 
of all records described above, in order to implement the Brady Act; 
and
* improve state record systems and sharing with the Attorney General 
of all records described above, in order to implement the National Child 
Protection Act.

Three key federal statutes were also enacted–the Brady Handgun 
Violence Prevention Act of 1993, the National Child Protection Act of 
1993, and the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994; these three have led 
to certain pertinent actions.

* First, the Brady Act–in an effort to identify ineligible prospective 
firearm purchasers–requires establishing a National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS), to be contacted by dealers before 
they sell any firearm.  States are to make criminal history records 
available to NICS through the Interstate Identification Index (III), a 
decentralized index-pointer system maintained by the FBI, and 
containing personal identifiers of offenders and “pointers” to states that 
maintain criminal history records on these offenders.  (NICS checks can 
also access records maintained by the FBI.)  NICS, which became 
operational on November 30, 1998, also includes limited data on 
persons other than felons who are ineligible to purchase firearms.  (Of 
the $100 million appropriated for Brady in Fiscal Year 1995, BJS 
transferred $6 million to the FBI for NICS development.)

* Second, the National Child Protection Act (NCPA) of 1993 requires 
that records of child abuse be transmitted to the FBI’s national records 
system and encourages states to adopt legislation requiring background 
checks on individuals before they assume responsibility for the care of 
children, the elderly, or the disabled.  In the context of NCPA, 
background checks are restricted to prospectively disqualified care 
providers, but state legislation varies and may have a broader scope, 
including the performance of routine background checks of many 
categories of potential employees, volunteers, and licensees.

* Third, the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994 and the Lautenberg 
Amendment of 1996 added the eighth and ninth firearm ineligibility 
categories–namely, persons who are “subject to a civil restraining order 
arising out of domestic or child abuse” and those convicted of 
“domestic violence misdemeanors.”  The seven other categories of 
persons ineligible to purchase firearms under the Gun Control Act are: 
people under indictment for or convicted of a felony, fugitives from 
justice, unlawful drug users or addicts, mental defectives, illegal aliens, 
those dishonorably discharged from the military, and those who have 
renounced US citizenship.

To implement these statutes, BJS established the National Criminal 
History Improvement Program (NCHIP); from its inception through 
fiscal year 1998, the program has awarded $206 million to fund state 
activities in records improvement.  

NCHIP implements grant provisions of these statutes and thereby 
improves the nation’s public safety by:

* facilitating accurate and timely identification of people ineligible to 
purchase a firearm;
* ensuring that people responsible for the care of children, the elderly, 
or the disabled do not have disqualifying criminal records;
* improving access to protection orders and records of people wanted 
for stalking and domestic violence; and
* enhancing the quality, completeness, and accessibility of the nation’s 
criminal history records systems and the extent to which such records 
can be used for criminal justice-related purposes.

More specifically, NCHIP helps states:

* expand and enhance participation in the FBI’s Interstate Identification 
Index (III) and the National Instant Criminal Background Check 
System (NICS);
* meet timetables for achieving criminal history records completeness 
and participating in III, as established for each state by the Attorney 
General;
* improve level of criminal history records automation, accuracy, 
completeness, and flagging; 
* develop and implement procedures for accessing records of people 
other than felons who are ineligible to buy firearms;
* identify–through interface with the National Incident-Based Reporting 
System (NIBRS), as necessary–records of crimes involving use of a 
handgun and/or abuse of children, the elderly, or the disabled;
* identify, classify, collect, and maintain–through interface with the 
National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and III, as necessary–
protection orders, warrants, arrests, and convictions of individuals 
violating protection orders (to protect stalking and domestic violence 
victims), and support development of state sex offender registries and 
an interface with a national sex offender registry); and
* ensure that states develop the capability to monitor and assess state 
progress in meeting legislative and program goals.

Common Goals

Many states view the various federal grant programs for improving the 
quality of criminal history records as one large pool of funds.  This 
makes it difficult, if not impossible, to separate “CHRI data quality 
impact” from “Byrne 5% data quality impact” or from “NCHIP data 
quality impact.”  Still, each program plays a synergistic and 
complementary role in improving criminal history records, and as such 
must be part of the overall evaluation.  Fortunately, the substantial 
overlap among goals makes it possible to formulate one set of common 
improvement goals for federally supported criminal history records.  
These six goals make it easy to discern how well federally funded 
activities undertaken by the state align with program goals to:
 
* provide resources to establish the infrastructure for 
improving criminal history records and related systems;

* improve criminal history records quality (completeness, 
accuracy, consistency, timeliness, and accessibility)

* improve interstate, intrastate, and federal criminal history 
records-related reporting; 

* automate systems for creating, storing, and sharing 
criminal history records;

* identify ineligible firearms purchasers; and 

* identify individuals disqualified from caring for children, 
the elderly, or the disabled.

Study Approach

This report is the third major deliverable in a multi-year Q.E.D. effort 
to evaluate the impact of federally funded criminal history records 
improvement programs.  The first and second deliverables, Preliminary 
Assessment and 1994-96 Report, built upon a 1994 Q.E.D. study 
evaluating the Bureau of Justice Statistics-funded Criminal History 
Records Improvement (CHRI) Program. 

To accomplish our study objectives, Q.E.D used the two-pronged 
evaluation approach, conducting both an overall impact evaluation of 
all states and a more focused evaluation of a handful of states.  The 
overall evaluation should benefit Justice Department officials and 
members of Congress (who need to know how well program funds have 
been spent) and individual states committed to improving their current 
criminal history records.  The focused evaluation enables a deeper 
analysis of selected issues.

After reviewing 56 states’ and territories’ NCHIP plans and their 
Criminal Justice Record Improvement (CJRI) plan updates, we 
developed a scaleable classification scheme to categorize the 1,552 
identified record improvement activities.  This scheme categorizes 
activities that mirror the flow of data as they are captured, updated, and 
used throughout the criminal justice system, and identifies funding 
sources and expected and actual schedules, as available.  The scheme is 
designed to accommodate diverse activities and help understand 
relationships among activities, funding sources, and timeframes.
Based on a model we developed and then fed sample state data, we 
examined issues of linking arrests and dispositions, including 
appropriateness of national linkage goals.  We concluded with the 
design of a set of measures which can be used to objectively assess 
overall data quality over time.

The scheme is three-tiered: categories 1-19 constitute what we refer to 
as “Level 1” and are subdivided into 50 more specific Level 2 sub-
categories.  Level 3 is a further sub-division of Level 2, and offers the 
greatest specificity; it contains 171 subcategories which ultimately 
“house” the specific improvement activities.  For example, Level 1. 
System Improvements consists of 1.1 Conduct study/develop plan, 1.2 
Conduct audit, and 1.3 Establish infrastructure.  Continuing the 
example, 1.2 Conduct audit, in turn, consists of 1.2.1 Audit criminal 
history data quality, 1.2.2 Conduct legislative audit, 1.2.3 Audit 
superior court.  In this way, the classification scheme permits a 
consistent comparison of activities across states.

The table below shows the number of activities in each of the 19 Level 
1 categories.  More than half the activities fall into the System 
Improvements and Criminal History Records categories; this is 
understandable, since they reflect the initial two stages of developing an 
effective criminal history records system.  Interestingly, these types of 
activities are as prevalent under NCHIP as they were under CHRI; 
however, fingerprinting-related activities such as AFIS or livescan 
implementation (not funded by CHRI) also prevail.

The number of activities undertaken by a state ranges from two to 63, 
with an average of 28.2 per state.  The variability in number of 
activities indicates that some states engage in a small number of costly 
improvements, while others undertake less-expensive activities.

Activity Categories by Prevalence
 
While both viable and robust enough to permit an expanding C-CHRIE 
effort, the classification scheme is limited in several respects, as with all 
such schemes or taxonomies.  Two limitations merit discussion.

First, the scheme categorizes improvements by choosing the one 
category–from a hierarchical list of categories–that best represents that 
activity.  This approach is somewhat analogous to the Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) system, which captures only the most serious charge 
for each arrest.  Classifying information in this way biases results 
towards those categories at the top of the hierarchy.

Second, activities are not comparable in either cost or benefit and 
should not be weighted as such.  While we count each activity as if all 
activities were equivalent, they are not; thus, an audit activity, while 
critical, is less costly than the purchase of an AFIS system.  However, 
notwithstanding these typical limitations, the classification scheme and 
the resultant findings form a sound basis for understanding the status of 
criminal history records and for funding their improvements.

2. Findings

To evaluate the impact of the three federally funded programs on 
criminal history records improvement, we considered the extent to 
which state efforts have helped accomplish the six common goals. 
While it would be ideal to assert that each goal has or has not been met, 
this is not yet possible.  Improving criminal history records is a lengthy 
process, best assessed with the aid of national aggregate measures, 
which can quantify the state of data quality over time.  Until these 
measures are established (see Remaining Issues, below), an evaluation 
must be based on activities being undertaken by the states. 

Goal 1: Provide Required Resources

Provide resources to establish the necessary infrastructure for 
improving criminal history records and related systems.
By providing ongoing funding since the beginning of the CHRI 
program, the Department of Justice has demonstrated a commitment to 
improving criminal history records.  Between FY 90 and FY 98, the 
federal government awarded a total of $389M–$27M through the CHRI 
program, $156M through the Byrne 5% program, and $206M through 
the NCHIP program.  This represents an annual average of $0.77M in 
federal funds awarded to each state, over the past nine years.  The chart 
below depicts the level of awards over time.


Total Federal Program Awards by Year
 

Specific financial assistance has also been targeted to states at both 
ends of the criminal history records automation spectrum.  “Priority” 
states (Maine, Mississippi, New Mexico, Vermont, and West Virginia) 
each received a supplementary grant of up to $l million in NCHIP funds 
to spend on basic activities to enhance automation of criminal history 
records.  Similarly, the 18 NCHIP “advanced” states, a subset of III 
states, were eligible, under the Advanced State Award Program 
(ASAP), to collectively spend an additional $5 million on extended 
core activities that would enhance the interface of their computerized 
criminal history systems with databases of persons other than felons 
who are ineligible to purchase a firearm.

Finding 1.1:	The establishment of federal programs has helped 
states place a high priority on criminal history records 
improvement.

Byrne 5% and NCHIP program requirements have heightened 
awareness of the importance of improving criminal history records.  As 
part of the Byrne 5% requirement, states must: (1) develop a Criminal 
Justice Records Improvement (CJRI) Plan and update it annually in 
order to expend their 5% funds, (2) convene a multi-agency criminal 
justice records improvement task force and, (3) as part of NCHIP, 
coordinate Byrne 5% and NCHIP funds.  In addition, states have target 
dates for meeting the Attorney General’s timetable for current and 
sharable records as well as dates for III participation, where applicable.  
Further, federal funds have helped leverage state and local funds, 
targeted at improving the quality of criminal history records.
One-third of the states expended more Byrne funds for criminal justice 
records improvement than the federally mandated 5% set-aside–
evidence that states recognize the need for improving criminal history 
records.  Moreover, states indicate that flexibility in the administration 
and use of Byrne 5% funds is helpful: it does not require that all 
projects be equally subsidized and allows the states to put funds to best 
use.

Finding 1.2:	The amount of available federal funds is not 
excessive. 

The question of whether some states may be unable to handle additional 
workloads associated with a large infusion of funding–precipitating a 
so-called “saturation phenomenon”–has been raised; for example, 
between FY 95 and FY 98 states drew down only 36% of their NCHIP 
awards, on average.  There are, however, other possible explanations. 
First, the typical NCHIP-and Byrne- funded activities (e.g., an AFIS 
effort) take considerable time to complete; this is to be encouraged, 
since states may otherwise be unsuccessful in undertaking such major 
efforts and explains why funds are not being spent.  Second, some states 
strategically accumulate their Byrne funds over several years to 
purchase “big ticket” items.  Third, no state has requested to waive 
compliance with the requirement to allocate at least 5% of its Byrne 
funds for improving criminal history records.  Finally, new programs, 
such as the State Identification Systems, come into existence, 
necessitating additional funding.

Finding 1.3:	While there is synergy among the CHRI, Byrne, and 
NCHIP programs, an attempt should be made to improve 
coordination with the newer DOJ initiatives and with other federal 
and state programs that have implications for criminal history.

Byrne 5% and NCHIP funds are coordinated, in the sense that they 
complement each other in related efforts, rather than supplement one 
another in the same efforts.  A state may fund improvement activities in 
the judicial branch with one of these two sources, while activities in the 
executive branch could be underwritten by the other source.  Although 
logically, the Byrne and NCHIP funds could be commingled to 
implement an interface between a courts information system (judicial) 
and a computerized criminal history records system (executive), this 
does not occur because Byrne, unlike NCHIP, requires a match and 
local pass through.  Commingling the two sources would introduce 
complexities in administrative and funds tracking.

CHRI and NCHIP also complement each other in related efforts.  While 
any leveraging of NCHIP and CHRI funds to support the same activity 
is negligible, the two funding sources overlap in the kinds of activities 
they support, namely, those falling into the System Improvements and 
Criminal History Records categories.  Interestingly, these types of 
activities are as prevalent under NCHIP as they were under CHRI, 
implying a continuing need for funding these initiatives.

The difference in allocation of NCHIP and CHRI funds is also 
understandable.  Because the average NCHIP award is much greater 
than the average CHRI award, only 16% of NCHIP-funded activities 
leverage state and/or local funds, compared to over 41% of CHRI-
funded activities.  By the same token, 41% of all activities are partially 
funded by NCHIP, whereas the analogous percentage for CHRI is only 
17%; this can be attributed to the narrower CHRI focus.  

Some state officials feel the greatest barrier to effective coordination of 
the increasing number of records-related programs is institutional.  At 
the federal level, programs are administered by multiple organizational 
units within BJA and BJS; this occurs more disparately at the state 
level, where the respective administrators may be not only in separate 
agencies but even in different branches of government (i.e., executive 
vs. judicial).  As new programs emerge (e.g., State Identification 
Systems, which supports AFIS development) and integration initiatives 
proliferate across agency lines (e.g., Health and Human Services 
programs requiring selective access to criminal history information), it 
will become more crucial than ever to coordinate the various federal 
and state criminal justice programs with federal and state non-criminal 
justice programs.  Organizational changes are being considered at the 
state level to address this need.

Finding 1.4:	The majority of records improvement activities are 
initiated and completed on schedule.  

An overwhelming 75% of activities start on time, and some 70% of 
activities are completed on time, based on an analysis of activities that 
included planned and actual start and completion dates.  This is 
commendable, given myriad possible delays–attributed to contractor 
problems, personnel changes, and political difficulties–not within the 
control of the department implementing the initiatives.  Ongoing 
activities–including training and auditing–comprise 7% of the total.  
Only 19 activities experienced starting lags exceeding two years, while 
only 14 activities experienced completion lags of two years or more.  
The average criminal history records improvement activity takes 2.7 
years to complete.  These statistics should help guide states through 
future planning efforts.

Goal 2: Improve Records Quality

Improve the quality (i.e., completeness, accuracy, consistency, 
timeliness, and accessibility) of criminal history records.

To gain insight into the states’ perspective, we administered a 
questionnaire to state officials, requesting their views on the relative 
importance of data quality issues and data quality improvement 
activities.  We also conducted telephone interviews with 50 users of 
criminal history information in both the criminal justice and non-
criminal justice communities and asked for their views on changes in 
the quality of records between 1992 and 1997.  While our sample is 
limited and somewhat biased–38% of criminal justice users were from 
local law enforcement–we find that these users are generally content 
with records quality; although, to the degree they could recollect, they 
believe that improvements since 1992 have been modest.  Our findings 
indicate that while federal funds have been instrumental in progress 
towards improving the quality of criminal history records, more work 
needs to be done.

Finding 2.1:	The automation of criminal history records systems–
especially their interfaces–has made records available on a more 
timely basis. 

Eighty-eight percent of users interviewed see access to criminal history 
records as either being timely or very timely; 30% perceive that access 
was either more timely or much more timely in 1997, compared to 
1992.  Attribution for the improvement was evenly split between 
improvements in automated systems and in data entry protocol.
Reduction in disposition submission times is one factor contributing to 
the greater timeliness of record accessibility.  Responses to our 
questionnaire indicate that disposition submission times–deemed 
problematic by the states in 1994–are no longer a concern.  Thanks to 
the CHRI emphasis on increased automation of disposition reporting, 
submission times have been successfully reduced.  In cases where there 
is no difficulty linking a disposition to its arrest, the improved 
disposition submission times lead to the timely availability of a 
complete record.  However, the troubling fact that arrest-to-disposition 
linking problems remain suggests that automation alone is insufficient 
to alleviate poor linkage, which is usually a symptom of a more 
structural problem (e.g., pertinent tracking or control numbers not 
entered on the arrest/disposition record).
  
Finding 2.2:	More federal funds are needed to substantially 
improve the quality, and particularly the completeness, of criminal 
history records. 

While availability of federal funds has enhanced quality of criminal 
history records, there is still substantial room for improvement. 
Completeness–the extent to which the criminal history record contains 
available disposition information–remains an acute problem. The 
degree to which arrests in the criminal history database have a final 
disposition was cited by states as being the most critical and most 
problematic issue they face, in both 1994 and 1997.  The past decade 
has witnessed a major increase in automated disposition reporting, but 
states still find it challenging to link dispositions to associated arrests 
and charges.  While automated disposition reporting has accelerated the 
rate at which dispositions are received at the repository, this does not 
necessarily guarantee the linking of a disposition to its corresponding 
arrest.

The linking task can be especially difficult in states where dispositions 
are matched to corresponding charges, since charges can be often 
dropped or modified anytime following an arrest.  One manifestation of 
this linking problem is the increase in suspense files–that is, repository 
files containing dispositions that cannot be linked to arrests.  A 
procedural change, such as implementing unique identifiers, or 
Offender Based Transaction Statistics (OBTS) numbers, should be 
encouraged, since it has been shown to help states alleviate the 
problem.  States should also continue to locate and process disposition 
reports not submitted to the repository–an activity which many states 
have cited as improving the quality of records, and which should be 
implemented on a wider scale. 

States assert that upgrading the AFIS and CCH systems and 
implementing livescan will yield the greatest improvement in data 
quality, and as such, are among the most frequently undertaken 
activities.  Federal funds have played a key role in subsidizing these 
costly initiatives (see Finding 4.2).  The importance of these efforts is 
understandable, since the AFIS and CCH are necessarily the two critical 
components of an efficient repository.  Further, legacy AFIS and CCH 
systems installed in the 1980s need to be replaced with state-of-the-art 
hardware and software.  Livescan, on the other hand, is a newer 
technology that should be fostered, since it improves arrest reporting 
and helps build towards a paperless system.  The timely focus on 
livescan and automated arrest reporting is likely related to the fact that 
automated disposition reporting has made major strides since CHRI, 
allowing more emphasis on the front end of the records process.  
The fact that the average time to complete an improvement activity 
exceeds two-and-one-half years explains why the need for supplemental 
funding can also be expected.

Finding 2.3:	Records are more accessible and more useful as a 
result of improvements to criminal history records.
 
Eighty-five percent of users interviewed feel that records were either 
accessible or very accessible in 1997; 34% feel that they were either 
more or much more accessible in 1997, compared to 1992.  This latter 
low percentage may be due to the fact that local law enforcement–a 
third of the users we interviewed–traditionally has had greatest access 
to the records, and hence no substantial difference is apparent to them.  
The majority attributed the improvement to changes in their automated 
systems, which, as in Goal 5, has been a focal point of federal funds. 
Seventy-nine percent find records information useful or very useful, and 
34% feel it was either more useful or much more useful in 1997, 
compared to 1992.  The predominant reason for increased usefulness 
was seen to be the greater completeness of the information. 

Goal 3: Improve Reporting

Improve interstate, intrastate, and federal criminal history records-
related reporting.

Finding 3.1:	Linking dispositions to their associated arrests poses 
a number of lingering problems.
  
Four issues inherent in linking arrests and their dispositions are:

* The delay in rendering a disposition pursuant to a felony arrest could 
be due to prosecutor or defense postponements, and/or to court 
backlogs.

* The delay in entering a rendered final court disposition could be due 
to a communication delay between the court and the central repository 
and/or processing backlogs at the central repository.

* The long-term difficulty in obtaining dispositions for 100 percent of 
felony arrests could be due to problems in tracking arrest cases through 
the criminal justice system as charges are modified and plea bargaining 
occurs.  Prosecutorial dispositions may also not be readily available to 
the repository.

* The long-term difficulty in entering all rendered final dispositions 
could be due to problems in linking dispositions to appropriate arrests. 

National goals of making arrest-to-disposition linkage raise concern 
about state-to-state comparability and data availability.  A preliminary 
list of questions that should be addressed:

* Is a disposition required for every charge, or is one per arrest enough?  
States which post dispositions for every charge–compared to those that 
post one disposition for each arrest–are at a disadvantage in attempting 
to dispose of an arrest. 

* How does a state determine whether a disposition is linked to an 
arrest (or charge)?  Is there a field indicating that the disposition has 
been received and entered, or is a proxy used, such as the date of entry 
of the disposition?  If neither of these data elements exists, how does 
the state know this information?

* Does the criminal history records database identify disposed 
arrest/charges?  In some states, prosecutorially disposed arrests are not 
consistently reported, if at all, to the repository.

* Does the state expunge old, undisposed arrest records?  There may be 
points in time after which “old” arrests whose dispositions have not yet 
been received by the repository are no longer counted in the arrest base 
against which the degree of linkage is measured.  States that engage in 
this practice would obviously have better arrest/disposition linking 
track records than states that do not. 

Finding 3.2:	Setting realistic standards for linking arrest and 
disposition records remains a challenge.

On average, states continue to view the linking of a disposition to an 
arrest as problematic.  Not only is this troubling for the states, which 
require complete and accurate records to make informed decisions on 
bail setting and sentencing, for example, but also because standards 
helpful in measuring record completeness are difficult to establish.  For 
example, the National Child Protection Act and the Brady Act’s 
Attorney General’s timetable each refers to objectives in linking 
dispositions to their corresponding arrests, but a statistical model we 
formulated showed these to be unrealistic. 
 
Specifically, our model examined the relationship between the average 
percent linkage required and the average elapsed time (in weeks) 
between arrest and disposition linking.  An assumption of even modest 
variability in the elapsed time between arrest and linkage to a 
disposition suggests that a typical objective of having 80% of criminal 
history records be “current and shareable” is in practice unattainable.  
Moreover, our model showed that for that goal to be achievable under 
even a modest variability assumption would require the average elapsed 
time between arrest and disposition linking to be less than 10 weeks.

Finding 3.3:	The infusion of federal program funds has increased 
the ranks of III membership, albeit slowly.
 
In contrast to CHRI and Byrne 5% efforts, a key goal of NCHIP in 
support of NICS is participation in the FBI’s Interstate Identification 
Index (III).  As such, since the start of the program ten states have 
become III members under NCHIP–Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, 
Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Mississippi, Nebraska, New Mexico and 
West Virginia–bringing the total to 39.

While states report that they do not believe that a major effort in III 
participation will improve data quality, they continue to use federal 
funds to accomplish this goal, suggesting the importance of federal 
funds as an incentive for III participation.  From a records quality 
perspective, joining III should be encouraged, since state-supported 
records are more complete than FBI-supported records.  

Goal 4: Automate Systems

Automate systems for creating, storing, and sharing criminal history 
records.

Finding 4.1:	Federal funds are responsible for major automation 
improvements in criminal history records throughout the states. 

The importance of automation in improving data quality cannot be 
overemphasized; the states obviously concur.  The three highest ranked 
federally funded improvement activities are upgrading CCH software, 
installing livescan, and electronically transmitting dispositions to the 
repository.  Each of these activities falls into the category of 
automation; collectively, they account for over 11% of all activities.  In 
particular, livescan implementation and electronic disposition reporting 
are critical in helping states in their efforts to achieve “data entry at the 
source”–and ultimately a paperless record system.  
In addition, the number of NCHIP-funded flagging activities is up over 
50%, as compared to those funded by CHRI.  This is clearly beneficial, 
and not only for identifying felons.  Eighteen percent of activities focus 
on flagging disqualifying crimes, such as child abuse, which may 
include misdemeanors.

Finding 4.2:	Without federal funding, the states would not have 
achieved their current levels of AFIS and livescan implementation. 

In 1994, states asserted that livescan implementation was the activity 
with the greatest potential for improving criminal records.  Since then, 
federal funds have played a major role in the increased levels of 
livescan implementation.  In addition to improving quality of 
fingerprints, livescan also improves arrest reporting.  Implementation of 
livescan, especially at high-volume arresting agencies and central 
booking sites, should be fostered.  

AFIS-related activities undertaken by 50 states account for over 8% of 
all activities; NCHIP funds half of these.  This level of interest is 
evidence of the rapidly burgeoning pace of AFIS technology.  The large 
number of AFIS-related activities also reflect the greater-than-ever need 
in states to store civilian prints in their AFIS, in response to the 
proliferation of fingerprint-based background checks.  In some states, 
the volume of civilian fingerprint checks surpasses criminal checks.  
As noted earlier, future planning of these initiatives should leverage 
other DOJ funding sources, such as SIS.

Finding 4.3:	Integration of automated justice systems is becoming 
increasingly important in improving data quality. 

While integration poses formidable challenges, it is critical as we move 
toward a paperless system, in which data is entered only once at the 
source (thus reducing the possibility of human error and inconsistent 
data).  Because integration efforts cross agency, and often 
jurisdictional, lines, their success depends on a top-down commitment 
from heads of participating agencies.  Consensus building is also 
needed to overcome “turf” issues and to coordinate resource utilization.  
The most prominent shift towards integration shows up in the increase 
in new prosecutor information systems, coupled with an increase in 
prosecution/repository interface activities.  Traditionally, court 
dispositions have been the funding focus for disposition reporting, and 
rightfully so.  Moreover, in some states prosecutors are elected and may 
not be eager to report cases that are not being prosecuted because their 
constituents would be displeased.  Tracking prosecutorial declinations, 
which will improve completeness of criminal history records, should be 
fostered. 

Goal 5: Identify Ineligible Firearm Purchasers

Identify persons ineligible, for criminal and non-criminal reasons, to 
purchase firearms. 

Finding 5.1:	More firearm sales to ineligible purchasers may occur 
under NICS than during the interim provisions of Brady. 
During the interim provisions of Brady from 1994-1998, all states 
checked their own records when performing firearm eligibility checks.  
Under NICS, however, which began in November 1998, state-level 
checks are performed only by states serving as so-called Points of 
Contact (POCs)–in which case, a federal firearms licensee (FFL) 
contacts the state prior to the sale of a firearm.  Unfortunately, the 
majority of states are not POCs–in which case the FFL contacts the 
FBI, whose criminal records are not as complete as state records.  This 
is particularly an issue in non-POC and non-III states.  Further, NICS 
may not be able to verify certain non-felon information: some state 
repositories may be permitted access to mental health information for 
the purpose of conducting a firearm eligibility check, but that same 
information would be prohibited from being passed on to populate the 
NICS index. 

Another artifact of NICS is the absence of a “cooling-off” period prior 
to the purchase of a firearm.  The interim Brady five-day “waiting 
period” was effectively a “cooling off” period for an individual who 
wished to buy a gun with the intent to harm.  For the state, it was a 
“maximum response” period, since a firearm purchaser did not have to 
wait five days before buying a handgun, but had to allow up to five days 
for the CLEO to check his/her records to determine purchase eligibility.  
Interestingly, even with NICS, there is a feeling in the current federal 
administration that the five-day waiting period should be reinstated to 
allow law enforcement officials more time to check noncomputerized 
records and to help prevent rash acts of violence.

Finding 5.2:	The identification of non-felons ineligible to purchase 
firearms is expected to remain problematic.

As noted earlier, the seven categories of individuals prohibited from 
purchasing a firearm listed in the Gun Control Act, the Anti-Drug 
Abuse Act, and the Brady Act are: (i) persons under indictment for or 
convicted of a felony; (ii) fugitives from justice; (iii) unlawful drug 
users or addicts; (iv) mental defectives; (v) illegal aliens; (vi) 
dishonorably discharged; and (vii) citizenship renunciates.  The eighth 
and ninth firearm ineligibility categories–namely, persons who are 
“subject to a civil restraining order arising out of domestic or child 
abuse” and those convicted of “domestic violence misdemeanors”–were 
added as part of the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994 and the 
Lautenberg Amendment of 1996, respectively.

Identifying non-felons ineligible to purchase firearms is challenging 
since non-felon information is not readily available to state criminal 
history record repositories.  Also, the dissemination of mental health 
and drug abuse information raises legal and ethical questions about the 
rights to privacy and presents new security challenges.  It is 
understandable, therefore, that two of the three dominant NCHIP-
funded Advanced State Award Program (ASAP) activities aimed at 
identifying non-felons are establishing access to mental health records 
and establishing access to drug abuse records, undertaken by nine and 
seven states, respectively.  (The third most popular ASAP activity, 
undertaken by 12 states, is incorporating civil protection orders in the 
repository database, as discussed below.)  The challenges include 
determining whether databases maintaining this type of non-criminal 
information exist and, if so, the feasibility and legality of accessing 
them, especially if they belong to private institutions.  New enabling 
statutes may be required to overcome these obstacles.

Two other ineligibility categories present unique implementation 
challenges: subjects of restraining orders and domestic violence 
misdemeanants.  States cannot reliably identify individuals for whom 
Gun Control Act-compliant restraining orders–among the plethora of 
restraining order categories–have been issued.  For this reason, some 
states deny firearms to subjects of all restraining orders.  The challenge 
with domestic violence misdemeanor convictions is that the law is 
retroactive; but domestic violence incidents have historically been 
categorized as assaults, making it difficult to segregate them from other 
criminal history records. 

Goal 6: Identify Disqualified Care Providers

Identify individuals disqualified from caring for children, the elderly, 
and the disabled.

Finding 6.1:	The passage of federal and state legislation has 
precipitated growth in the volume of requests for background 
checks of employees, volunteers and licensees–the challenge is 
how to meet the subsequent demand placed on the resources of 
state repositories.

Although practices (e.g., statutory mandates and regulations concerning 
inquiries) vary from state to state regarding background checks, careful 
planning and explicit procedures are needed to support the high volume 
of such inquiries, which in some cases surpasses that of criminal 
checks.  The volume of civilian fingerprints is now overwhelming AFIS 
storage capacities.  Moreover, the volume of inquiries can be expected 
to increase as states continue to pass laws that increase the scope of 
background checks.  In addition, the Volunteers for Children Act, 
passed as part of the Crime Identification Technology Act of 1998, 
amends NCPA to authorize qualified volunteer organizations to contact 
authorized state agencies (e.g., the repository) to request national 
criminal fingerprint background checks, in the absence of state 
procedural requirements.

Not surprisingly, the increased volume of fingerprint-based applicant 
background checks has resulted in longer response times in a number of 
states.  Based on our interviews, we noted a heightened frustration on 
the part of agencies waiting for responses.  Obviously, the demand 
placed on state repositories for background checks must be 
appropriately met.

Finding 6.2:	There are problems associated with acquiring and 
interpreting information needed to disqualify prospective care 
providers.

Incomplete records are especially a problem in states that release 
conviction-only data to authorized agencies requesting background 
checks.  For example, if the subject of a background check has been 
arrested and convicted of a disqualifying offense, but the disposition 
has not yet been received at the repository or has not been linked to its 
arrest, the conviction will not appear on the record.  The repository will 
not release any information, and the agency will not know that there has 
been a conviction.  The agency will not even know that there has been 
an arrest, which could otherwise be followed up with the court of 
jurisdiction.  

In addition, agencies requesting background checks do not always know 
if a particular conviction is disqualifying for employment.  Agencies are 
not necessarily qualified to understand the plethora of violation and 
conviction codes contained in the reports they receive.  For example, 
sometimes they cannot distinguish whether a felony violation involved a 
child, and hence whether it is disqualifying. 

3. Remaining Issues

Future evaluation efforts should build on findings in this report, seeking 
closure on outstanding issues and assessing more recent BJS and BJA 
initiatives to further improve criminal history records.  More 
specifically, they should: 

1. Continue to assess the impact of federally funded activities. 

This report’s timeframe precedes the FY 98 NCHIP and Byrne 5% 
awards and many of the CHRI-, Byrne 5%-, and NCHIP-funded 
activities are still in progress.  Moreover, an evaluation of the State 
Identification Systems (SIS) and National Sex Offender Registry 
(NSOR-AP) programs should be initiated.  SIS and NSOR-AP are new 
programs which have yet to be assessed–SIS enhances states’ ability to 
identify offenders by upgrading their information systems and DNA 
analysis capability, and NSOR-AP promotes establishment of a national 
sex offender registry.  Thus, formal monitoring of all federally funded 
activities should be ongoing. 

2. Continue to develop a measures framework.

Measures must continue to be identified, building on the C-CHRIE 
study, in which we develop a framework that incorporates a core set of 
input, process, and outcome measures with which to assess records 
quality, over time.  A related issue is the identification of a set of 
desirable attributes for pertinent records quality measures which, in the 
aggregate, can be used to assess the state of records quality over time.  
As part of the C-CHRIE study, we have identified such attributes as 
understandability, measurability, availability, consistency, validity, 
reliability, stability, accuracy, independence, robustness, and 
completeness. 

3. Create a computer-based simulation model of the criminal history 
records process from arrest-to-disposition linkage. 

Building on the measures framework, a simulation model of the arrest-
to-disposition linkage process should be developed, using actual system 
data from a set of focus states.  Results would shed light on the 
interaction and relevance of measures, as well as their impact on 
national goal setting.  

4. Define a set of pertinent measures to assess the aggregate 
improvement of records quality, over time.  

In partnership with BJS, develop a set of pertinent measures to 
determine the nation’s progress in improving criminal history records.  
These measures should reflect common goals of federally funded 
criminal history records improvement programs, capture progress over 
time, and to the extent possible, have the above-mentioned attributes.  
Once developed and tested–perhaps using the simulation model 
described above–measures should be updated regularly to determine the 
extent to which federal goals are being met, to indicate where 
deficiencies lie, and to point to activities which could mitigate such 
deficiencies.  

5. Expand the assessment of user perceptions about the value of 
criminal history records. 
 
We have learned a great deal about the ultimate usefulness of criminal 
history records by speaking with a small group of records users.  They 
were anxious to share current perceptions of the quality of the records, 
as well as expectations and concerns for the future.  Data quality 
improvement will benefit from interviews with a larger, more diverse 
set of users from both the criminal justice and non-criminal justice 
communities.  Ultimately, user perceptions are key to understanding the 
true value of criminal history records and thus the ultimate success of 
federally funded improvement programs.

