Conducting Community Surveys

A Practical Guide 
for Law Enforcement Agencies


Conducting Community Surveys

A Practical Guide for Law enforcement Agencies
by Deborah Weisel

October 1999, NCJ  178246


A joint project by the
Bureau of Justice Statistics and the 
Office of Community Oriented  
Policing Services

U.S. Department of Justice

State and Federal Corrections Information Systems


Acknowledgments

This report was written by Deborah Weisel.  It was prepared
under the supervision of Marshall DeBerry and Steven K. Smith,
Ph.D., of the Bureau of Justice Statistics and by Pam Cammarata
of the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services.  Meg
Townsend, formerly with the COPS office, also contributed to the
project.

The project was supported by BJS under contract number
OJP-99-135-M.  Tom Hester, Lea Gifford, and Marika Litras  of
BJS provided editorial review.  Jayne Robinson of BJS
administered final publication.

The Crime Victimization Software may be obtained by contacting
1-800-732-3277 or ASKCVS@ncjrs.org.



Contents

		Why undertake a community survey     
		How was the survey developed?  
		What is the local-level Crime Victimization Survey?  
		How have surveys been used by police  
		Use of telephone surveys  
		Overcoming fears of surveys   

	Survey development

		Thinking about and setting goals   
		What do you really want to know from the survey   
		Tailoring the survey to fit your needs   
		Modifying the level of analysis   
		Modifications to reflect local conditions   
		Modifications to incorporate measures of planned police initiatives
		Modifications to survey should be consistent and neutral   
		Who ya gonna call?  The critical issue of sample size   
		Population and samples   
		Issues of probability sampling   
		Generating the sample frame
		What is the appropriate sample size?   
		How representative is the sample?   	

	Survey administration

		Carrying out a survey   
		Coordination and quality control   
		Selection, training, and supervision   

	Analyzing and interpreting survey results

		Frequencies and crosstabulations   
		More sophisticated analyses   

		Conclusion   

	Appendixes

		Appendix A.  Terminology
		Appendix B.  References
		Appendix C.  Seven basic steps for conducting telephone surveys
		Appendix D.  Costs



Why undertake a community survey?

The widespread adoption of community policing across the nation
has increased the interest in law enforcement agencies'
conducting community surveys.  Many police engaged in community
policing want to know "how we're doing" from the citizens'
perspective.  Community surveys provide descriptive information
that goes beyond the traditional measures of police workload,
arrest activity, reported offenses, and calls for service. 
Besides, since community police officers are trying to be
responsive to community concerns, any complete measure of
success would have to include asking the members of the
community themselves. 

Community surveys at a city-wide or county-wide level can be
designed to provide police with reliable feedback from citizens
about perceptions of police performance. In addition, these
surveys collect information about criminal victimization,
residents' views about crime, and their willingness to report
crime to the police.  From a police management perspective,
these surveys collect information about the most effective
approaches to dealing with crime.  Since these surveys provide a
measure of police performance, they can be used to analyze the
way police deliver services and possibly change the allocation
of resources where needed.  Some community surveys provide
detailed information about specific problems affecting parts of
a city, which helps in focusing police resources.  

Survey research is a science and requires that accepted
practices be followed.  But carrying out surveys need not be
intimidating.  Even terms such as field testing, validation,
sampling and statistical analyses need not be barriers to you if
you want to conduct survey research to shed light on police
practices.  You can partner with a local college, university, or
research firm to assist you in developing and administering the
survey as well as reporting the findings. Local colleges,
universities, and research firms can assist you with survey
issues addressed throughout this guide, including validity,
reliability, purpose, probability sampling, survey
administration, and analyzing and interpreting survey results.   

Survey research is straightforward, although it can be
time-consuming to follow acceptable practices.  To make
available good community surveys and reliable survey methods to
cities, counties, and states, the Office of Community Oriented
Policing Services (COPS) and the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) in the U.S. Department of Justice have developed a
software package that includes a standardized community survey
you can administer by telephone.  The entire questionnaire is
included at no cost in the software package available to
government agencies and researchers.

This guide comes with the software and its technical how-to
manual.  It gives practical, basic pointers for police in
conducting community surveys.  It provides an overview
of key issues involved in conducting survey
research.  This guide  provides some basic do's and don'ts for
conducting surveys that can withstand close scrutiny by police
leaders, academicians, community groups, politicians, and the
media and that can be compared with similar surveys by other
jurisdictions.  The goal of this guide is to help you identify
the issues in conducting useful surveys. However, this guide
addresses only the basic elements of survey research. To learn
more about research and statistics for police managers, see
Appendix B. Police agencies may also consult with professionals
about the technical aspects of survey research.  The
step-by-step procedures in this guide will help you and whoever
will conduct the survey to address the following basic but
critical issues:

  

Why are we doing a survey and what do we want to know?
What kind of resources and commitment do we have for this effort?
Who should be surveyed and how?
How many people should be surveyed?
What do we do with the responses to the survey?

     
Answering these questions will make conducting surveys a
relatively painless process to collect valuable information from
the community.  This guide also provides the reader with a brief
description of the critical issues affecting community surveys.  

How was the survey developed? 

Some background on this survey project is in order.  The
community survey discussed in this guide builds on the work
currently part of the National Crime Victimization Survey, or
NCVS.  The NCVS has been conducted since 1972 by the Bureau of
the Census for the Bureau of Justice Statistics.  The results of
the NCVS are widely available to police and others, and are
developed to provide national estimates of victimization,
illuminating how actual victimization varies from crime reported
to the police.  Because much crime is not reported to police,
the NCVS findings clarify patterns of crime that are actually
experienced by citizens and give the victim's perspective on
what happened and the consequences.  Because the NCVS is based
on a nationwide sample designed to produce estimates for the
entire United States, the NCVS does not provide insight into
crime problems at the city, county, or state level.

To assist localities with collecting this important
victimization information and other information at the city
level, COPS and BJS have developed a standardized software
package.  Known as the Crime Victimization Survey or CVS, the
CVS software duplicates all the questions in the NCVS.  In
addition, the CVS includes a component which asks specific
questions about community policing.  Moreover, both the
victimization component and the community policing component of
the CVS can be modified to meet specific local needs.
  
  
What is the local-level Crime Victimization Survey?

The CVS is a generic telephone survey questionnaire covering
what police engaged in community policing often seek to learn
from the community:

      

What is the extent of residents' exposure to crime and
perceptions of crime?
What are local perceptions of community disorder and quality of life?   
What are local priorities for addressing neighborhood conditions
of disorder?
How fearful are residents of crime?      
What self-protective steps have been taken by citizens?  
What is the extent and nature of police contact with residents?
What are citizens' perceptions of police activities?
How satisfied are citizens with police performance?
What are public attitudes toward and knowledge of community
policing?
    
The community policing questions supplement the core
victimization questions taken from the NCVS.  The core
victimization questions from NCVS examine in great detail the
nature of victimization experiences within a household --
identifying victim characteristics, victim behaviors, offense
characteristics, reporting behavior including an explanation of
why the incident may have been unreported, offender
characteristics, use of weapons, and a host of other information
about the victimization experience.  

The reader should be cautioned that the CVS is a basic or
generic community survey instrument.  Survey research is not
typically "one size fits all."  Later in this guide, we'll
discuss how to revise the basic survey to fit the specific needs
of your jurisdiction.  There are important benefits to
conducting a standardized survey, however.  The principal
benefit is that many of the questions related to scientific
methodology have been addressed by experts. You can have greater
confidence that the results of the survey are valid.  A second
reason is that it is possible to make comparisons with other
jurisdictions which have conducted similar surveys.  For many
situations such as addressing crime and disorder problems, such
comparisons may not be helpful.  However, to interpret the
measures of citizen satisfaction with your department resulting
from this survey, it may be useful to compare your agency to
others.
  

How have surveys been used by police? 

Police have long been interested in citizens' views of police.
To evaluate police programs, academic researchers have used
surveys of citizens -- in person, by telephone or by mail, with
different response rates and costs.  But police agencies  have
only intermittently surveyed citizens, with some increase in
these surveys beginning in the 1980s.  During the 1980s police
began to conduct  their own -- albeit often informal -- surveys. 
Many of these surveys were door-to-door surveys designed to
document the extent and nature of fear of crime.  Among others,
fear reduction programs by police in Houston, Newark and
Baltimore County made use of community surveys.  

During the late 1980s, many police came to view the public as
customers or consumers of police service.  Police often used
citizen or customer satisfaction surveys to gauge the reaction
of citizens to contact with police.  These surveys were often
mailed surveys, sent to citizens who had complained, received
traffic citations, or had other formal contact with police.
Telephone surveys were also used for this purpose.   

As part of the trend towards community policing and
problem-solving in the mid- and late 1990s, community surveys
have increasingly been used to collect local-level information
from citizens about specific problems in their communities.  For
the most part, these surveys have been administered to sub-units
within cities -- public housing developments, neighborhoods or
other geographic entities.  Many of these surveys have been
administered face-to-face at the homes of residents; however,
door-to-door surveys are very costly to carry out.  

While all of these approaches to collecting information from
citizens have been used, surveys have not always provided
reliable information to police.  Because of the way people were
selected for surveys, police surveys have typically not met
scientific standards of reliability, and some have been subject
to criticism.    

To provide feedback about community policing, there has been
increasing interest among police, city councils, and mayors'
offices in obtaining reliable survey information that meets
scientific standards by using probability samples.  In fact,
some cities now routinely conduct citizen surveys to provide
feedback on police performance.

* Scottsdale, Arizona, conducts (through a contractor) an annual
citizen satisfaction survey to assess service delivery.  (See
the questionnaire at www://ci.scottsdale.az.us). The telephone
survey queries approximately 400 citizens through a random digit
dialing approach.  The sampling procedure is so standardized and
the survey so routinized that information is used to guide the
city's budgetary process.

 * Similarly, police in Reno, Nevada, completed their 17th
semi-annual community survey in early 1999. The Reno department
primarily uses volunteers, such as university students and
seniors, to carry out the survey of 430 citizens. (For more
information contact the deputy chief for planning, training and
research via http://www.reno.gov)  

Use of telephone surveys  

As a method of research, telephone surveys have many benefits.  
The telephone interview is typically non-threatening to the
respondent and allows the respondent to feel the degree of
confidentiality or anonymity assured by the interviewer. 
Telephone surveys also preclude the need for interviewers to
conduct interviews in high crime areas where the risks to personal
safety may be high.  Typically, telephone surveys are inexpensive
relative to other types of survey research, and response rates to
telephone surveys are generally higher.  

Despite the strengths of telephone surveys, there are some
limitations which should not be overlooked. Although the vast
majority of Americans have telephones in their homes, some do
not, and in some neighborhoods the proportion of households with
phones is low. Telephone surveys are inherently biased against
lower-income citizens, since a larger proportion of low-income
families have no telephone. Telephone surveys may also
underrepresent persons with language barriers, in some ethnic
groups or in age groups like the very young or the very old.
Some groups such as the homeless, young inner-city males, or
college students may be severely underrepresented in phone
surveys.  Since these persons may have different views of police
service or different exposure to crime, this inherent bias in
telephone survey research should be recognized throughout the
survey process. There are procedures to weight demographic
groups which are not fully represented in telephone surveys.
These procedures are discussed later in this guide.
  

Overcoming fears of surveys  

Conducting surveys can be intimidating and for some good
reasons. The results of community surveys come under a great deal
of scrutiny by media, politicians, community groups, academicians, and police
leaders. If police or sheriff's departments develop their own
surveys, they have to be concerned about their perceived bias as
survey administrators.  Surveys can be viewed as self-serving
devices, designed to make the police look good, especially if
there are concerns about police brutality, police attention to
minority areas or police treatment of minorities, and other
sensitive issues.   

To address perceived bias, police must focus attention on every
aspect of survey research, including question wording, field
testing of questionnaires to identify problems, and other
processes of survey development. In addition, police must
identify an unbiased sampling frame and develop procedures for
contacting prospective respondents. This is a big task -- one
with which a local university or college can assist.  

Using the CVS and a standardized sampling procedure will relieve
many of the external and internal pressures on police in
conducting surveys.  By following sound sampling procedures,
city-level findings can be comparable to those of other
jurisdictions.  Replicating the survey on a periodic basis will
provide police agencies with regular and reliable information
about citizens' views of crime and public safety.

The CVS eliminates the need for many of the procedures that
occupy survey researchers. The survey instrument has already
been rigorously pre-tested to ensure that questions are neutral
and understandable, and responses have been scaled and
validated. In addition, the software includes a method for
generating a simple random sample of telephone numbers through a
random digit dial approach by using the telephone prefixes for
the area.  

Telephone surveys are a promising method for police to collect
quality information from citizens on a routine basis and at
relatively low cost.  Conducting survey research that meets
standards of reliability is not difficult but requires a
significant amount of effort.  Importantly, the commitment and
resources for this task should be carefully evaluated by police
before undertaking survey research.  Only if sufficient
resources are available to police to conduct reliable scientific
surveys can the benefits of telephone surveys be fully realized.


Survey development

Carrying out the community survey involves installation and use
of the CVS software  provided by COPS/BJS.  While this task
should be carried out by someone knowledgeable about computers,
it is a straightforward procedure that involves following
clearly specified steps.  The technical manual accompanying the
software includes detailed installation and use instructions.   


Thinking about and setting goals  

The first and most important step of survey research, and the
most often overlooked step, is determining the goals of the
survey.  Surveys for police can be used for different purposes
and it is important to thoroughly discuss and articulate these
goals prior to conducting the research.  Avoiding or rushing
this step will invariably result in problems.     

Articulating survey goals invariably saves time, money and
headaches.  For example, if your jurisdiction is not interested
in collecting information about victimization for different
types of crime, much effort would be expended for collecting
data with little value to your agency.  Similarly, if your
agency is not engaged in community policing  -- and has no
interest in implementing community policing --  you won't want to
waste time asking respondents about community policing
initiatives. If your agency is concerned about its relationship
among different groups of Asian heritage -- perhaps Lao, Cambodian and
Vietnamese -- the survey must ask about country of origin. 
Thinking about these needs after the survey is conducted is too
late. 

So, thinking through and articulating goals help police develop
a survey instrument that is most appropriate for the
jurisdiction.  Articulating goals also facilitates analysis. 
For example, if you're interested in the rate of crime in the
Northeast area of your city, the sampling plan must collect
enough responses from that neighborhood to yield valid
information.  If you're particularly interested in the opinions
of a small ethnic group, or a particular age group, this affects
your sample size and sampling plan.  It's best to know these
needs at the beginning of the survey, not after the survey is
completed.  

During the discussion of goals, police should also plan whether
the survey is to be repeated periodically.  While there are many
benefits to conducting periodic surveys of citizens, this
replication may be beyond the resources of the jurisdiction. It
may be more feasible to conduct the community survey every other
year or even every three years.  While the longer time frame may
wash out some of the information about police services, such a
survey will still provide valuable information which is a
snapshot of a point in time.  If possible, decisions about
replication should be made before conducting the first survey as
plans to replicate the survey can have implications for what
questions are asked.    

While your jurisdiction may not be exceptionally interested in
victimization rates for a one-time survey, declines in
victimization rates -- as reflected in a periodic survey -- may
provide useful information for evaluating crime control and
public safety initiatives.  An example of this utility is often
heard in discussions of community policing.  Many police leaders
believe that reported crime will first rise when community
policing initiatives are implemented, as residents become more
willing to report offenses.  Victimization surveys may provide
evidence for this hypothesis, revealing that as actual
victimization declines reported crime rises.  Without
victimization information, police will be hard pressed to
document this explanation of community policing impact and will
be able only to provide anecdotal support for the hypothesis
that crime is actually declining.
  

So, thinking through the survey goals is a necessity for
conducting good survey research.  This step ensures that the
survey accomplishes the following:               

Makes most efficient use of resources by selection of
appropriate sample size 
Provides the most meaningful information for local needs
Assists with development of an analysis plan        
Plans for future information needs.


What do you really want to know from the survey?  

In practical terms, the answer to this question may be affected
by knowing what kinds of things you can learn from a community
survey.  Among the possible objectives of a police department
using the standardized CVS including the community policing
section are the following: 

 *  Victimization -- differences between reported offenses and
actual victimization  by individual characteristics such as
race, gender, age and income
* Comparison of local victimization rates with those of other
jurisdictions
* Measures of citizen willingness to report crime
* Indicators of citizen fearfulness               
* Analysis of crime and disorder problems
* Measures of police performance:  survey measures citizen
knowledge and attitudes, satisfaction reflects how well the
police are doing their job from the citizens' perspective  
*Measures of public information efforts
* Comparison of a jurisdiction's community policing efforts -- and
impact on victimization and fear -- with those of other
jurisdictions


Tailoring the survey to fit your needs 

The goals of the survey will affect the kinds of questions which
the police agency will want included in the survey.  The basic
survey questionnaire -- either the CVS portion or the community
policing section -- can be modified to fit different police
objectives.  Some questions may be deleted or altered, while
additional questions may be added.  The technical guide that
accompanies the CVS software includes directions for carrying
out these modifications.
  

Modifying the level of analysis  

One modification which may be desired by local jurisdictions is
to alter the level of analysis. The CVS survey is designed to
collect information about a city.  The survey currently does not
contain area-level information smaller than a city. While
city-level information is certainly easiest to collect, there
is no reason why the level of analysis cannot be changed.
However, if police wish to collect and analyze information
about smaller areas within the city, such as neighborhoods
or other geographic areas, typically a larger sample must
be surveyed.  Sample size is discussed inlater in this guide.   

Since many police agencies are interested in differences in
crime and victimization in specific areas within their city,
agencies may wish to add a question identifying the respondent's
area within the city.  Addresses are requested in the survey or
respondents may also be asked to identify their zip code,
neighborhood by name, region or quadrant of the city (linking
the survey to a GIS may facilitate data collection by
neighborhood).      

Police agencies may want to collect information only from
specific neighborhoods rather than undertaking a city-wide
survey.  If information about geographic areas for telephone
prefixes is available, a sampling frame may be constructed
making use of this knowledge.  Sample size will vary
accordingly.  Alternatively, interviewers may screen calls to
identify only respondents who live in certain portions of the
city.  This task would be time consuming.
  

Modifications to reflect local conditions 
  

Other modifications to the survey will reflect differences in
jurisdictions across the nation.  On occasion, these differences
may consist of wording or particular localized conditions.  For
example, the survey asks respondents about steps they have taken
to prevent crime in the home.  In warm areas of the country
where windows and doors may be left open, simply keeping doors
and windows shut may be a deterrent to crime.  While the survey
asks if the respondent has taken other precautions, the current
survey questions and responses should be carefully evaluated to
ensure they reflect local conditions and objectives.  The local
crime and public safety scenario in cities varies based on a
variety of conditions.  For example, crime varies by housing stock
since high rises feature different problems than single-family
residences; crime varies by the presence of alleys or other street
configurations and conditions; by topography, such as canyons;
by development, such as proximity to retail areas, and by many
other features.
  

Modifications to incorporate measures of planned police
initiatives  

An important element for modifying the questionnaire is to
incorporate measures of planned police initiatives.  Say, for
example, the police plan to mount an extensive public
information effort to encourage residents to keep windows and
doors shut.  If this type of effort is planned, a baseline
question can be included in the survey to determine what
proportion of residents currently keep windows and doors shut. 
This baseline measure will then provide a before-and-after
measure of the impact of the police public safety measure. This
research design, known as a pre-test post-test, provides
excellent information about the impact of prevention or
intervention efforts.  Crackdowns on gangs, street-level drug
dealing, truancy, public drinking and a host of other
community-policing initiatives can be well documented by using
this design.
  

Modifications to survey should be consistent and neutral   

Modifying the questionnaire requires care and attention to
question construction and response options.  In general,
questions should be neutral and consistent with other questions
in the survey questionnaire.  Response options should also be
consistent with the responses in the questionnaire.  For
example, if concern about gangs in your jurisdiction is a major
issue, the survey may be modified to ask the respondent:    

"How fearful are you about gangs in your city (and/or your
neighborhood)?"  

  

Since response options to similar questions in the survey are
worded as

(1)	Very fearful
(2)	Somewhat fearful
(3)	Not very fearful
(4)	Not at all fearful

this same sequence of responses should be used for the new
question.
                   

Who ya gonna call?   The critical issue of sample size   

Once the survey has been modified to be consistent with the
goals and objectives in a particular jurisdiction, attention
must turn to the selection of respondents.  By far, the most
common question of police conducting community surveys is "How
many people must I survey?"  The answer to this question relates
to the goals and objectives of your survey.  In this section, we
will provide some general guidelines for decision making.   

We mentioned previously that police surveys are often criticized
because they are not scientific or probability samples, thus
their findings are not representative of anything in particular.
 Investing the time to develop a defensible sampling strategy
and a probability sample is an important procedure.  So, a brief
and very basic discussion about sampling procedures is necessary.
  

Population and samples   

When you sample people, you select a portion or subset of
everyone you are interested in, then make generalizations from
the subset to all people of this type.  The larger group is
called a population while a sample is the subset or a portion 
of the population.  If you were interested in the experiences of
women who have been victims of theft, the population is all
women.  Since it is not possible to interview all women, you
will want to interview a subset of women.  The subset is your
sample, and it is made up of cases.  In the example so far, 
the cases are those women selected for interviewing.  

If possible, you will want to know something about the
population.  For example, what proportion of the population have
been victims of theft in the prior six months?  To answer this
question with a sample, you need to be sure that the sample is
representative of the population.  Characteristics of the
population are called parameters.  In this example, the
proportion of women in the population who have been sexually
assaulted in the prior six months is a parameter.  Though this
number exists, it is unknown.  You will need to estimate it from
the sample.  The estimate of the population parameter from the
sample is called a statistic.  If the sample is unrepresentative
of the whole population, then the statistic you calculate is
unlikely to be an accurate estimate of the population parameter
you care about.  For example, if you interview women at a
women's crisis clinic, you may overestimate the proportion of
women who have been victims of theft because it is quite likely
that this sample or subgroup has a higher than average theft
rate than women in the population.  

How do you get a representative sample from your population? 
All sampling begins with the translation of a defined population
into a sampling frame.  A sampling frame is either a list of
possible cases or a procedure for finding eligible cases.  It is
from this sampling frame that you will select your cases.
Ideally, everyone in the population should show up in the
sampling frame.  Say you were interested in the experience of
college undergraduate women who have been victims of theft. 
There is one university in your jurisdiction, but there are too
many female undergraduates to interview.  The university might
be able to provide you with a list of undergraduates for you to
use as a sampling frame.
  

Issues of probability sampling  

Probability sampling includes a variety of techniques that
produce cost-effective data sets that are representative of the
population from which they are drawn and yield information that
quantitatively describes our confidence in how well the sample
estimates describe population characteristics.  Non-probability
samples can be cheap or expensive, but we often have no basis
for claiming they are representative of the population, and we
are not able to measure how well our sample results reflect the
whole population.    

A probability sample is one that is selected in such a way that
each member of the population's sampling frame has a known
probability of being selected and that probability is greater
than zero.  Note that this does not necessarily mean an equal
probability of being selected, though some probability samples
have that characteristic.  In some circumstances it is desirable
to select some members of population with certainty.  If you are
using something other than equal probability of selection,
weights should be used to take into account the differing
sampling probabilities.   

A non-probability sample is a sample in which you either do not
know the chances that each member of the population has of being
selected, or there are some members of the population that will
not be selected.  Interviewing the women in your office about
their theft victimization experiences might help you think about
the problem of women as victims of theft, but this group is
unlikely to be representative of the larger population in your
city.  

When using a probability sample, two things heavily influence
the confidence in your estimates.  The first is sample size. 
This is the number of cases in your sample.  The bigger your
sample, the greater the confidence that your statistic is an
accurate measure of the population parameter.  You have some
control over your sample size, at least within the bounds of
your budget or the budget of the agency funding your research.  

The second factor which influences confidence in estimates is
the prevalence of the characteristics of interest in the
population.  The greater the prevalence, the smaller the sample
you will need to get the same level of confidence.  The more
rare the characteristic is in the population, the larger the
sample required to get the same level of confidence.  While you
have no control over the prevalence in your jurisdiction, your
knowledge about how common the characteristic is in your
population can be used to design your sampling strategy.   

Simple random sampling is one of four common probability
sampling designs.  Each has its advantages and disadvantages.
Simple random sampling is the type of sampling design we usually
think about, and the sampling strategy which is recommended in
software package included with this guide.    

Once the sample size has been determined and the sampling frame
has been developed by inputting the jurisdiction's telephone
prefixes to generate a list of telephone numbers, each item on
the list is given a unique number.  Using  the software's
capacity to produce random numbers, cases (telephone numbers)
are selected for the sample.  Each case (telephone number) in
the sampling frame (list of telephone numbers) has exactly the
same probability of selection and that probability is equal to
the sample size divided by the population size (number of
entries in the sampling frame).  It is important to include all
prefixes that  significantly cover the area of interest. 
Leaving out some will lessen the representativeness of the
sample.  

Simple random sampling is most useful when you are not
investigating rare events or small population segments.  For
example, if you think that only about 2 percent of the female
undergraduates at a certain college have been the victim of a
theft in the prior six months, then simple random sampling is a
very costly approach. To be sure that we have 30 women who have
been victims of theft in our sample, we would have to interview
1,500 female students.  In contrast, if 40 percent of female
undergraduates are likely to have been theft victims, then
simple random sampling may be quite efficient.  This, of course,
is the difficulty for a city-wide sample for victimization;
despite prominence in the media, violent crime events are
relatively rare in a jurisdiction.  Very few persons are
victimized by violent crime.
  

Generating the sampling frame   

Now that we've discussed the issues underlying determining
sample size, we're back to the question -- How many are enough?  
Since violent crime rates -- that is, rates per 1,000 population
C are fairly well established and consistent across different
places, we know that violent crime is a relatively rare event.  

Using the CVS software, the sampling frame for the CVS and
community policing survey consists of randomly generated
telephone numbers which, by and large, represent separate
households.  (Some may represent multiple phones within a single
household while others serve multiple households, such as a
rooming house.)  This method of telephone number generation is
known as random-digit dialing or RDD.  In developing a sampling
frame, RDD avoids the limitations of using phone books, since
many telephone numbers are unlisted.     

In generating the sampling frame, enough numbers must be
generated to account for refusals -- that is, the prospective
respondents who decline to be interviewed -- and ineligibles such
as non-residential numbers, non-working numbers, facsimile,
computer lines, and cell phones and numbers which duplicate
other lines within a household.  These ineligible numbers may
constitute a very large portion of the sampling frame,
particularly in moderate to high-income neighborhoods.  There is
no reliable information about ineligibles generated through RDD.
 An estimate of about 60 percent may be appropriate for purposes
of planning.  Actual experience will probably vary a great deal
by location and depend on the effort applied to obtaining
participation from the survey respondents.    


What is the appropriate sample size?   

Deciding on an appropriate sample size requires effort and
planning.  There are no standardized sample sizes for surveys. 
Recommended sample sizes are even  independent of city size. 
Since violent crime is a relatively rare event and is somewhat
equally as rare in large cities as in small cities, recommended
sample sizes will not vary much based upon the total population
of the city.  In general, a final sample size of at least
200-250 will be the absolute minimum necessary for making
inferences to the larger population.  In the 12 large cities in
which the CVS questions were tested, final samples consisted of
approximately 800 households (in each city) to produce a sample
sufficient for making inferences about victimization experience.
 These numbers were necessary to generate a sufficient number of
victims of violent crime in the sample since violent crime
victimization is statistically a rare event.  In general, an
appropriate sample size will fall somewhere between these
points, depending of course on the objectives of the survey.  If
the police agency is not interested in violent crime, and
desires only to collect information about property crime
victims, a smaller sample may be used since property crime is
statistically more common than violent crime. 

One way to think of selecting sample size is to develop a "best
guess" of the level of victimization experience being sought in
the sample.  Using Table 1, say that you estimate that half of 1
percent of persons in your community experience the type of
victimization you wish to examine.  If your population is
500,000, this best guess of victimization suggests that about
2,500 persons are victims.  To find 30 of the 2,500 victimized
persons, you will need to call or interview at least 6,000
persons  -- your sample size is 6,000.  A minimum number of 30
cases is an absolute requirement for large sample analysis with
statistical procedures normally used. 

------------------------------------------------
Table 1.  Best guess for sample size
 
Best gues       
percent of            Minimum sample size to find n
people victimized     cases with victimization
                      n=30     n=50    n=100    n=150
					  
0.5%                 6,000   10,000  100,000  300,000
1%                   3,000    5,000   10,000   15,000
5%                     600    1,000    2,000    3,000
10%                    300      500    1,000    1,500
15%                    200      333      666    1,000
20%                    150      250      500      750
25%                    120      200      400      600
------------------------------------------------


---------------------------------------------
Reno, Nevada

Reno police conduct community surveys twice each year, and a
sample size of 430 provides reliable information.  In general,
the larger the sample size the greater the accuracy in the
survey estimates, assuming the sample is increased in a random
manner.

---------------------------------------------


If you are interested in looking at subgroups such as race or
gender by type of victimization, then doubling the sample size
is appropriate.  This requires that your minimum number of cases
increases proportionally as indicated in the top row of Table 1.
  If the subgroup of  interest is a very small proportion of the
overall population, then tripling or quadrupling the sample size
may be in order.  In these situations, simple random sampling is
prohibitively expensive since you need more and more interviews
C and a more efficient method of probability sampling should be
used.  Professional assistance should be sought under these
conditions.  

If the victimization experience you seek to examine is more
common than the previous example, you may call fewer people. 
For example, if the victimization experience is estimated at
15%, looking at Table 1, you will see that you only need to call
200 persons to find 30 persons with that type of experience.
  

How representative is the sample?

As telephone numbers are randomly generated for the survey, no
advance information is available about the population.  While
the generation of random numbers (RDD) will provide a defensible
sampling strategy, the randomness alone will be insufficient to
insure that the final sample is actually representative of the
jurisdiction's population.  Nonrepresentativeness may occur
either in the original sampling frame if, for example,
low-income persons or minorities are less likely to have phones,
or in the non-responses or refusals if victimized persons or
some other group are less likely to participate in the survey.
The resulting level of error in the survey estimates will depend
on how many persons are missed and how different they are from
those that you are able to interview.  Missing a large portion
of a distinctive subgroup in the population can greatly reduce
the usefulness of the survey data.   

For most police agencies, some demographic characteristics of
citizens are of critical importance in collecting information.
The exposure of citizens to police and their opinions of police,
as well as victimization experience, vary based on demographic and
neighborhood characteristics.  Thus information about these
characteristics must be collected during any survey and must be
monitored as the survey is being conducted to make sure that
enough respondents with those characteristics are being surveyed.  

For most police agencies, these relevant characteristics may
include gender, age, race, and income level.  Additional
variables may be critical in a particular jurisdiction.  Once
the survey is administered and demographic characteristics of
the respondents are developed, these findings can be compared
with census data for your jurisdiction to ensure that
respondents are representative.  For groups which may be
underrepresented in the final sample, the responses may be
weighted to increase their relative proportion for the entire
sample.


Survey administration


Carrying out a survey  

Conducting a large survey is a substantial task.  This section
of the guide discusses the highlights of survey administration. 
You may want to refer to the appendix for additional resources
about this step of the survey.  Resources must be identified and
capacity for conducting the survey must be assessed.  Cities or
police agencies often contract with local colleges, universities
or research organizations to conduct surveys.  These
organizations have the resources in terms of telephones,
computers and trained personnel to carry out the survey. 

While this approach may be expensive, this may be the most
efficient way to conduct the research. In addition, many police
and city leaders feel that there is increased legitimacy
attached to research findings conducted external to the police
department.     

The perceived legitimacy associated with survey research is not
a minor issue.   Conducting their own survey of the community
may open the city or police department to criticism or make
results suspect.  However, if results are designed primarily for
use within the police agency for example, feedback for
allocating police resources or providing annual evaluation
information -- an in-house survey may be appropriate.    

Using the CVS software companion to this guide relieves some of
the criticism applied to police surveys.  The CVS is a
standardized survey which builds on the National Crime
Victimization Survey, conducted for over 25 years by the U.S.
Census Bureau for the Bureau of Justice Statistics.  The
community policing questions in the CVS were rigorously field
tested by the U.S. Department of Justice in 12 jurisdictions. 
The validation processes carried out have standardized the
survey instrument, so that the same survey will likely be used
by other police agencies in the nation. The survey instrument
has a great deal of validity on its own merits.  

Effort and care must be expended to set up and carry out the
survey.  Resources such as telephones and computers must be
allocated and located.  Personnel must be selected and
thoroughly trained.  Methods of supervision and quality control
must be developed to insure the accuracy of the surveys, and
issues such as time frames must be established.
  

Coordination and quality control  

Administration of a telephone survey is not complicated but
requires careful planning and close adherence to a series of
quality control procedures.  Planning a survey also involves
estimating the time needed to carry out the survey in a
relatively compressed period of time.  Surveys which are allowed
to drag out for months and months run the risk of a major crime
event occurring which will alter respondents' perceptions of
crime or police in the midst of the survey.  To avoid this
situation, every effort should be made to conduct the survey as
quickly as possible.  

Estimations can be made of the amount of time necessary to carry
out a survey based on the desired sample size.  The national CVS
requires approximately 10 minutes to administer.  This figure,
of course, varies from one individual to the next while the
Community Policing section will add approximately 5-10 minutes
to the interview time.  

The number of surveys to be conducted will be determined through
the sampling procedure (see above), guiding survey
administrators in estimating the amount of staff necessary to
conduct the survey.  Estimates of the time to conduct a
community survey should follow a formula which includes:
 

The number of respondents/cases desired -- e.g., 600
Estimation of refusal rates (30 percent of 12-city CVS)
Estimates of eligible respondents (that is, ineligible numbers
are screened out -- perhaps around 60 percent)
Total number of telephone numbers to be generated and called         

In this example seeking 600 respondents, 2400 numbers will be
generated; 60 percent or 1,440 will be ineligible while 960 will
be eligible; and 30 percent or 288 will refuse while 70 percent
or 672 will agree to the interview.  As general rule, based on
the sample size for the 12-city field test of the CVS questions,
telephone numbers should be generated for approximately four
times the number of surveys desired.  This ratio incorporates
both ineligibles and refusals.  
  

Selection, training, and supervision 

The selection and training of interview staff and their
supervision are critical to administering the survey.  All
interviewers should be well-supervised.  Survey administration
should be monitored on a random basis and quality control
checks, such as making call-backs to respondents should be
carried out to ensure the accuracy of interviews.  

Training of interviewers should be carried out to ensure that
all surveys are conducted as similarly as possible.  In general,
interviewers should be thoroughly trained to be neutral,
precise, and thorough in administering each survey.    

Training should also emphasize the confidential nature of
information being collected.  Interviewers should be aware that
respondents may be suspicious of providing personal or sensitive
information over the telephone particularly about their
experience with victimization.  Evidence with telephone surveys
suggests that these surveys are typically less threatening to
respondents than face-to-face surveys.  Nonetheless,
interviewers should fully brief prospective respondents about
the purposes of the survey and the identity of the survey
organization.  Data management practices should be established
to maintain the anonymity of the respondent and the
confidentiality of all information collected through the
interview. 

The respondent should be fully assured of anonymity associated
with his or her individual experience and opinions.  Good
interviewers who are able to address respondents' concerns about
anonymity may lower refusal rates.   

Consistent with the practices of the U.S. Census Bureau in
carrying out surveys, telephone interviews should adhere to the
following practices:    

* Be friendly and businesslike    
* Assure the respondent of confidentiality
* Refrain from expressing (via words or tone) a personal opinion
about answers received -- any comments should be neutral
* Pace the interview and always avoid rushing the interview C
surveys can be rescheduled for completion at a later time, if
necessary
* Ask all questions in a deliberate and objective way  -- asking
no additional questions
* Ask all questions in order
* Ask all questions exactly as worded -- even if the respondent
has previously provided the information
* Avoid leading respondents by changing words
* Read each question clearly
* As instructed, follow up questions with "Any other way?" or
other prompts to elicit additional responses 
* Probe, as necessary -- stating "yes, I see" or repeating
questions as necessary may encourage a more complete response to
questions.  Probes are especially useful if the respondent says
"I don't know"
* Use neutral probes such as "I don't understand" or "Can you
explain that?"
* Close the interview by thanking the respondent(s) for their
time.      

Compliance with these basic requirements for conducting
telephone surveys should be assessed through routine monitoring
of survey administration.  As a technique of quality control,
all surveyors should be monitored periodically to ensure that
the survey is being conducted as designed.  Failure to comply
with these basic administration requirements may invalidate the
survey findings.


Analyzing and interperting survey results

Analyzing and interpreting survey results is a step of survey
research that makes many lay persons panic.  To help ease the
pain of analysis, the CVS has developed some canned analysis
packages to report survey findings.
 

Frequencies and crosstabulations  

Frequencies report how many persons (and what percent of
respondents)  responded a certain way to each question in the
survey.  This is the most basic output from surveys and is a
step taken by every survey analyst.  For some folks, this may
even be the last piece of analysis done on the survey findings! 
The following table is a frequency table reporting citizen
attitudes about drug problems.                           

Concerns about drugs                                

                         	Agree  Neutral Disagree Total

Drug sales and use in my 	61.02%	23.73%	15.25%	100%
neighborhood are problems	(288)	(112)	(72)	(472) 

The numbers in the table show the rare situation in which all
respondents answered the question.  Typically, in a survey with
many respondents, each question will have at least a few
respondents who do not answer.  The number of non-responses is
often shown separately, particularly if it is large, and the
percents are of the people who did answer the question.  While
this type of table is interesting, frequencies are most useful
for pointing to directions for further analysis.  Wouldn't it be
useful to know what kinds of citizens are most concerned about
drug problems?  

Crosstabulations compare categories of responses on a particular
characteristic. Demographic characteristics frequently influence
the way results are interpreted.   

Concerns about drugs, by age of respondent

                                

Drug sales and use in my       
neighborhood are problems        Agree        Neutral     Disagree    Total  

Age  18-29                        21%            18%         61%       100%
                                 (30)           (26)        (87)      (143)
Age  30-59                        43%            21%         36%       100%
                                 (74)           (36)        (62)      (172)
Age 60 or older	                  80%            11%          9%       100%
                                (126)           (17)        (14)      (157)
Totals                           100%           100%        100%       100%
                                (288)          (112)        (72)      (472)

This type of table is available as a standardized report with
the CVS software.  Tables can be generated by the demographic
variables such as age, gender and race.  The technical  manual
provides guidance on how to use the software to carry out these
tasks.
 

More sophisticated analyses   

Frequencies and crosstabulations tell most police agencies much
of what they want to know from community surveys.  We have not
discussed significance testing, the criteria for determining the
likelihood that an observed relationship is due to chance.  You
may want to evaluate significance of findings to establish
support for an observed relationship.  The mathematical formula
used to estimate significance depends on a host of factors,
including the size of the sample or sub-sample.   

In addition to frequencies and crosstabulations, more
sophisticated analysis may be used by jurisdictions with the
interest and ability to do so.  For example, surveys which opt
to collect location information from residents (such as zipcode
or neighborhood) may be able to use GIS systems to map response
categories.  Analyses should also be framed so that replication
of findings from year to year will generate results which
provide meaningful comparisons over time.     
  

Conclusion  

Surveys of the public can provide valuable information to police
managers and law enforcement policy makers.  There are some
types of information, such as citizen attitudes and the volume
of unreported crime, that cannot be gathered in any other way.  



This guide has introduced the basic concepts and procedures
needed to undertake a community survey.  The survey software
provided by COPS and BJS incorporates some of the best practices
available, thus making the process simpler.  Nevertheless, a
competent and valid survey, particularly of rare events such as
criminal victimization, is a difficult and resource-intensive
undertaking.  If the sample is too small, there can be little
confidence in the results even if it is a random sample.  If an
important segment of the population refuses to answer the
questions or cannot be reached by telephone then making
population estimates from your sample is highly problematic.  

The software and this guide focus on simple random sampling
which is appropriate for telephone samples in which nothing is
known about the respondents.  For many circumstances, simple
random sampling is more expensive than other more complex
sampling strategies.  We strongly recommend that you discuss the
substantive problem you want to investigate with a trained
survey researcher before starting your project.

Appendix A.  Terminology

CVS  --  Crime Victimization Survey  -- This is the two-part
survey provided by BJS/COPS.  It includes the community policing
section and replicates the questions contained in the National Crime
Victimization Survey conducted by the Bureau of the Census.  

NCVS --  The National Crime Victimization Survey is the
victimization survey conducted by the Bureau of the Census.  

Parameter  -- characteristics of the population of interest,
e.g., one gender or one race with victimization experience.  

Population --  the group in which you are interested.  

RDD --  Random Digit Dialing  -- This is a method for generating a
random list of telephone numbers for carrying out the survey.  The
Windows-based CVS software uses this method to generate a list
of numbers for calls.   

Sample C- a subset or portion of the group you're interested in.  

Sampling frame  --  a list of all possible cases from which you
select your sample.  

Significance testing  --  the criteria for determining the
likelihood that an observed relationship is due to chance.  

Statistic  -- the estimate of a population parameter from your
sample.  

Probability sample  -- a sample in which everyone selected had a
known chance of being selected; often probability samples
reflect an equal probability of selection. 



Appendix B.  References

For further reading on survey research, especially telephone
surveys,  see --  

Babbie, Earl (1999).  The Basics of Social Research, 8th
edition.  Belmont, CA:  Wadsworth Publishing.  

Czaja, Ronald and Johnny Blair (1996).  Designing Surveys:  A
Guide to Decisions and  Procedures.  Thousand Oaks, CA:  Pine
Forge Press.  

Eck, John E. and Nancy G. LaVigne (1994).  Using Research:  A
Primer for Law Enforcement Managers.  Washington, DC:  Police
Executive Research Forum.  

Lavrakas, Paul (1993).  Telephone Survey Methods:  Sampling,
Selection, and Supervision.  Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.  

Lipsey, Mark W.  (1990).  Design Sensitivity:  Statistical Power
for Experimental Research.  Newbury Park, CA:  Sage Publications.  

Maisel, Richard and Caroline Hodges Persell (1995).  How
Sampling Works. Thousand Oaks,  CA:  Pine Forge Press.  

Saris, Willem E. (1991).  Computer-Assisted Interviewing.
Newbury Park, CA:  Sage Publications.  

Schutt, Russell K. (1999).  Investigating the Social World:  The
Process and Practice of Research.  Thousand Oaks, CA:  Pine
Forge Press.  

Webb, Kenneth and Harry P. Hatry (1973).  Obtaining Citizen
Feedback: The Application of Citizen Surveys to Local
Governments.  Washington, DC:  The Urban Institute.


Appendix C.  Seven basic steps for conducting telephone surveys

 1.   Think about and set goals.   Take time to be exceptionally
clear about what  you really want to know from a survey.  Modify
the survey questionnaire based  on your specific objectives.     

2.   Select a sampling frame by generating telephone numbers
with RDD software.     

3.   Determine the sample size and the sampling method based on
your goals.*  Select the sample -- that is, select who will be
called.     

4.   Set up the survey administration.  Select interviewers such
as students or volunteers or contract for administration.  Find
resources, including telephones, computers and space.  Develop
data management procedures which secure the data and protect the
anonymity of respondents.     

5.  Administer the survey.  Make telephone calls and carry out
quality control steps.     

6.   Analyze the survey data.     

7.   Report the findings.     

*You may need some assistance with this step.  You can contact a
local college, university, or research firm for assistance.

Appendix D. Costs

Telephone surveys are the least expensive way to get reliable
survey information.  But there are costs involved.  Costs vary
from one place to another, but you should be able to predict
costs by examining the following cost factors --  

Personnel  -- telephone callers and supervisors.  To save money,
some police agencies use volunteers such as students or seniors
or other community members.  The number of personnel you need is
based, of course, on the sample size you select and the time
necessary to conduct a single survey.  You will also need
personnel to be involved in planning the survey, coordinating
survey tasks, analysis, and report preparation.
     
Training --  Training of callers and supervisors will require
time and staff, and materials.      

Telephones --  Each caller needs a telephone.  Calls can be
scheduled for evening hours, thus permitting the use of
telephones which may be otherwise used during daytime hours.       

Space -- Sufficient space is necessary for callers and their
necessary equipment. You may have space available within the
police agency or elsewhere in local government.   For at least a
portion of the calls, evening or weekend access to buildings
will be necessary.         

Computers  -- Windows-based PCs for recording survey information.
 One computer per caller.       

Software  -- There is a small cost associated with the survey
software.  You will  also need software such as SPSS or SAS for
any sophisticated analysis.   Although the CVS includes some
standardized report features, these are limited.       

Contractual services -- You should include costs for any
assistance you may need with sampling, making calls, or
analyzing data.  These costs may vary  from enough to carry out
the entire survey task to nothing, if you have the expertise
in-house.

       



END OF FILE  10/15/99
PM