U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojb.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cfjs

Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1996

January 1999, NCJ-172849

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director, BJS

This Bureau of Justice Statistics Report was prepared by
the Urban Institute under the supervision of Steven K.
Smith and John Scalia, Jr., of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS). The project is supported by BJS grant
number 95-BJ-CX-K001. Principal staff for the project at
the Urban Institute were William J. Sabol, Ph.D., William
Adams, John McGready, Barbara Parthasarathy, Adam
Pollack, Harvey Meyerson, Yan Yuan, and Christine
Arriola. Layout and design were by O. Jay Arwood and
David Williams. Tom Hester of BJS provided editorial
review.

This report is made possible through the cooperation of
the following Federal agencies and their staffs: The
Administrative Office of the United States Courts
(AOUSC), the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys
(EOUSA), the U.S. Bureau of Prisons (BOP), the United
States Sentencing Commission (USSC), and the Federal
Judicial Center (FJC). The staff who provided expert
advice about the source records include: Steven
Schlesinger, Catherine Whitaker, and Pragati Patrick
(AOUSC); Eileen Menton and Vernlyn Bryant (EOUSA);
Gerald Gaes and Christopher Innes (BOP); Elizabeth
McGrath and Richard McNeil (USSC); and David Rauma
and George Cort (FJC).

The contents of this document do not necessarily reflect
the views or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or
the U.S. Department of Justice.

BJS authorizes any person to reproduce, publish,
translate, or otherwise use all or any part of the
copyrighted material in this publication; citation to source,
however, is appreciated.

An electronic version of this report and the data analyzed
in the report may be found on the Internet at the following
address: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Contents

Highlights
Introduction
Organization of the Compendium
Modifications to the 1996 Compendium
Notes to reader
System overview
Chapter 1:  Prosecution
U.S. attorneys' decisions
Suspects in matters received
Suspects in matters concluded
Tables -- not included in this file
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format (PDF))
Chapter notes
Chapter 2:  Pretrial release
Types of pretrial release
Factors relating to release or detention
Pretrial outcomes by offense categories
Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups
Length of pretrial detention
Tables -- not included in this file 
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format) (PDF))
Chapter notes
Chapter 3:  Adjudication
Defendants in cases commenced
Defendants in cases terminated
Case processing times
Convictions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted defendants
Tables -- not included in this file
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format (PDF))
Chapter notes
Chapter 4:  Sentencing
Offenders convicted and sentences imposed
Average prison sentences imposed
Relationship between sentence imposed and mode of conviction
Characteristics of offenders sentenced to prison
Tables -- not included in this file
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format (PDF))
Chapter notes
Chapter 5:  Appeals
Appeals filed
Appeals terminated
Tables -- not included in this file
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format (PDF))
Chapter notes
Chapter 6:  Corrections
Supervision
Probation outcomes
Parole and supervised release outcomes
Entrants into supervision
Characteristics of offenders completing supervision
Federal offenders under supervision
Federal prisoners: First releases and time served
Admissions, releases, and standing population of Federal prisoners
Characteristics of Federal prisoners
Tables -- not included in this file
(available in Lotus spreadsheets and portable document format (PDF))
Chapter notes
Methodology
The Federal justice database
Table construction and interpretation
Offense classifications
Figure S.2. -- not included in this file  
(available in portable document format (PDF)
Source agencies for Compendium data tables -- not included in this file  
(available in portable document format (PDF)  
Glossary
 

Highlights

During 1996 nearly 98,000 suspects were investigated by U.S.
attorneys for possible violations of the U.S. code, and criminal
charges were filed in U.S. district courts against about 65,500
defendants, a third of whom were prosecuted for drug offenses.

The majority (86%) of the 61,434 defendants whose cases were
terminated in U.S. district courts during 1996 were convicted. 
Among those convicted, 68% were sentenced to prison for an
average of 61 months.  At the end of 1996, the Federal Bureau of
Prisons held more than 92,650 prisoners who had been convicted
of a Federal offense, an increase of 5% over 1995.  Sixty
percent of those held by the Bureau of Prisons were convicted
and sentenced for drug offenses.

Prosecution

During 1996 U.S. attorneys initiated criminal investigations of
97,776 suspects, and they concluded their investigations of
98,454 suspects.  More than 30% of the suspects were
investigated for each of three overall offense categories --
property, drug, and public-order -- while the remaining 7% were
investigated for violent offenses.

Of the suspects in criminal matters concluded, U.S. attorneys
prosecuted 56,938 in U.S. district courts (58% of all suspects
in matters concluded) and declined to prosecute 32,832 suspects
(33%), while U.S. magistrates disposed of another 8,684 suspects
(9%).

Suspects in criminal matters involving drug or violent offenses
were slightly more likely to be prosecuted in a U.S. district
court (70% and 62%, respectively) than were the suspects
involved in public-order or property offenses (54% and 49%,
respectively).  Suspects involved in property offenses such as
fraud or regulatory public-order offenses were more likely to be
declined for prosecution (46% and 66%, respectively) than were
the suspects investigated for drug or violent offenses (23% and
33%, respectively).

Pretrial release

During 1996 about 53% of the 51,063 defendants who terminated
pretrial services were released at some time prior to their
criminal trial.  Defendants charged with property offenses such
as embezzlement, fraud, and larceny and those charged with
regulatory public-order offenses or tax law violations were more
likely to be released prior to trial (between 76% and 95% of
these defendants were released) than were defendants charged
with violent offenses, drug trafficking, weapons, or immigration
offenses (between 13% and 49% of these defendants were released).

Defendants having a prior criminal history of serious or violent
crimes were less likely to be released than those without a
prior criminal history; defendants with more criminal history
were less likely to be released than those with less criminal
history.  Twenty-six percent of the defendants with a prior
violent felony conviction were released before trial, while 64%
of the defendants with no prior convictions were released. 
Fifty-six percent of defendants with one prior conviction were
released, as compared to 43% of defendants having two to four
prior convictions and 29% of defendants having five or more
prior convictions.

About 84% of the defendants released prior to trial completed
their periods of release without violating the conditions of
their release.  Sixteen percent of defendants released violated
the conditions of their release, and about 6% of defendants had
their release revoked.  Defendants charged with drug and violent
offenses were more likely to commit at least one violation of
their conditions of release (26% and 21%, respectively) and to
have their release revoked (10% each) than were other defendants.

Adjudication

Criminal charges were filed in U.S. district courts against
65,480 defendants during 1996, about 80% of whom were charged
with felonies.  Of the defendants charged with felonies, 41%
were prosecuted for drug trafficking offenses, 27% for property
offenses, 25% for public-order offenses, and 7% for violent
offenses.

Criminal cases were concluded against 61,434 defendants during
1996, 80% of whom had been charged with felonies.  Eighty-six
percent (or 53,076) of all defendants were convicted; 83% of
these were felony convictions.

Eighty-nine percent of defendants charged with felonies were
convicted.  This conviction rate was about the same for all
major offense categories:  88% of violent offenders, 90% of
property offenders, 88% of drug offenders, and 90% of
public-order offenders.  Most felony convictions were obtained
by guilty plea (91%).

Drug defendants comprised 41% of felony convictions; defendants
charged with property and public-order offenses comprised 26%
and 27%, respectively, of the felony convictions, and defendants
charged with violent offenses comprised the remaining 6% of
felony convictions.

Sentencing

Of the 53,076 offenders sentenced during 1996, about 69% were
incarcerated, another 24% were placed on probation (either alone
or with some incarceration), and 7% were ordered to pay a fine.

About 91% of violent felony offenders and 92% of drug
trafficking offenders received prison sentences, as did 79% of
felony public-order offenders and 59% of felony property
offenders.

The 36,373 offenders sentenced to prison received, on average,
61 months of imprisonment, while the 12,644 offenders sentenced
to probation received, on average, 33 months of probation. 
Offenders sentenced for violent felony offenses and felony drug
offenses received longer average prison terms (93 and 85 months,
respectively) than those convicted of felony property and
public-order offenses (24 and 51 months, respectively).



Average length of sentences imposed, by offense, 
October 1, 1995 - September 30, 1996

Most serious offense of conviction  Average sentence length
   All offenses                               61.2
Felonies                                      64.2
Violent offenses                              92.5
Property offenses                             23.9
Drug offenses                                 84.5
Public-order offenses                         50.8
Misdemeanors                                  11.0



Appeals

During 1996 the U.S. Courts of Appeals received 10,889 criminal
appeals.  Forty-six percent of the appeals filed challenged both
the conviction and sentence imposed.  Only 4% of appeals were
filed by the Government.  Of the 10,161 appeals terminated
during 1996, 77% (or 7,820) were terminated on the merits.  In
86% of the appeals terminated on the merits, the district court
ruling was affirmed, at least in part.

Corrections

A total of 17,433 offenders were serving terms of probation
supervision that terminated during 1996.  Most of these
offenders (84%) completed their terms of probation successfully.
 About 14% of offenders violated their conditions of probation;
4% of probationers committed new crimes.

A total of 19,874 offenders completed terms of parole or
supervised release during 1996.  Sixty-four percent of these
offenders successfully completed their terms without violating
conditions of release; 11% committed new crimes; 22% committed
technical violations.

Regardless of the type of supervision, offenders convicted of
violent offenses were less likely than others to successfully
complete a term of supervision.

At the end of 1996, there were 88,189 offenders under
supervision.  About 52% were under terms of supervised release;
another 38% were on probation; and 10% were on parole.  Drug
offenders comprised 50% of offenders under terms of supervised
release, 56% of offenders on parole, and 12% of offenders on
probation.  Property offenders comprised 40% of the offenders on
probation, 28% of offenders serving terms of supervised release,
and 12% of offenders on parole.

The Federal prison population increased by 4,676 offenders
during 1996 to reach 92,672 persons.  During 1996, 35,254
prisoners were received by the Bureau of Prisons from U.S.
district court commitments.  An additional 12,175 prisoners were
returned to Federal prison for violating conditions of
probation, parole, or supervised release, or were otherwise
admitted to Federal prison from elsewhere than a U.S. district
court.

During 1996, 30,251 prisoners were released for the first time
from Federal prison after commitment by a U.S. district court. 
Of these, 28,073 were released by standard methods and 2,178
were released by extraordinary means (death, treaty transfer,
sentence commutation, or drug treatment).  The standard "first
releases" served, on average, 28.2 months before their release,
or about 92% of the sentence imposed.  Drug offenders served an
average of 40 months before first release, while property
offenders served an average of 16 months before first release.



          
Average time to first release, standard releases, 
by offense, October 1, 1995 - September 30, 1996
     
Most serious original
offense of conviction          Mean time served
   All offenses                     28.2
Violent offenses                    54.3
Property offenses                   15.6
Drug offenses                       40.3
Public-order offenses               17.2
          


An additional 12,502 prisoners were released from subsequent
commitments to Federal prison.

Drug offenders -- who comprised about 41% of persons admitted
into Federal prison -- comprised the largest percentage of
persons in prison (60%) at the end of 1996.


Admissions to Federal Bureau of Prisons, releases, and prisoners at yearend,
by offense, October 1, 1995 - September 30, 1996

Most serious offense                                           Population at
of conviction          All admissions       All releases        yearend        
                                             
   All offenses          47,429              42,753               92,672
Violent offenses           9.1                 9.8                 12.4
Property offenses         20.2                22.4                  8.4
Drug offenses             40.8                39.1                 59.6
Public-order offenses     28.4                27.6                 18.6



Introduction

This Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) report presents an
overview of case processing in the Federal criminal justice
system.  The data presented are compiled from the BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database.  The FJSP database
includes data provided by the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, the Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys, the Federal
Bureau of Prisons, and the U.S. Sentencing Commission.  The
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, in addition to
providing data describing defendants in cases processed by the
Federal judiciary, provides data describing defendants processed
by the Federal pretrial services agencies and the Federal
probation and supervision service.  The data provided by the
agencies are archived for public use at the National Archive of
Criminal Justice Data (ICPSR 9296).

Each agency reports on those defendants it processed during a
given year in an annual statistical report.  These agency
reports are often incomparable due to the varying methods the
agencies use to report case processing activities.  As reported
by an interagency working group, headed by BJS, the differences
in the case processing statistics are attributable, in part, to
the differing needs and missions of the agencies.  The working
group found the following differences in reported statistics:

the universe of cases reported during a given period -- some
agencies report on those case processing events that occurred
during a particular period, whereas others report on those
events recorded during a particular period; and

many of the commonly used case processing statistics --
suspect/defendant processed, offense committed, disposition, and
sentence imposed -- are defined differently across agencies.

BJS, through its Federal Justice Statistics Program, however,
has recognized the incomparability of these annual statistical
reports and has attempted to reconcile many of the differences
identified by the working group.  For instance, by combining
databases from several years, BJS is able to report on those
cases that actually occurred during the reporting period. 
Additionally, commonly used case processing statistics are made
comparable across stages by applying uniform definitions to data
obtained from each agency.  Because definitions in the Federal
Justice Statistics Program are consistent with those categories
in BJS programs describing State defendants convicted,
sentenced, or imprisoned, the comparison of Federal and State
case processing statistics is facilitated.

The 1996 Compendium, 11th in a series which includes 1984, 1985,
1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, and 1995, describes
defendants processed at each stage of the Federal justice system
-- investigation and prosecution by the U.S. attorneys (chapter
1), pretrial release or detention (chapter 2), adjudication in
the U.S. district courts (chapter 3), sentencing (chapter 4),
appeal of the conviction and/or sentence imposed (chapter 5),
and corrections (chapter 6)-- for the 12-month period ending
September 30, 1996 (the Federal fiscal year).  Prior to 1994,
the Compendium was reported on a calendar-year basis.

The tables presented report events that occurred during the
Federal fiscal year -- October 1, 1995 - September 30, 1996. 
Generally, the tables include both individual and organizational
defendants.  Organizational defendants are not included in
tables describing pretrial release and detention or tables
showing defendants sentenced to incarceration.  Juvenile
offenders are included in the reported statistics.  Felony and
misdemeanor distinctions are provided where possible (see
"Offense classifications" in Methodology).

Organization of the Compendium

Each chapter of the Compendium describes a major stage in the
processing of criminal suspects and defendants.  Each chapter
contains Chapter notes that describe the universes of data used
in the tables and information relevant to the interpretation of
individual tables.  The Compendium contains the following:

Chapter 1.  This chapter describes decisions made by Federal
prosecutors in screening criminal matters and the
characteristics of defendants in cases prosecuted or declined
for prosecution.

Chapter 2.  This chapter describes the pretrial release and
detention practices of the Federal judiciary, including the
characteristics of defendants detained or released pending trial.

Chapter 3.  This chapter describes actions by the Federal
judiciary in adjudicating defendants in cases filed by the U.S.
attorneys, including the offense charged and characteristics of
defendants convicted.

Chapter 4.  This chapter describes the sentences imposed by the
Federal judiciary on convicted defendants, including the
characteristics of defendants sentenced.

Chapter 5.  This chapter describes appeals of criminal
convictions and sentences imposed in the Federal courts,
including the original offense charged.

Chapter 6.  This chapter describes defendants under Federal
correctional supervision -- probation, parole, and supervised
release -- including the outcome of the supervision (successful
completion or violations), admissions to and releases from
Federal prison, and time served by Federal inmates.

Methodology.  This section describes the procedures followed in
analyzing data and developing tables.

Glossary.  This section contains definitions for terms used in
the Compendium.  Since many terms used in the text and tables
have specialized meanings (either because they refer to Federal
law or because of reporting procedures by the Federal agencies
supplying the data), readers are encouraged to check the
glossary for exact definitions of tabulated data.

Comparing Case Processing Statistics.  This document, prepared
by an interagency working group tasked to reconcile differences
in Federal criminal case processing statistics, identifies and
describes the major differences in the way Federal criminal
justice agencies collect, tabulate, and report criminal case
processing events.

Modifications to the 1996 Compendium

The 1996 Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics incorporates
these changes:  For tables based on AOUSC criminal data,
carjacking offenses were reclassified, based on title and
section, as robberies.  This is a departure from AOUSC's
classification of carjackings as motor vehicle theft.  (See
chapter 3, "Chapter notes.")

In the corrections chapter (chapter 6), a table describing the
population of Federal offenders under supervision at fiscal
yearend was added.  Also, a table showing methods of release for
Federal inmates released from prison -- including both standard
and "extraordinary" releases -- was added.  Extraordinary
releases include releases for drug treatment, treaty transfer,
sentence commutation, and death.

Notes to reader

The tables in the Compendium were constructed to permit valid
comparisons within each table and to allow the reader to compare
percentages (but not raw totals) across tables.  It should be
understood, however, that the total number of subjects/ 
defendants shown in a particular table may not equal the number
of subjects/defendants involved in a particular stage of
processing, since some records could not be linked and some data
sources did not include information on particular data elements
classified in a particular table.  Data notes indicate the exact
universe for individual tables.

The Compendium is a statistical presentation of Federal criminal
justice information with limited analyses of trends or
explanatory factors underlying the statistics.  Analyses of
Federal justice statistics may be found in special reports and
other publications, some of which are cited in the Compendium. 
Assessment of changing patterns in the Compendium tabulations
may depend on detailed examination of subcategories not shown in
the tabulations or may require other sources of information,
such as knowledge of legislation or Federal agency procedures.


Chapter 1

Prosecution

Federal criminal cases may be brought by the U. S. Attorney's
Office, by the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of
Justice, or by other authorized agencies.  The 93 U.S. attorneys
serve as the chief Federal law enforcement officers within their
respective districts.

Investigations are most commonly referred to a U.S. attorney by
a Federal investigative agency (primarily the Drug Enforcement
Administration; the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the Postal
Inspection Service; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms; and the Secret Service), by the Criminal Division, or
by a State or local investigative agency.  Investigations may
also be initiated -- and cases brought directly -- by U.S.
attorneys or by the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department 
of Justice.  This chapter reports only on suspects that were at
least partially investigated by U.S. attorneys.

U.S. attorneys' decisions

After criminal investigations are initiated and criminal
suspects are referred to them, U.S. attorneys may file charges
against defendants in a U.S. district court, or they may decline
to file these charges for reasons such as weak or insufficient
evidence, minimal Federal interest, lack of resources, or lack
of criminal intent.  Matters that are declined may be referred
to another authority for prosecution or be settled through
alternative resolution procedures.  U.S. attorneys may also file
cases before U.S. magistrates, who have the authority to
adjudicate misdemeanor offenses (18 U.S.C. Section 3401).  
U.S. attorneys consider these cases to be criminal matters 
because of their relatively less serious nature and because they 
are handled by magistrates.

The decision to prosecute a suspect in a criminal matter depends
upon many factors, including the Attorney General's priorities,
U.S. attorney priorities and resources, laws governing each type
of offense, and the strength of evidence in each case.  During
1996, 58% of suspects in all offense categories were prosecuted.
Suspects were prosecuted at different rates depending on their
offense.  Suspects involved in violent and drug offenses were
more likely to be prosecuted before U.S. district court judges
than were those involved in property and public-order offenses. 
Drug offense suspects were the most likely (70%) to be
prosecuted.  Suspects in property offenses were the least 
likely to be prosecuted (49%).  However, suspects involved
in property offenses were more likely to be referred to other
authorities -- including authorities who resolved criminal
matters by restitution or by civil or administrative procedures
-- than were suspects involved in other types of criminal
matters.

Suspects in matters received

During 1996 there were 97,776 suspects in new matters received
for investigation by U.S. attorneys. ***Footnote 1: See Chapter 
notes, item 1, p. 20.  The 1996 data are not directly comparable 
to the 1993 and prior compendia.***  Of these suspects, about 32% were
investigated for public-order offenses, 31% for drug offenses,
and 30% for property offenses.  Just under 7% of all suspects
were investigated for violent crimes.  Relative percentages of
offenses reflect criminal activity as well as Federal
investigative, prosecutorial, and statutory priorities.  For
example, during 1996 priority areas for U.S. attorneys included
violent crimes (including firearms prosecutions and violent
street gangs), international and domestic terrorism, narcotics
prosecutions, immigration, organized crime, white collar crime,
government regulatory offenses, child support recovery, and
civil rights prosecutions. ***Footnote 2: Statistical Report, 
United States Attorneys' Offices, Fiscal Year 1996.  U.S. 
Department of Justice, Executive Office for United States Attorneys,
Washington, DC.***

Suspects in matters concluded

Upon receiving a matter, a U.S. attorney will either immediately
decline it for prosecution or further investigate.  Upon
conclusion of the investigation, a matter may be filed as a
criminal case in a U.S. district court, referred to a U.S.
magistrate, or declined for   prosecution.  Of the 98,454
suspects in criminal matters concluded during 1996,  58% were
prosecuted in U.S. district court, 33% were declined for
prosecution, and 9% were referred to U.S. magistrates. 
***Footnote 3: The number of suspects in criminal matters 
concluded is not comparable to the 1993 and prior compendia.  
See Chapter notes, item 2, p. 20, for details.***

Suspects prosecuted -- The likelihood of prosecution in 
U.S. district court varied widely across offense categories. 
Drug and violent offenders were more likely to be prosecuted
than those involved in property and public-order offenses.  U.S.
attorneys prosecuted approximately 70% of suspects in drug
offenses, 62% of those in violent offenses, 54% of those in
public-order offenses, and 49% of those in property offenses.

Differences in rates of prosecution within major categories were
substantial.  For example, among violent offenders, 78% of
robbery suspects were prosecuted, while 63% of murder, 48% of
assault, and 39% of rape suspects were prosecuted.  Among
property offenders, suspects investigated for counterfeiting
were prosecuted at a higher rate than those involved in fraud
(72% compared with 48%), and among suspects in public-order
offenses, immigration (84%), weapons (63%), and tax law
violators (61%) were much more likely to be prosecuted than
suspects in communications (30%) and civil rights (6%) offenses.

Suspects in matters declined -- Suspects in matters involving 
violent offenses were less likely to be declined for prosecution 
(33%) than those in property offenses (45%) but more likely 
than those in drug offenses (23%).  Suspects in public-order 
offenses were slightly less likely to be declined for prosecution 
than those involved in violent offenses (32% compared to 33%).

The decision to decline prosecution is based on a number of
factors, including the lack of prosecutable offense, alternative
resolution, or case- and suspect-related reason.  Of the 32,832 
declinations during 1996, 27% occurred because of case-related 
reasons, mostly due to weak evidence (23%); 23% occurred 
because there was no crime or criminal intent was lacking; and 
19% occurred for other reasons, such as agency requests (6%) 
and minimal Federal interest (4%).

Not all suspects whose matters were declined for prosecution
avoided prosecution.  Approximately 22% of the suspects in
matters declined were referred to another authority for
prosecution.  An additional 6% were settled through
alternative resolution procedures.  While property offense
suspects constituted the largest number of suspects who were
referred by U.S. attorneys to other authorities for prosecution
or resolution, drug offense suspects were the most likely of 
suspects whose matters were declined to be referred to other 
authorities for prosecution or alternative resolution.  
Thirty-four percent of the drug suspects whose matters were 
declined prosecution by U.S. attorneys were referred for other 
prosecution or resolution, as were 26% of the public-order, 
26% of the property, and 25% of violent offense suspects.

Within major offense categories, the likelihood that suspects in
matters declined for prosecution were referred to other
authorities for prosecution or alternative resolution varied
among specific offenses.  Within property offenses, referral
occurred with 38% of persons involved in motor vehicle theft,
compared to 16% of suspects in arson and explosives cases. 
Within public-order offenses, referral occurred with 30% of
weapons suspects were referred to other authorities or had their
case settled through alternative procedures, compared to 8% of
suspects in civil rights cases.

Defendants in cases concluded by U.S. magistrates --
Cases concluded by U.S. magistrates are, by statute,
misdemeanors. ***Footnote 4: At the time that U.S. attorneys receive them,
matters may not be classifiable as felonies or misdemeanors.  By
the time a U.S. magistrate disposes of a case -- or what the
U.S. attorneys call a matter -- its offense level has been
determined and it is, by statute, a misdemeanor.***  Overall, U.S.
magistrates disposed of about 9% of all criminal matters
investigated by U.S. attorneys.  For most offenses, the
likelihood that a U.S. magistrate concluded the matter was also
relatively low.  The most notable exception was escape, for
which 57% of matters were concluded by U.S. magistrates.  The
escape offense category accounted for 21% of all cases concluded
by U.S. magistrates.

Most of the 3,369 escape violations were against defendants who
absconded to avoid prosecution in State courts, the so-called
"unlawful flight to avoid prosecution."  Upon apprehension of
the fugitive, these cases are normally dismissed by U.S.
magistrates and turned over to the State for prosecution on the
original warrant.

Other types of offenses having comparably high rates of disposal
by U.S. magistrates included postal law violations (30%);
conspiracy, aiding and abetting, traffic, and jurisdictional
offenses (29%); and other property violations (20%).

Processing times -- For matters concluded during 1996, the 
average number of months from receipt of a matter to
its conclusion by a U.S. attorney as a case filing or
declination or its disposal by a U.S. magistrate was 10.3
months.  However, the time to process matters varied with the
outcome of the matter.  Matters concluded by U.S. magistrates in
which the suspect was convicted took the least amount of time --
an average of 3.7 months, and at least 50% of these convictions
occurred in about 43 days.  Similarly, 50% of the matters
declined for prosecution were declined within 12.9 months.

Overall, suspects in violent and drug offenses were processed
more quickly than suspects in other offenses.  For key
decisions, such as whether to file a case or decline a matter
for prosecution, violent offenses were concluded more quickly
than drug offenses.  At an average of 15.8 months, fraudulent
property offenses took longer to conclude than other offenses.


Chapter 2

Pretrial release


The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 U.S.C. & 3141) sets the terms
for release and detention of defendants facing charges in
Federal courts.  At the time defendants first appear before a
judicial officer, they may be (1) released on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond; (2) released subject to
conditions imposed by the court, possibly including traditional
bail; (3) temporarily detained without bail (limited to 10
working days) to permit deportation, exclusion, or the
revocation of previously granted conditional release; or (4)
detained pending the outcome of a detention hearing.  (18 U.S.C.
Section 3142(e) (1984)).

According to the statute, a defendant must be brought before a
judicial officer without "unnecessary delay" upon arrest.  The
judicial officer, who may be a judge but is generally a U.S.
magistrate, determines whether the defendant will be released or
detained prior to trial.  If a hearing is required, the release
decision may be delayed no longer than 3 days (or 5 days if
requested by the defendant).

At the initial appearance a recommendation to detain the
defendant is made by the U.S. attorney and/or the pretrial
services officer.  If the court concurs with the recommendation
to detain the defendant, a pretrial detention hearing is
scheduled -- typically within 1 week of the initial appearance. 
At the pretrial detention hearing evidence is presented to show
cause why the defendant should be detained pending adjudication
of the charges.

Recommendations to detain a defendant are limited to those
instances where the defendant was charged with (1) a crime of
violence, (2) an offense with a statutory maximum sentence of
life imprisonment or death, (3) a drug offense with a statutory
maximum sentence of 10 years or more imprisonment, or (4) any
felony offense if the defendant had been convicted on two or
more occasions of an offense described above or a similar
State-level offense.  Additionally, a detention recommendation
may be made if there is a serious risk that the defendant would
flee in an attempt to avoid prosecution or would obstruct
justice or intimidate witnesses or jurors.

Types of pretrial release

Defendants may be released without financial conditions
according to the following:

Personal recognizance -- defendant is released subject to no
financial or other conditions.

Unsecured bond -- no money is required to be posted before
release, but defendant is liable for full bail amount if he or
she fails to appear.

Conditional release-- any combination of restrictions that are
deemed necessary to guarantee the defendant's appearance at
trial or the safety of the community.  Non-financial conditions
commonly place restrictions on the defendant's movements,
associations, and/or actions.  They may also involve employment,
or treatment for medical, psychological, or substance abuse
conditions.

Defendants may also be released on financial conditions. 
Financial conditions include (1) deposit bond (the defendant is
required to post a percentage of the total bail amount, usually
10%), (2) surety bond (the defendant is released subject to
guarantees by a third person that the full amount will be paid),
or (3) collateral bond (collateral equal to the full bail amount
required to be posted by the defendant before release). 
Financial conditions may occur in combination with nonfinancial
conditions.

Factors relating to release or detention

In deciding whether to release a defendant and in settling
release conditions, the court is directed to consider the nature
and circumstances of the offense charges, the weight of evidence
against the defendant, the defendant's character, physical and
mental condition, family ties, employment, financial resources,
length of residence in the community, community ties past
conduct, history relating to drug or alcohol abuse, criminal
history, and record concerning appearance at court proceedings.

During 1996, 26,801 defendants were released for some period of
time prior to trial (table 2.1).  Those defendants released made
up nearly 53% of the 51,063 defendants who terminated pretrial
services during 1996.  Of the defendants released, 84% completed
pretrial services without violating the conditions of their
release (table 2.8). 

In 1996, 31,895 defendants were detained for some period of time
prior to the disposition of their case (table 2.3).  Those
defendants detained comprised about 63% of all defendants who
terminated pretrial services during 1996.  Included are those
who were detained prior to having a preliminary hearing with the
magistrate, at which point they could have been either released
or ordered to have a detention hearing.  Of the defendants
detained, 53% were ordered detained by the court until case
disposition.

Pretrial detention hearings were held for 22,890 defendants.  Of
these, 16,917, or 74%, were ordered detained (table 2.5).

Of the 26,801 defendants released prior to trial, 16% violated a
condition of their release (table 2.7).  The majority (82%) of
these violations were technical violations of the bail
conditions.  Defendants released on collateral bond were more
likely (21%) than other defendants to incur some violation of
the conditions of their release (table 2.8).  Conversely,
defendants given conditional release violated their release at
the lowest rates (7%).  Slightly more than 6% of all released
defendants had their release revoked.

Pretrial outcomes by offense categories

Releases (table 2.1) -- Defendants charged with violent offenses
were less likely than other defendants to be released prior to
criminal trial -- only 38% of the 3,152 violent offenders were
released during 1996.  However, among defendants
charged with violent offenses, the percent released varied
greatly; 20% of those charged with robbery were released
compared to 64% of those charged with assault and 63% of those
charged with rape.

Property defendants made up the largest part of those defendants
who were released, while drug defendants made up the largest
part of those defendants who were detained. Violent defendants 
composed the smallest part of defendants in both groups.

Slightly less than half of all drug defendants were released. 
Drug trafficking defendants were less likely to be released than
those charged with non-trafficking offenses (44% compared to
58%), but defendants charged with trafficking offenses
outnumbered those charged with non-trafficking offenses by 
7 to 1.

The release types for those defendants who were released prior
to trial varied among offense categories.  Within each offense 
category, the highest percentage of defendants released was 
on unsecured bond, except for violent defendants.  Of the 38% 
of violent defendants released, 40% were released on unsecured
bond and 43% on personal recognizance compared to 81%
of all property defendants released, of whom 53% were released
on unsecured bond and 35% on personal recognizance.

Detentions -- Defendants charged with violent offenses were 
more likely (78%) to be detained for some period of time than 
other defendants.  Violent defendants were also more likely to 
be detained by the court following a detention hearing (64% of 
those detained).  Similarly, of those defendants charged with drug 
offenses, 76% were detained for some period of time -- 57% 
following a detention hearing.  Property and public-order defendants 
were less likely to be detained than violent and drug defendants. 
During 1996, 68% of public-order defendants were detained.  Of
public-order defendants, those charged with immigration offenses
were the most likely to be detained (93%).  In 1996, 30% of all
defendants charged with property offenses were detained.  Of
those defendants detained, 51% of public- order and 40% of
property defendants were detained following a detention hearing.

For 65% of defendants charged with violent offenses, it was
decided at the preliminary hearing that a detention hearing was
warranted.  This rate varied by offense category, as 60% of those 
charged with drug-related offenses, 42% of those charged with 
public-order offenses, and 20% of those charged with property 
offenses were ordered to have a detention hearing.  Of those 
charged with violent offenses, the most likely to have a pretrial 
detention hearing were those charged with murder, kidnaping, 
robbery, or threats against the President.  The least likely were 
those charged with negligent manslaughter and sex offenses other 
than rape.

Once a defendant was ordered to have a detention hearing, the
chances of being detained were less variable across offense
categories.  The highest rate of defendants ordered detained were 
those charged with public-order offenses (82%) -- primarily 
immigration (90%) and weapons offenders  (73%).  Of the 65% 
of defendants charged with violent offenses and given a pretrial 
detention hearing, 77% were ordered detained.  In 1996, 72% of 
those charged with drug offenses and 61% of those charged with 
property offenses were ordered detained.

Violations -- Of defendants released prior to trial and
terminating pretrial services during 1996, those charged with
drug offenses were more likely (26%) than other defendants to
incur at least one violation during the release period.  Those
charged with property offenses were less likely (10%) than
others to violate conditions of their release.  Those charged
with violent offenses were more likely to have their release
revoked (10% of all violent defendants, 51% of violent
defendants incurring a violation), and  property defendants were
slightly less likely than public-order defendants to have their
release revoked (3.5% versus 3.8%).

Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups

Releases (table 2.2) -- Females were more likely (78%) than
males (48%) to be released during 1996.  Males had nearly 
twice the chance of having a financial condition imposed
on them as females (19% versus 11%).  Sixty-six percent of all
defendants identified as non-Hispanic were released during 1996
compared to 26% of Hispanics.  Non-Hispanic releasees had nearly
twice the chance of being released on personal recognizance.

The higher the education level of the defendant, the greater the
probability of release.  Less than half (44%) of defendants with
less than a high school education were released in 1996, while
82% of those who had completed college were released.  Releasees
with a college degree were slightly less likely to receive
financial conditions (15%) and more likely to be released on
personal recognizance (32%) than those who had less education.

Defendants with a known history of drug abuse were released less
frequently than those defendants with no known drug history. 
However, among all released defendants, drug abuse history does
not appear to have had a major effect on the form of pretrial
release.

Detentions -- Males were nearly twice as likely as females to be 
detained.  Of all detainees, 55% of the men and 41% of the women 
were detained following a detention hearing.  Hispanics had a 
substantially higher probability of being detained as compared 
with non-Hispanics.  However, among those detained, Hispanics 
and non-Hispanics had nearly equal chances of being detained 
following a detention hearing.

Younger defendants were more likely than older ones to be
detained, with the percentage peaking at defendants in their
twenties.  Sixty-nine percent of defendants between the ages of
21 and 30 years were detained compared to 64% of defendants
between 16 and 18 years and 46% of those over 40.  However,
among all defendants detained, the chances of being detained
following a detention hearing were similar across all age
groups.  These patterns were more dramatic with education
levels.  Those defendants with lower levels of education were
more likely to be detained.  Seventy-four percent of those who
did not graduate from high school were detained versus 31% of
college graduates.  Of those detained, 54% of defendants without
a high school diploma were detained following a detention
hearing compared to 47% of college graduates.

Not only were male defendants nearly twice as likely as female
defendants to have a detention hearing (48% versus 27%), they
were also more likely to be ordered detained as a result of the
hearing.  Blacks had a higher chance of having a detention
hearing (50%) than those of other races (42% for whites, 47% for
other).  However, once a detention hearing was held, there were
only slight differences amongst racial groups in the probability
of being ordered detained.

The likelihood of having a detention hearing increased with the
number of prior convictions, severity of the defendant's
criminal history, and current sentence of supervision.  Further,
51% of those with a history of drug abuse had detention hearings
as compared to 40% of those without such a past.  Those with a
known history of drug abuse were also more likely to be detained.

Violations -- Released males were more likely than females to
incur a violation during the pretrial release period (17% versus
13%) and were more likely to have their release revoked. 
Defendants with no prior criminal history were less likely to
have a pretrial release violation than those with a prior
conviction.  Released defendants with a known drug history had
more than 3 times the likelihood of incurring a violation than
those with no known drug history.  Also, those with a history of
drug use were more likely to have their release revoked.

Length of pretrial detention 

Among defendants detained for any time prior to case
disposition, those charged with violent offenses were detained
the longest (an average of 71.5 days) compared to drug
defendants (59.8 days), public-order defendants (40.5 days), and
property defendants (38.0 days).

Of defendants released, those released on conditional means
spent the greatest average number of days detained (44.6 days)
compared to those released on personal recognizance (34.0 days),
unsecured bond (31.1 days), and financial conditions (28.2
days).  However, this trend changed across major offense
categories.  For public-order defendants, those released on
personal recognizance spent the greatest average number of days
detained (34.1 days) compared to unsecured bond (28.1 days),
conditional release (27.7 days),  and financial conditions (22.4
days).

Of defendants not released, those detained following a detention
hearing were detained longer, on average, than those held on
financial conditions (112.7 days compared with 56.8 days).



Chapter 3

Adjudication

Federal criminal cases may result in conviction of the defendant
following plea or trial, acquittal of the defendants after
trial, or dismissal of the case. ***Footnote 1: Unless otherwise 
noted, data describe felony and misdemeanor cases in U.S. district courts
and include Class A misdemeanors handled by U.S. magistrates. 
The data also include infrequent Class B misdemeanors that are
handled by U.S. district court judges.***

Defendants in cases commenced 

During 1996, 65,480 defendants had criminal charges commenced
against them in U.S. district courts, and 52,656 (80%) of those
defendants were charged with felonies.  The 21,677 felony drug
defendants comprised one-third of all criminal defendants in
cases commenced and 41% of all felony defendants.  Felony
property and public-order defendants comprised 22% and 20%,
respectively, of all defendants in cases commenced. The number
of misdemeanor cases commenced was 12,774 in 1996. 
Approximately 39% of all misdemeanors were charged with traffic
violations during 1996.

Defendants in cases terminated

Cases were terminated against 61,434 defendants during 1996,
49,283 (80%) of whom were felony defendants.  During 1996 the
20,305 felony drug defendants comprised 33% of all defendants
and 41% of all felony defendants.

Over 86% of all defendants were convicted, as were 89% of all
felony defendants and 76% of misdemeanor defendants.  For major
felony offense categories, conviction rates ranged from 88% for
drug offenses to 90% for property and public-order offenses. 
Within major offense categories, however, the conviction rates
varied more widely.  For example, within violent offenses, the
conviction rate ranged from 77% for those charged with making
threats against the President to 95% for those charged with sex
offenses other than rape.  Within the public-order category, the
conviction rate ranged from 65% for civil rights violations to
91% for tax law violations and 96% for immigration offenses.

Most (92%) defendants who were convicted pleaded guilty.  For
felony offenses, 91% pleaded guilty to their charges.  For the
major felony offense categories, guilty pleas were registered
for 93% of property offenders, 92% of public-order offenders,
91% of drug offenders, and 88% of violent offenders.

During 1996, 5,085 defendants exercised their right to a trial. 
A higher percentage of violent offenders went to trial than
drug, public-order, and property offenders.  Fourteen percent of
violent offenders went to trial, as did 9% of drug and
public-order offenders and 7% of property offenders.

Of defendants who exercised their right to a trial, 4,104 (81%)
were convicted either by a jury or bench trial.  The felony
trial conviction rate was 84%, while the misdemeanor conviction
rate was 59%.  Among felony offenses, trial conviction rates
ranged from 80% for violent and property defendants to 87% for
drug defendants.  Public-order offenders fell in between, as 83%
of them were convicted at trial.

Case processing times 

The data in table 3.3 cover the interval from the time a case is
filed in U.S. district court to sentencing for those convicted
as well as the interval from case filing to disposition for
those not convicted or those whose cases are dismissed.  Title I
of the Speedy Trial Act of 1974, as a- mended, sets time
requirements for processing criminal cases in Federal courts. 
Except for certain exclusions, indictment must occur within 30
days of arrest; defendants are guaranteed at least 30 days to
prepare for trial; and the Government must be ready for trial
within 70 days.  The Speedy Trial Act does not specify a time
interval from trial to sentencing. ***Footnote 2: The Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984 specifies minimum intervals for the disclosure and
objections to the presentence report.  See Rule 31, Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure.*** The time limits set by the Act
exclude several enumerated periods of pretrial procedure such as
time spent awaiting rulings on motions. ***Footnote 3: 18 U.S.C. 
Section 3161 et. seq.***  Additionally, defendants may seek 
continuances that result in case processing time in excess 
of the statutory limits without violating the provisions of 
the Speedy Trial Act.

Overall, the average time for processing defendants was 8.7
months (figure 3.1).  For felony defendants, the overall
processing time average was 10 months; for those convicted of
misdemeanor crimes, the average processing time was 3.6 months. 
Defendants who pleaded guilty were processed faster (7.9
months) on average than defendants who went to trial (11.9
months).  Defendants whose cases were ultimately dismissed took
longest to process (12.4 months), on average.  Among major
felony offense categories, case processing times were similar to
the overall pattern, with two exceptions.  For those convicted
of violent offenses, those whose cases went to trial took
longest to process. The same pattern applies to those convicted
of property offenses. 

Convictions by U.S. magistrates 

During 1996 U.S. magistrates disposed of 11,173 misdemeanor
criminal defendants, over 76% of whom were convicted.  Those
charged with traffic violations comprised 41% of the defendants
disposed by U.S. magistrates, while misdemeanor property
offenses comprised another 31% of U.S. magistrates' cases.

Characteristics of convicted defendants

Of defendants who were convicted, 84% were men, 65% were
white, 30% were black, and 31% were Hispanic.  Most were
U.S. citizens (72%), had graduated high school or completed
some higher education (60%), and had some criminal history
(53%).

Among defendants convicted there were over 5 times as many
men as women (84% versus 16%); over twice as many whites as
blacks (65% versus 30%); and over 2 times as many
non-Hispanics as Hispanics (69% versus 31%).  U.S. citizens
comprised 72% of defendants; non citizens comprised 28%. 
Persons over age 30 represented 58% of defendants.


Chapter 4

Sentencing

Depending upon the type and severity of the offense,
convicted offenders may be sentenced to incarceration,
probation, a fine, or a combination of sanctions such as a
split or mixed sentence (imprisonment as well as a period of
probation supervision).1  The Federal sentencing guidelines
require a term of supervised release following service of
any prison sentence of more than 1 year. In addition, courts
have the discretion to impose supervised release in any
other case.

Except where otherwise indicated, tables in this chapter are
based on the most serious offense of conviction.  They are
not directly comparable with tables in earlier chapters that
are based on the most serious offense investigated or most
serious offense charged (see "Offense classifications" in
Methodology, p. 91). 

Offenders convicted and sentences imposed (table 4.1)

Of the 53,076 offenders sentenced during 1996, 36,373 (69%)
were sentenced to prison; 12,644 (24%) were sentenced to
probation; and 3,429 (7%) were ordered only to pay a fine.2 
Of the 36,373 offenders sentenced to prison, 34,345 (94%)
were convicted of felonies. Eighty percent of convicted
felons were sentenced to prison. Felony drug and violent
offenders were more likely to receive prison sentences (92%
and 91%, respectively) than were either public-order or
property offenders (79% and 59%, respectively).

Among public-order offenders, persons convicted of civil
rights (93%), escape (92%), and weapons offenses (91%) were
as likely as violent and drug offenders to receive prison
sentences.  

Among property offenders, persons convicted of arson (87%)
and burglary offenses (85%) were almost as likely as violent
and drug offenders to receive prison sentences.  

Overall, 24% of convicted offenders were sentenced to
probation. The percentage of misdemeanant sentenced to
probation (48%) was more than twice that of convicted felons
(18%). Among felons, persons convicted of migratory birds 
(100%), postal laws (88%), communications (82%), and food
and drug violations (72%) were the most likely to be
given probation.

While less than 1% of all convicted felons were ordered to
only pay a fine, 46% of the felons convicted of antitrust 
violations were so ordered.  Fines generally were reserved
for misdemeanor offenders, 32% of whom received fines.

Average prison sentences imposed (table 4.2)

For all offenders given prison terms, the average term of
imprisonment imposed was 61.2 months. Persons convicted of
felonies received an average prison term of 64.2 months.

The average length of prison sentence imposed varied among
major offense categories. Property offenders received the
shortest sentence, on average, while violent offenders
received the longest (23.9 months compared to 92.5 months).
Drug offenders received 84.5 months, on average, and
public-order offenders received 50.8 months. The average
prison term for public-order offenders was primarily
attributable to the sentences imposed for weapons offenders.
The 2,773 weapons offenders sentenced to prison comprised
30% of the 9,383 public-order offenders sent to prison;
weapons offenders received an average prison term of 99.8
months, and public-order offenders other than weapons
offenders received an average prison term of 30.3 months. 

Relationship between sentence imposed and mode of conviction
(table 4.3) 

Offenders convicted by plea were less likely to receive
prison than those convicted at trial. Sixty-seven percent of
the offenders convicted by guilty plea received some prison,
while 88% of the offenders convicted at trial received
prison.

For violent offenders, 91% of those convicted by plea
received prison sentences, as did 94% of those convicted at
trial. However, for fraudulent property offenders, 57% of
those convicted by plea received prison compared to 88% of
those convicted at trial.  And, for regulatory offenders,
45% of those convicted by plea went to prison, compared with
70% of those convicted at trial.

The average prison term imposed on defendants convicted at
trial was longer than the term imposed on defendants
convicted by plea.  Defendants convicted at trial received
155.1 months, on average, while those convicted by plea
received an average of 51.6 months.  Drug offenders
convicted at trial received an average  of 197.5 months as
compared to the 72.5 months for drug offenders convicted by
a guilty plea.  Violent offenders who went to trial received
an average sentence of 206.5 months as compared to the  
78.4 months for those convicted by plea.

Characteristics of offenders sentenced to prison

The majority of persons sentenced to prison during 1996 were
male (89%), white (64%), non-Hispanic (57%), and U.S.
citizens (69%).  The percentage sentenced to prison was not
uniform across all categories of age, race, sex, education,
and ethnicity.  Similarly, the average sentences imposed
were not uniform across these categories.  However,
conclusions about the effect that characteristics may have
had on sentencing cannot be drawn from the aggregate
patterns in the data.  Such an assessment would require
detailed information for each category showing the presence
or absence of factors that are legally intended to affect
sentencing, such as offense severity, weapon  use, role in
the offense, victim injury, dollar loss, and so forth.

One such study of the factors affecting sentencing found
that "nearly all of the aggregate differences among
sentences for whites, blacks, and Hispanics during 1989-90
can be attributed to characteristics of offenses and
offenders that current law and sentencing guidelines
establish as legitimate considerations in sentencing
decisions." ***Footnote 3: Douglas C. McDonald and
Kenneth E. Carlson, Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does
Race Matter?, Washington, DC. U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice  Statistics, December 1993 (NCJ-14328).***

Average sentences imposed were longest for males (65.3
months), blacks (91.1 months), non-Hispanics (69.6 months),
and U.S. citizens (69.7 months).  These longer terms are due
in large part because these categories of offenders (males,
blacks, non-Hispanics, and U.S. citizens) are more highly
concentrated in the offense types  that also are associated
with longer average  sentences.  For example, incarceration
rates for blacks exceed  those of whites in the violent,
drug, and nonregulatory public-order offense categories. 
These offenses are associated with  longer average sentences
than are property offenses or misdemeanors -- the categories
in which whites' incarceration rates exceed those of blacks.

In general, within categories of offender characteristics,
average prison terms were longer for violent and drug
offenses than for property and regulatory public-order
offenses.  These two offense categories generally are
considered to be more serious under the Federal sentencing
guidelines than are property and regulatory public-order
offenses.  As a result, for aggregate tables like the ones
presented in this chapter, persons with a certain
characteristic may appear to receive more severe sentences
on average.  The primary reason for the longer averages is
the larger number of serious offenses that made up the
average sentences  

Chapter 5

Appeals

Prior to implementation of the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, only criminal convictions could be appealed.  However,
the Sentencing Reform Act provided for the appellate review
of sentences imposed given that the sentence was (1) imposed
in violation of the law; (2) imposed as the result of an
incorrect sentencing guideline application; (3) outside the
recommended guideline sentencing range; or (4) imposed for
an offense for which no sentencing guideline exists and is
plainly unreasonable.  Both the defendant and the Government
have the right to appeal an imposed sentence. (18 U.S.C. &
3742).

Appeals filed

During 1996 the U.S. Court of Appeals received 10,889
criminal appeals.  Of all appeals, 408 (4%) were filed by
the Government.  Forty-six percent of appeals filed in 1996
challenged both the conviction and the sentence imposed. 
Twice as many appeals challenged only the sentence imposed
as those that challenged only the conviction (23% versus
11%).  Only 14% of appeals filed were appeals of convictions
for crimes committed before 1987, when the sentencing
guidelines took effect. 

The type of appeal filed (sentence, conviction, or both) was
relatively constant across the offense categories underlying
the appeal.  However, for immigration offenders, 29% of
those convicted appealed only their sentences, compared to
22% for public-order offenses and 23% for all criminal
categories.

Nearly half of all appeals filed were for drug convictions
(49%).  Of these, 47% appealed both the sentence and the
conviction.  Public-order offenses were 24% of all appeals,
and property offenses comprised 20% of all appeals.  Violent
offenders were only 7% of all appeals filed.

Appeals terminated 

A total of 10,161 appeals terminated during 1996.  Of these,
1,441 (14%) were appeals of convictions for offenses
sentenced under laws in effect prior to the sentencing
guidelines.  Of the 8,720 guideline-based appeals, 4,536
(52%) were appeals of sentence and conviction, 2,568 (29%)
were appeals of the sentence only, and 1,196 (14%) were
appeals of the conviction only.

In half of all appeals terminated in 1996 (for which offense
is known), drug offense convictions underlay the appeal; for
23%, the underlying offense was a public-order offense; for
20%, the underlying offense was a property offense; and 7%
were appeals for violent offense convictions.  For 52% of
public-order appeals, the underlying offense of conviction
was for weapons. Robbery offenses composed 46% and murder
composed 20% of the underlying offenses for appeals of a
violent conviction.

Of the 10,161 appeals terminated during 1996, 77% were
terminated on the merits, while the remainder were
terminated on procedural grounds.


For appeals based on a conviction of a violent offense, 85%
were terminated on the merits.  Also terminated on the
merits were 79% of appeals based on a public-order
conviction, 78% of appeals based on a drug conviction, and
74% of appeals based on a property conviction.  Having the
highest rates of termination on the merits were appeals
based on a forgery conviction (97%), rape conviction (92%),
or kidnaping conviction (90%).

In 79% of appeals terminated on the merits, the district
court ruling was affirmed.  In another 7% it was partially
affirmed.  Eighty-two percent of all violent offense appeals
were affirmed, as were 80% of drug offense appeals. 
Property offense and public-order offense appeals were
affirmed in 76% and 77% of cases, respectively.  District
court decisions were reversed or remanded back to the court
in approximately 1 out of 10 cases (9%).  Public-order
offenses had the highest rate of reversal or being remanded
back to the court (12.1%) including perjury, contempt, and
intimidation (33.3%) and traffic (21.4%).  Appeals were
dismissed in 4% of cases.


Chapter 6

Corrections

Supervision

During 1996, 37,307 offenders terminated active supervision
of probation, parole or mandatory release, or a term of
supervised release.

Active supervision can terminate upon one of two events: 
(1) a temporary removal or (2) a permanent closure.  A
temporary removal to inactive status can occur because of a
violation (usually absconding, a warrant for arrest, or
failure to appear for a hearing) or for some other reason,
such as long-term hospitalization.  A permanent closure of
supervision occurs in one of three ways:  (1) the offender
successfully completes the supervision term without
violating conditions; (2) the offender is returned to prison
following a violation of conditions or conviction for a new
crime; or (3) the offender's supervision is closed for
administrative reasons.  The tables in this chapter
classify termination of active supervision as "no violation"
(a successful completion or a removal without violations),
as technical violations or new crimes (removals with
violations or returns to prison), or as administrative case
closures.

Violation of the conditions of supervision or arrest for a
new offense can result in imposition of additional
restrictions or in removal from active supervision.  Removal
from active supervision may entail incarceration of a
probationer or reincarceration of an offender who was under
parole or supervised release.  Offenders who are removed
from active supervision with violations, but who are not
incarcerated, may have some other action taken against them,
such as deportation, issuance of an arrest warrant,
assignment to community corrections, or supervision by some
other State or local authority.

Probation outcomes

During 1996, 17,433 offenders completed 1 or more terms of
active probation.  Overall, 84% of offenders successfully
completed their term of probation, another 14% violated
their conditions of probation, and the remaining 2% were
administrative closures.  Of those who violated their
conditions of probation, 4% committed a new crime.  Most
committed technical violations, including drug use (3%) and
absconding (2%).

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were less likely
than others to successfully complete a term of probation
without a violation.  During 1996, 26% of probationers
convicted of violent offenses violated their conditions of
probation, as did 13% of drug, 12% of property, and 8% of
public-order offenders.  During 1996 violent offenders were
also more likely to commit new crimes (10%) than were
probationers convicted of property (4%), drug (3%), and
public-order (2%) offenses.

Parole and supervised release outcomes 

Of the 19,874 offenders who completed their term of either
parole or supervised release during 1996, 64% successfully
completed parole or supervised release.  During 1996, 11% of
the offenders violated their probation supervision by
committing a new crime; 22% committed technical violations,
such as drug use (8%) and absconding (4%); and 3% completed
their parole term through an administrative case closure.

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were less likely
than others to complete a term of parole or supervised
release without a violation.  Fifty-three percent of violent
offenders violated conditions of parole or supervised
release, while 32% of public-order, 31% of drug, and 30% of
property offenders violated parole or supervised release. 
Violent offenders were more likely to commit new crimes
(18%) than offenders convicted of public-order (12%),
property (11%), or drug (11%) offenses.

Entrants into supervision

The rate of violating conditions of supervision was highest
for parolees and lowest for probationers.  After 12 months
of supervision, 26% of parolees had violated conditions of
release, compared to 9% of probationers.  Overall, 12% of
offenders entering supervision during 1996 had violated
conditions of release within 12 months of their entry into
supervision.

Characteristics of offenders completing supervision (tables
6.2 and 6.4)

Probation -- Among offenders who completed a term of
probation, 74% were male; 70% were white and 91% were of
non-Hispanic origin; 30% were less than age 31 (compared to
40% over age 40); 26% had less than a high school diploma
(compared to 38% who had a high school diploma and 36% who
had at least some college education); and 81% had no known
drug history.

Offender characteristics -- such as age, history of drug
abuse, and education -- were associated with the probability
of violating terms of supervision.  Offenders ages 16 to 20
were more likely (28%) to violate conditions of supervision
than probationers in other age groups -- 21% of those age 21
to 30 and 11% of those over age 30.

Probationers with a history of drug abuse were 7 times more
likely to violate probation for drug use than offenders who
were not drug abusers.  Probationers with known histories of
drug abuse were also more likely to violate supervision for
other reasons (fugitive status and new crimes) than were 
other probationers.

Probationers with lower levels of education were more likely
to violate the conditions of probation than those with
higher levels of education.  Those who did not graduate high
school had a 19% violation rate, those who were high school
graduates had a 15% violation rate, those with some college
had a 11% violation rate, and those with a college degree
had a 6% violation rate.

Parole and supervised release -- Among those who completed a
term of parole or supervised release, 87% were male; 68%
were white; 85% were of non-Hispanic origin; 22% were less
than age 31 (43% were over age 40); 40% had only some high
school (34% had a high school diploma and 26% had at least
some college); and 55% had no known drug history.
 
Offender characteristics -- such as age, history of drug
abuse, and education -- were associated with the probability
of violating terms of supervised release and parole. 
Offenders ages 16 to 20 were more likely (67%) to violate
conditions of supervision than offenders in other age groups
-- 47% of those ages 21 to 30 and 29% of those over age 30.  

Releasees with a history of drug abuse were 5.5 times more
likely to terminate their supervision for technical
violations of drug use as were releasees who were not drug
abusers.  Releasees with known histories of drug abuse were
also more likely to violate supervision with technical
violations or new crimes.

Releasees with lower levels of education were more likely to
violate conditions of parole or supervised release than
those with higher levels of education.  Those who did not
graduate from high school had a 40% violation rate, those
who were high school graduates had a 32% violation rate,
those with some college had a 27% violation rate, and those
with a college degree had a 13% violation rate.

Federal offenders under supervision 

As of the end of the fiscal year 1996, there were 88,189
offenders under active Federal supervision, of which most
(87%) were felons.  About 62% of these offenders were
receiving one of two forms of post-incarceration
supervision:  supervised release (45,975) or parole (8,569). 
The remainder (33,645) were under probation supervision. 
Most of the probationer population had been convicted of
either a property felony (40%) or some type of misdemeanor
offense (32%).  Over 50% of offenders under supervised
release and 56% of parolees had been convicted of a drug
offense.

The distribution of offenders under supervision, in terms of
supervision type, varied according to major offense
category.  Of the 5,036 offenders convicted of violent
offenses, 49% received supervised release, 39% were on
parole, and about 12% were on probation.  Of the 27,208
property offenders, 49% received probation, 47% were on
supervised release, and 4% were on parole.  Of the 31,859
drug offenders under supervision, most (73%) were on
supervised release, 15% were on parole, and 12% were on
probation.  Finally, of the 12,590 public-order offenders
under supervision, 53% received a term of supervised
release, 41% were under probation, and 6% were on parole
supervision.

Federal prisoners: First releases and time served (tables
6.7-6.10)

During 1996, 30,251 prisoners were released from Federal
prison for the first time after serving a sentence imposed
by a U.S. district court.***Footnote 1: Tables 6.7-6.9
include only prisoners first released by the BOP during
1996.***  Of these, 28,073 were released by standard means. 
These standard releases served an average of 28.2 months
in prison -- 92% of the sentence imposed, on
average.***Footnote 2: Average time to first release is the
number of months in Bureau of Prisons facilities minus
credits for the time spent in jail prior to final
disposition or sentencing.  Percent of sentence served is
the average percentage of each individual prisoner's 
percent of total sentence obligation served until first
release.***

The remaining 2,178 first releases were released by
extraordinary means:  852 were released early due to
participation in a drug treatment program; 512 had their
sentences commuted; 441 were deported; 210 died; and 163
were released for other reasons including escape and an
intensive confinement program .  Drug offenders make up the
vast majority of those released by extraordinary means
(77%). 

Time served until first release varied by offense:  Violent
offenders served an average of 54.3 months; drug offenders
served an average of 40.3 months; public-order offenders
served an average of 17.2 months; and public-order offenders
served an average of fewer than 15.6 months.  During 1996
the average time to first release for public-order offenders
was influenced heavily by the relatively short time served
by immigration offenders.  On average, immigration offenders
served 8.3 months until first release during 1996.  This was
less than half of the average time served for all
public-order offenders (17.2).  Exclusive of immigration
offenders, public-order offenders served an average of 27.2
months until first release.

Old law offenders -- those who committed crimes before the
implementation of Federal Sentencing Guidelines in November
1987--that were released in 1996 served an average of 81
months in prison -- 58% of the sentence imposed, on average
(tables 6.9 and 6.10).  New law offenders released during
1996 served, on average, 26 months in prison (92% of the
sentence imposed).  Since the Federal Sentencing Guidelines
became effective as November 1987, new law offenders
sentenced to terms of imprisonment greater than 126 months
could not have been released by standard means as of the end
of 1996.***Footnote 3: The Federal Sentencing Guidelines
allow a prisoner up to 54 days per year for good behavior,
so a prisoner sentenced to 126 months in  November 1987
could have served 107 months of his or her sentence and been
released in 1996.***  They could have been released for 
extraordinary reasons such as death, commutation, or treaty 
transfer. ***Footnote 4: Prisoners released for
extraordinary reasons have been excluded from all time
served and percent of sentence served calculations.***

Admissions, releases, and standing population of Federal
prisoners 

The Federal prison population grew by 4,676 persons during
fiscal year 1996, increasing from 87,996 sentenced prisoners
to 92,672.  The greatest growth was among drug and
public-order offenders, particularly immigration offenders. 
The number of drug offenders in prison grew by 2,604 during
1996.  The number of immigration offenders increased by
1,151.  In contrast, the number of weapons offenders grew at
a slower rate in 1996, increasing by 265.

Characteristics of Federal prisoners

Prisoners released -- Of prisoners released during 1996, 88%
were male, 74% were white, 24% were black, 34% were
Hispanic, and 66% were U.S. citizens.  Fifty-eight percent
were 31 years of age or older.  These patterns held across
offenses and between old and new law offenders, except with
non-regulatory public-order offenses.  Of released offenders
convicted of those offenses, 56% were Hispanic and 59% were
not U.S. citizens.

Time served to first release -- 

Of prisoners released by standard methods, males served more
time than females, blacks served more time than whites,
non-Hispanics served more time than Hispanics, older persons
served more time than younger (until over age 40), and U.S.
citizens served more time than noncitizens.  However, among
the offenses, the overall pattern does not always hold,
except for males and females.  For example, blacks served
more time on average than whites, but among property
offenders released from prison, whites served more time than
blacks.

Chapter notes

1) Tables 6.1-6.4 were created from the probation,
parole, and supervision data files of the Federal
Probations Supervision Information System (FPSIS),
which is maintained by the AOUSC. Only records
with one or more terminations of active supervision
during October 1, 1995, through September 30, 1996,
were selected. Each termination was counted
separately. Technical violations and terminations for
new crimes are shown only if supervision terminated
with incarceration or removal from active supervision
for reasons of a violation.  

Corporate defendants were excluded from tables 6.1-6.4.

2) Offenders were classified according to their most
serious offense at conviction. In cases involving
multiple offenses, the AOUSC offense severity
hierarchy was applied. The most serious offense was
the one with the most severe penalty imposed. If equal
prison terms were imposed, or there was no imprisonment,
the offense with the highest severity
code, as deter-mined by the U.S. Title and Code
Criminal Offense Citations Manual, was selected.

3) Table 6.5 was also created from FPSIS data files.
Records with supervision opened or reinstated during
fiscal year 1996 were selected and tracked for a
period of 12 months, or, if the offender violated
their supervision before the 12-month period
concluded, until the time of the violation. This
represents a departure from the 1993 and prior compendia,
which only considered time that fell within the
calendar year in which an offender began supervision.
Therefore, direct comparisons between this
Compendium and the 1993 and prior compendia are not
valid.

Corporate defendants were also excluded from table
6.5.

4) Table 6.6 was created using the FPSIS data files as
well. Year end pending cases (that is, records with
offenders who were under active supervision as of the
end of the fiscal year, September 30, 1996) were
selected.

Corporate defendants were excluded from table 6.6. 

5) Tables 6.7-6.13 were created from the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) data files. Tables 6.7-6.10
and 6.12-6.13 include only prisoners committed by
U.S. district courts or released by the BOP during
fiscal year 1996.  Table 6.11 also shows sentenced
prisoners in the custody of the BOP at the end of
fiscal year 1996.

In these tables, a single person may be counted more
than once if that person was committed into, or
released from, the BOP more than one time during
fiscal year 1996, or if that person appears in more
than one column in a table, e.g., commitment and
population. 

Offense categories in these tables were based on
combinations of offense designations used by the
BOP. They are similar, but may not be directly
comparable, to the categories used in other tables of
this Compendium. Offenses for some prisoners admitted
or released were not able to be classified;
these offenders were included in the totals and are
shown as "other prisoners" on the last line of
tables.

In these tables, offenses were classified according to
the offense associated with the longest single
sentence actually imposed. Classifications in other
tables may have been based on the longest potential
sentence allowed by law.

6) Tables 6.7-6.13 distinguish between prisoners
committed by U.S. district courts for violations of
the U.S. Code and other prisoners. Prisoners released
after commitment from U.S. district court are
called "first releases." The other admissions and
releases include offenders who returned to prison
after their first release (such as probation, parole,
or supervised release violators), offenders convicted
in other courts (such as military or District of
Columbia courts), and persons admitted to
prison as material witnesses or for purposes of
treatment, examination, or transfer to another
authority. Offenders who entered or left a prison
temporarily -- such as for transit to another
location, for health care, or to serve a weekend
sentence -- were not counted as admitted or released.
Persons who were detained for deportation by the
Immigration and Naturalization Service and who were
not criminal offenders were also not included in the
tables.

Table 6.7 distinguishes between standard and
extraordinary methods of release from prison.
"Stan-dard" releases include the usual methods of exiting
from prison, such as full-term sentence expirations,
expirations with good time, mandatory releases, and
releases to parole. Extraordinary releases are unusual
exits from prison, such as death, commutation, and
trans-fer to another facility.

7) Tables 6.7-6.10 and 6.12-6.13 include only
prisoners committed by U.S. district courts and
released by the BOP during fiscal year 1996. 
Prisoners committed by U.S. dis-trict court -- but not
for a violation of the U.S. Code, or whose offense
could not be classified -- were included in the total
but are not shown separately. Table 6.11, however,
shows these prisoners separately. Other prisoners--
such as probation and parole violators and prisoners
committed by other courts, such as courts martial or
District of Columbia Superior Court -- were excluded
from tables 6.7-6.10 and 6.12-6.13, as were other
persons admitted to Federal prison but not committed
from a U.S. district court.

8) In tables 6.7-6.10 and 6.12-6.13, time served was
calculated for prisoner's arrival into jurisdiction of
the BOP until first release from prison, plus any jail
time served and credited. The calculation is the same
as that currently used by the BOP. Prisoners serving
consecutive sentences may have total imposed sentences
exceeding the longest single sentence length.
Accordingly, time actually served may exceed the
longest single imposed sentence. The percent of
sentenced served (in tables 6.8, 6.9, and 6.10) is the
average of each individual prisoner's percent of
sentence served. Because other publications may 
include different groups of prisoners, calculate
time served differently, or use a different offense
classification, data in tables in this Compendium
may differ from estimates of time served in previous
publications by the BOP or in publications based
on other data sources. 

Time served, as reported in tables 6.7-6.10 and 6.12-6.13
in this Compendium, may not be directly
comparable to the calculation of time served in the
1993 and prior compendia. The methodology in this
report uses additional informa-tion to identify prison
commitment dates and account for jail credit. In
previous reports, jail credits were overestimated in
some cases. In addition, time served estimates reported
in tables 6.8-6.10 and 6.13 include only
prisoners released by standard methods (expirations,
mandatory releases, and releases to parole). Prisoners
released by extraordinary means (death, commutation,
transfer, etc.) are excluded from the time served
calculations in these tables.

9) Table 6.11 shows all persons admitted to, or
released from, the jurisdiction of the BOP during
fiscal year 1996. Prisoners counted in this column are
the same as prisoners included in tables 6.8-6.10.
Table 6.11 shows in separate colthe total, prisoners
committed by a U.S. district court -- but not for a
violation of the U.S. code, or whose offense could not
be classified. Other columns in table 6.11 include
prisoners who were committed by other courts, returned
to prison for violation of the conditions of
supervision, or were received for examination,
treatment, or transfer to another jurisdiction.
Offenders who returned to prison for a violation of
the conditions of supervision without a new court
commitment, were classified according to the offense
with the longest single sentence originally imposed at
conviction.

Methodology

The Federal justice database

Source of data

The source of data for all tables in this Compendium
is the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) Federal justice
database.  The database is presently constructed from source
files provided by the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys,
the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, the United
States Sentencing Commission, and the U.S. Bureau of Prisons. 
The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts also maintains the
data collected by the Pretrial Services Agency, the U.S.
Court of Appeals, and the U.S. Probation Service.  Federal law prohibits the use
of these files for any purposes other than research or
statistics.  A description of the source agency data files
is provided in the table at the end of this section.

Some records in the Federal justice database are
matched according to a statistically weighted combination of
names, other personal identifiers, dates of court
appearances, types of offenses, and other relevant information
contained in the files. Using the matched data files, it is possible to
combine information about two or more stages of the processing
of a criminal matter or case, for example from adjudication
to probation or parole supervision.
 

Reporting period

Wherever possible, matters or cases have been selected
according to some event which occurred during fiscal
year 1996 (October 1, 1995, through September 30, 1996). 
Some data files provided by source agencies are organized
according to a calendar year time frame; these have
been combined and divided into fiscal years for purposes of
the Compendium.  Files which are organized by their source
agencies according to fiscal year nonetheless include
some pertinent records in later years' files.  For example,
tabulations of suspects in matters concluded during
fiscal year 1996 in this Compendium have been
assembled from source files containing records of 1996 matters
concluded which were entered into the data system during fiscal
years 1996 or 1997.

Availability of data items

The availability of particular items of information is
affected by the data source.  For example, data on
prosecutors' decisions prior to court filing are
provided for cases investigated by U.S. attorneys but not for
those handled by other litigating divisions of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  Criminal Division
cases enter the data base once they are filed in U.S.
district court, however.  

Many items of social and demographic information come
from presentence investigation records, supervision
records, or sentencing records, and are available only for
arrested defendants who were convicted and/or began serving a
sentence involving supervised release.  This particularly
affects sex, race, ethnicity, and prior record information. 

Table construction and interpretation

The tables presented report events that occurred during the
Federal fiscal year -- October 1, 1995 - September 30, 1996. 
Generally, the tables include both individual and organizational
defendants.  Organizational defendants are not included in 
tables describing pretrial release and detention or tables
showing defendants sentenced to incarceration. Juvenile
offenders are included in the reported statistics.

Unit of analysis

The unit of analysis in chapters 1 through 5 is a
combination of a person (or corporation) and a matter
or case.  For example, if a single person is involved in
three different criminal cases during the time period
specified in the table, he or she is counted three times in the
tabulation.  Similarly, if a single criminal case involves
a corporate defendant and four individual defendants, it
counts five times in the tabulation.  In chapter 6, the
unit of analysis for incarceration, probation, parole,
or other supervised release is a person entering custody
or supervision, or a person leaving custody or supervision.
For example, a person convicted in two concurrent cases
and committed once to the custody of the Federal Bureau of
Prisons in the indicated time period is counted as one
admission to a term of incarceration.  A person who
terminates probation twice in the indicated time
period, such as with a violation and again after
reinstatement, is counted as two terminations of probation.

Interpretation

The tables in the Compendium are constructed to permit
the user to make valid comparisons of numbers within each
table and to compare percentage rates across tables.  The
total numbers of subjects in Compendium tables that are
based on records linked between two files are generally less
than the total number of records in either source file.  Accordingly,
comparisons of absolute numbers across two or more tables in this
volume and other data sources are not necessarily valid.

Offense classifications

Procedure

The offense classification procedure used in this
Compendium is based on the classification system followed by the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.  Specific
offenses combined to form the BJS categories shown in the
Compendium tables.* 

For data from the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys,
which include United States Code citations but do not
include the Administrative Office offense classifications, United
States Code titles and sections are translated into the
Administrative Office classification system and then aggregated into
the offense categories used in the tables.  Offense
categories for prisoners in chapter 6 are based on combinations
of offense designations used by the Bureau of Prisons. 
They are similar to the categories in other chapters and
other tables in chapter 6, but may not be directly
comparable.  

Felony/misdemeanor distinctions

Felony and misdemeanor distinctions are provided where
possible.  Felony offenses are those with a maximum
penalty of  more than 1 year in prison.  Misdemeanor offenses
are those with a maximum penalty of 1 year or less. 
Felonies and misdemeanors are further classified using the
maximum term of imprisonment authorized.  Section 3559, U.S. Code, Title 18
classifies offenses according to the following schedule:

Felonies

Class A felony -- life imprisonment, or if the maximum
penalty is death.

Class B felony -- 25 years or more.

Class C felony -- less than 25 years but more than 10 years.

Class D felony -- less than 10 years but more than 5 years.

Class E felony -- less than 5 years but more than 1 year.

Misdemeanors

Class A misdemeanor -- 1 year or less but more than 1 month.

Class B misdemeanor -- 6 months or less but more than 30 days.

Class C misdemeanor -- 30 days or less but more than 5 days.

Infraction -- 5 days or less, or if no imprisonment is authorized.

In this Compendium, felony and misdemeanor distinctions are
provided where the data permit these distinctions.  Chapter 1
does not use this distinction because many suspects cannot
be so classified at the investigation stage in the criminal
justice process.  Chapter 2 no longer reports this distinction because
the Pretrial Services Agency no longer gathers this
information. Chapters 3 and 4 distinguish between
felony and misdemeanor offenses, as do tables 6.1-6.6.  Tables
6.7-6.11 follow the convention of other BJS publications by
separately tabulating offenders whose actual imposed
sentences are less than or equal to 1 year and those
whose actual sentences are greater than 1 year. 

Most serious offense selection

Where more than one offense is charged or adjudicated,
the most serious offense (the one that may or did result
in the most severe sentence) is used to classify offenses.
The offense description may change as the criminal justice
process proceeds.  Tables indicate whether investigated,
charged or adjudicated offenses are used.  In chapter
1, the most serious offense is based on the criminal lead
charge as determined by the assistant U.S. attorney responsible
for the criminal proceeding.  In chapter 2, the major
charged offense is based upon the Administrative Office's
offense severity classification system, as determined by the
pretrial officer responsible for the case. To select
this offense, the officer ranks offenses according to
severity based on maximum imprisonment, type of crime, and
maximum fines.  In chapter 3, the most serious offense charged
is the one that has the most severe potential sentence. 
For chapter 4, conviction offenses are based on statutory
maximum penalties.  In chapter 5, offenses are classified by
the offense of conviction.  In tables 6.1-6.6, the most
serious offense of conviction is either the one having
the longest sentence imposed or, if equal sentences were 
imposed or there was no imprisonment, it was the
offense  carrying the highest severity code as determined by
the  Administrative Office's offense severity code ranking. 
In tables 6.7-6.13, prisoners are classified according to the offense
which bears the longest single incarceration sentence.  

Offense categories

For offense categories in all text tables, the
following conditions apply:

"Murder -- includes nonnegligent manslaughter.

"Other sex offenses" may include some nonviolent offenses.

"Fraud -- excludes tax fraud.

"Larceny -- excludes transportation of stolen property.

"Other property felonies -- excludes fraudulent property
offenses, and includes destruction of property and
trespass.

"Tax law violations -- includes tax fraud.

 "Obscene material -- denotes the mail or transport thereof.

"All other felonies -- includes felonies with unknown
or unclassifiable offense type.

"Misdemeanors -- includes misdemeanors, petty
offenses, and unknown offense levels.

"Drug possession -- also includes other drug
misdemeanors.

Figure S.2.

Figure S.2. uses data from the Executive Office for
U.S. Attorneys to provide an overview of case processing in
the Federal criminal justice system.  The figure uses data
from two separate cohorts of persons involved in criminal
proceedings.  The data on suspects in criminal matters concluded and
defendants prosecuted come from the cohort of suspects
in matters concluded during October 1, 1995, through
September 30, 1996.  (The filing of charges in a criminal case
is one conclusion of a matter; the other is the declination
of the matter for prosecution.)  For the other three outcomes
in figure S.2. -- offenders convicted, sentenced to
prison, or given a term of probation  --  the data come from the
cohort of defendants in cases terminating during fiscal year
1996 in U.S. district courts (by either a judge or a
magistrate).

A total of 98,454 suspects were investigated in
matters concluded by U.S. attorneys during 1996.  Sixty-seven
percent of these suspects were prosecuted in U.S.
district court, either before U.S. district court judges
(56,938/98,454 = 57.8%) or before U.S. magistrates
(8,684/98,454 = 8.8%).  The conviction data in figure
S.2. refer to defendants in cases terminated in U.S.
district court during 1996, whether before U.S. district court
judges or U.S. magistrates.  Fifty-four percent of the
defendants in cases terminating during 1996 were convicted
(53,076/98,454). 

Of the defendants investigated, 37% (36,373/98,454)
were reported as sentenced to a term of imprisonment, and
13% (12,644/98,454) were sentenced to a term of probation
without imprisonment.  These figures are based on all
charges, whether they eventually were felony or
misdemeanor offenses. 



Glossary

Acquittal -- legal judgment that a criminal defendant
has not been proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of
the charges against him.

Affirmed -- in the appellate courts, the decree or order is
declared valid and will stand as rendered in the lower
court.

Agriculture violations -- violations of the Federal statutes
on agriculture and conservation:  for example, violations of
the Agricultural Acts, Insecticide Act, and the Packers and
Stockyards Act, 1921; also violations of laws concerning
plant quarantine and the handling of animals pertaining to
research (7 U.S.C., except sections on food stamps (fraud);
also 16 U.S.C. sections relating generally to violations in
operating public parks, such as trespassing for hunting,
shooting, and fishing). 

Antitrust violations -- offenses relating to Federal
antitrust statutes, which aim to protect trade and commerce
from unlawful restraints, price fixing, monopolies (for
example, 15 U.S.C. && 1, 3, 8, 20, and 70(i)), and
discrimination in pricing or in furnishing services or
facilities (15 U.S.C. && 13(c) and 13(e)). 

Appeal -- a review by a higher court of a judgment or
decision of a lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of -- an intermediate Federal court,
inferior to the U.S. Supreme Court, but higher than
the U.S. district court.  The function of the U.S. court of
appeals is to review the final decisions of the district
courts, if challenged.  There are 13 courts of appeal in the
Federal system representing the 12 judicial circuits and the
Federal circuit (28 U.S.C. & 41).

Appellant -- the party which takes an appeal from 1
court or jurisdiction to another; opposite of appellee. 

Appellee -- the party against whom the appeal is
taken; opposite of appellant.

Arson -- willfully or maliciously setting, or attempting to
set, fire to any property within the special maritime
and territorial jurisdiction of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. & 7 (18 U.S.C. & 81; and 49A U.S.C. && 1804
and 1809).  (See also, "Explosives.")

Assault -- intentionally inflicting or attempting or
threatening to inflict bodily injury to another
person.  Applies to anyone within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. & 7, or to any Government official, foreign
official, official guest, internationally protected
person, or any officer or employee of the United States
designated in 18 U.S.C. & 1114 (for example, 16 U.S.C. && 1857(e)
and 1859; 18 U.S.C. && 111(a), 112(b), 113(c)(e), 114,
115(c), 351(d)(e), 372, 373, 1502, 1751(c), 1959, 2118(c), and
2231(a); 21 U.S.C. && 461(c), 675(b), and 1041(c); 26
U.S.C. && 7212(a)(b); 29 U.S.C. & 1141; 46 U.S.C. & 701; and
49A U.S.C. & 1472(k)); also certain violations of the Fair
Housing Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. && 3610 and 3631).

Bail -- the sum of money promised as a condition of
release, to be paid if a released defendant defaults (18 U.S.C.
& 3142(c)). 

Bribery -- offering or promising anything of value
with intent to unlawfully influence a public official in
the discharge of official duties.  Applies generally to
bank employees, officers or employees of the U.S.
Government, witnesses, or any common carrier.  Includes soliciting
or receiving anything of value in consideration of aiding
a person to obtain employment in the U.S. Government. 
Also, receiving or soliciting any remuneration, directly or
indirectly, in cash or any kind in return for purchasing,
ordering, leasing, or recommending to purchase any good,
service, or facility (18 U.S.C. && 201(a), 203(a)(b),
204, 207(a)(c), 208, 210, 211, 213, 215, and 663; 21 U.S.C.
& 622; 46 U.S.C. & 239(i); and 49 U.S.C. && 104, 917(b),
and 11904(b)). 

Burglary -- breaking and entering into another's
property with intent to steal within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in
18 U.S.C. 7.  Includes breaking and entering into any
official bank, credit union, savings and loan
institution, post office, vessel or steamboat assigned to the use
of mail service, or personal property of the United States; or
breaking the seal or lock of any carrier facility containing
interstate or foreign shipments of freight or express
(18 U.S.C. && 2111, 2113(a), and 2115-17). 

Career offender -- defendants are counted as career
offenders if they are at least 18 years old at the
time of the instant offense, if the instant offense of
conviction is a felony--that is either a crime of violence or a drug
crime; and if they have at least two prior felony
convictions of either a crime of violence or a drug
crime. 

Case -- in this Compendium, a judicial proceeding for
the determination of a controversy between parties wherein
rights are enforced or protected, or wrongs are prevented or
redressed; any proceeding judicial in its nature.

Collateral bond -- an agreement made by a defendant as a
condition of his or her pretrial release that requires the
defendant to post property valued at the full bail amount as
an assurance of his or her intention to appear at trial.

Community confinement -- a form of commitment either
as a substitute for Federal imprisonment or as a condition
of probation in a community treatment center, halfway
house, restitution center, mental health facility, alcohol or
drug rehabilitation center, or other community facility;
and participation in gainful employment, employment search
efforts, community service, vocational training, treatment,
educational programs, or similar facility-approved programs
during non-residential hours.  Under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, community confinement may be a substitute for
imprisonment on a day-to-day basis for defendants with
a guideline maximum of less than 16 months of
imprisonment (see also, U.S.S.G. & 5C1.1(e)).  

Complaint -- a written statement of the essential
facts constituting the offense charged, with an offer to
prove the fact, so that a prosecution may be instituted.  The
complaint can be "taken out" by the victim, the police
officer, the district attorney, or other interested
party. 

Concurrent sentence -- a sentence imposed which is to
be served at the same time as another sentence imposed
earlier or during the same proceeding (18 U.S.C. & 3584). 
(See also, "Consecutive sentence.") 

Conditional release -- in this Compendium, at the
pretrial stage, a conditional release is release from detention
contingent on any combination of restrictions that are
deemed necessary to guarantee the defendant's
appearance at trial or the safety of the community (see text in
Chapter 2 of this Compendium.)

Consecutive sentence -- a sentence imposed that will follow
another sentence imposed earlier or during the same
proceeding; opposite of concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy -- an agreement by two or more persons to
commit or to effect the commission of an unlawful act or to
use unlawful means to accomplish an act that is not in
itself unlawful; also any overt act in furtherance of the
agreement.  A person charged with conspiracy is
classified under the substantive offense alleged.

Continuing criminal enterprise --  a felony committed
as part of a continuing series of violations, which is
undertaken by a person in concert with five or more other
persons with respect to whom such person occupies a position
of organizer, a supervisory position, or any other position
of management, and from which such person obtains
substantial income or resources (21 U.S.C. & 848(c)).

Conviction -- the result of a criminal trial which
ends in a judgment that the defendant is guilty.  The final
judgment on a verdict or finding of guilty, a plea of guilty,
or a plea of nolo contendere, but does not include a final
judgment which has been expunged by pardon, reversed,
set aside, or otherwise rendered invalid.

Corporate surety -- in this Compendium, a surety; one
who has entered into a bond to give surety for another;
for example, bail bondsman.  As a condition of his or her
release, the defendant enters into an agreement that
requires a third party such as a bail bondsman to
promise to pay the full bail amount in the event that the
defendant fails to appear.  (See also, "Surety bond.")

Counterfeiting -- falsely making, forging, or altering
obligations with a view to deceive or defraud, by
passing the copy or thing forged for that which is original or
genuine.  Applies to obligation or security of the United
States, foreign obligation or security, coin or bar stamped
at any mint in the United States, money order issued by the
Postal Service, domestic or foreign stamp, or seal of any
department or agency of the United States.  Includes
passing, selling, attempting to pass or sell, or bringing
into the United States any of the above falsely made
articles.  Also, making, selling, or possessing any
plates or stones (or any other thing or instrument) used for
printing counterfeit obligations or securities of the
United States, foreign obligations or securities, Government
transportation requests, or postal stamp; or knowingly
and intentionally trafficking in falsified labels affixed
to phonorecords, motion pictures, or audio visual works
(for example, 18 U.S.C. && 471, 473, 477, 479, 481, 485,
487, 501, 507, 509, 513(b), 2318, and 2320).

Courts -- See "Appeals, U.S. Court of" and "District
court, U.S."  Pursuant to Article III of the Constitution,
judicial power is vested in the following Federal Courts:  The
U.S. Supreme Court, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, and the U.S. district court for the District
of Columbia. 

Criminal career -- the longitudinal sequence of crimes
committed by an individual offender.  

Criminal history category -- under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, a quantification of the defendant's prior
criminal record and the defendant's propensity to
recidivate.  Guideline criminal history categories
range from Category I (primarily first-time offenders) to
Category VI (career criminals).   

Deadly or dangerous weapon -- an instrument capable of
inflicting death or serious bodily injury.  

Declination -- the decision by a prosecutor not to
file a case in a matter received for investigation.  In this
Compendium, immediate declinations (i.e., where less
than 1 hour of time is spent on a case) are excluded.

Defendant -- the party against whom relief or recovery
is sought in an action or suit, or the accused in a
criminal case. 

Departure -- under the Federal sentencing guidelines,
the term used to describe a sentence imposed outside the
applicable guideline sentencing range.  A court may
depart when it finds an aggravating or mitigating
circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not adequately taken into
consideration by the Sentencing Commission in formulating
the guidelines that should result in a sentence
different from that described (18 U.S.C. & 3553(b); U.S.S.G. &
5K2.0).  (See also, "Substantial assistance.") 

Deposit bond -- an agreement made by a defendant as a
condition of his or her release that requires the
defendant to post a fraction of the bail before he or she is
released.
 
Detention -- the legally authorized confinement of
persons after arrest, whether before or during prosecution. 
Only those persons held 2 or more days are classified as
detained in this Compendium.

Dismissal -- termination of a case before trial or
other final judgment (including nolle prosequi and deferred
prosecution). 

Disposition -- the decision made on a case brought before a
criminal court.

Distribution -- delivery (other than by administering or
dispensing) of a controlled substance (21 U.S.C. &
802(6)).  The term "controlled substance" means any drug or
other substance, or immediate precursor, included in
schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of part B of subchapter I of Chapter
13 (title 21).  The term does not include distilled
spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are
defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986.

District court, U.S. -- trial courts with general
Federal jurisdiction over cases involving Federal laws or
offenses and actions between citizens of different States.

District of Columbia -- the jurisdiction of the U.S.
district court for the District of Columbia.  This
Compendium includes Federal offenses prosecuted in
U.S. district courts, and except for tables based on data
from the Bureau of Prisons, excludes violations of the
District of Columbia Code and cases prosecuted in the District
of Columbia Superior Court.  

Drug offenses -- offenses under a Federal or State laws
prohibiting the manufacture, import, export, distribution,
or dispensing of a controlled substance (or counterfeit
substance), or the possession of a controlled substance (or
a counterfeit substance) with intent to manufacture, import,
export, distribute, or dispense.  Also using any communication
facilities which causes or facilitates a
felony under title 21, or furnishing of fraudulent or
false information concerning prescriptions as well as any
other unspecified drug-related offense.  (See also,
"Distribution," "Possession," and "Trafficking.")

Embezzlement -- the fraudulent appropriation of
property by a person to whom such property has been lawfully
entrusted.  Includes offenses committed by bank officers or
employees; officers or employees of the Postal Service; officers
of lending, credit, or insurance institutions; any
officer or employee of a corporation or association engaged in
commerce as a common carrier; court officers of the U.S.
courts; or officers or employees of the United States.  Also,
stealing from employment and training funds, programs receiving
Federal funds, and Indian tribal organizations; or selling,
conveying, or disposing of any money, property, records, or
thing of value to the United States or any department
thereof without authority (for example, 15 U.S.C. &
645(c); 18 U.S.C. && 153, 334, 642-57, 665(a)(b), 666(b),
1163, 1709, 1711, 1956, and 1957; 25 U.S.C. & 450(d); 29
U.S.C. & 502(b); and 42 U.S.C. && 1760, 2971, and 3220(b)).

Escape -- departing or attempting to depart from the
custody of a correctional institution; a judicial,
correctional, or law enforcement officer; or a hospital where one is
committed for drug abuse and drug dependency problems. 
Knowingly advising, aiding, assisting, or procuring
the escape or attempted escape of any person from a
correctional facility, an officer, or the above-mentioned hospital
as well as concealing an escapee.  Providing or attempting to
provide to an inmate in prison a prohibited object; or
making, possessing, obtaining, or attempting to make
or obtain a prohibited object (as defined in 18 U.S.C. &
1791(d)(1)(A)).  Instigating, assisting, attempting
to cause, or causing any mutiny or riot at any Federal
penal, detention, or correctional facility, or
conveying into any of these institutions any dangerous
instrumentalities (for example, 18 U.S.C. && 751(a)(b),
752(a), 753, 755-56, 1071, 1073, 1791(a)(c), (d)(1)(A),
1792, 3146(a)(b)(d), 3147 and 3615; 28 U.S.C. & 1826;
42 U.S.C. && 261 and 3425; and 50 U.S.C & 823).

Explosives -- violations of Federal law involving
importation, manufacture, distribution, and storage of
explosive material.  Includes unlawful receipt,
possession or transportation of explosives without a license (18
U.S.C. & 842(a)), where prohibited by law (18 U.S.C. &
842(c), or using explosives during commission of a felony (18
U.S.C. & 844(h)).  Also includes violations relating to dealing
in stolen explosives (18 U.S.C. & 842(h)), using mail or
other form of communication to threaten an individual with
explosives (18 U.S.C. & 844(e), and possessing explosive
materials at an airport (18 U.S.C. & 844(g), and 49A
U.S.C. && 1804 and 1809).  (See also, "Arson" and 18 U.S.C.
&& 842(e)(g)(i)(k); and & 844(b).)   

Failure to appear -- willful absence from any court
appointment.  

Felony -- a criminal offense punishable by death or
imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year.  According
to 18 U.S.C. & 3559, felonies are classified into 5 grades
based on maximum terms of imprisonment:  Class A felony, if
the maximum term is life imprisonment, or if the maximum
penalty is death; Class B, if 25 years or more; Class C, if
less than 25 years, but 10 years or more; Class D, if less
than 10 years, but five or more years; and Class E, if less
than 5 years, but more than 1.    

Filing -- the initiation of a criminal case in U.S.
district court by formal submission to the court of a charging
document alleging that one or more named persons have
committed one or more specified offenses.  In this
Compendium, each defendant in a case is counted
separately, and only the most serious alleged offense is
considered.

Financial conditions -- monetary conditions upon which
release of a defendant before trial is contingent. 
Includes deposit bond, surety bond, and collateral bond.  (See
also, "Specific definitions.")
 
First release -- in this Compendium, prisoners who are
released from the Bureau of Prisons for the first time
after their commitment by a U.S. district court (i.e.,
excludes offenders who are returned to prison after their first
release, such as probation, parole, etc.).  

Food and drug violations -- violations of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act such as regulations for clean
and sanitary movement of animals (21 U.S.C. & 134(b)),
adulteration or misbranding of any food or drug (21
U.S.C. & 331(a)), failure to transmit information about
prescription drugs (21 U.S.C. & 331(o)), and intent to defraud and
distribute adulterated material (21 U.S.C. & 676).
(See also, 18 U.S.C. & 1365(b); 21 U.S.C. && 17, 22, 63,
115, 122, 126, 134(d), 142, 144, 151, 153, 155, 158, 201,
205, 209, 210, 212, 331(b)-(g), 331(i)-(n)(p)(t), 333(a),
458(a), 459, 460(a)-(d), 461(a), 463, 466, 610(a)(c), 611(a),
620, 642, 1037, 1041(a), and 1175.) 

Forgery -- falsely making or materially altering a
document with the intent to defraud.  Includes such
falsification with intent to pass off as genuine any of the
following: U.S. Postal Service money order; postmarking stamp or
impression; obligation or security of the United States;
foreign obligation, security, or bank note; contractors'
bond, bid, or public record; deed; power of attorney;
letters patent; seal of a court or any department or
agency of the U.S. Government; the signature of a judge or
court officer; ships' papers; documents on entry of vessels;
customs matters; coin or bar; and so forth.  Also
includes making, possessing, selling, or printing plates or
stones for counterfeiting obligations or securities, and
detaching, altering, or defacing any official, device, mark or
certificate (for example, 18 U.S.C. && 483, 493, 495, 497,
503, 505, 510(a)(b), and 511; 19 U.S.C. & 1436; and 21 U.S.C. && 458(b)(c)). 

Fraud -- unlawfully depriving a person of his or her
property or legal rights through intentional misrepresentation
of fact or deceit other than forgery or
counterfeiting.  Includes violations of statutes
pertaining to lending and credit institutions, the Postal
Service, interstate wire, radio, television, computer,  credit
card, veterans benefits, allotments, bankruptcy, marketing
agreements, commodity credit, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, railroad retirement, unemployment, Social
Security, food stamp, false personation, citizenship,
passports, conspiracy, and claims and statements,
excluding tax fraud.  The category excludes fraud involving tax
violations that are shown in a separate category under
"Public-order, other offenses."  (See also, specific
offenses in this glossary for citations.)

Fraudulent property offenses -- see "Property offenses,
fraudulent."  

Gambling -- the Federal offense of transporting, manufacturing,
selling, possessing, or using any gambling device in the District
of Columbia or any possession of the United States or within
Indian country or the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United
States as defined in 18 U.S.C. & 7.  Includes transporting
gambling devices in the jurisdiction of the United States
(except under authority of the Federal Trade Commission or any
State that has a law providing for their exemption from
these provisions), transmitting wagering information in
interstate or foreign commerce, interstate transporting of
wagering paraphernalia, importing or transporting lottery
tickets, or mailing lottery tickets or related matter (for
example, 15 U.S.C. && 1173 and 1175; and 18 U.S.C. && 1082(a),
1084, 1302, 1956, and 1962). 

Good-time -- time credited toward early release to an
offender for good behavior in imprisonment.  Under the
1984 Sentencing Reform Act, two classes of prisoners are
ineligible to receive good-time credits:  (1) misdemeanants
serving a term of imprisonment of 1 year or less; and (2)
felons serving life sentences.  All other Federal prisoners
receive a flat allocation of 54 days per year of sentence
served; credit for a partial year remaining at the end of
the sentence is prorated.  The annual allotment does not
change according to the length of time a Federal inmate
already has spent in prison (18 U.S.C. & 3624(b)).

Guideline sentencing range -- under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, the range of imprisonment corresponding to the
applicable guideline offense level and criminal history
category.  The guideline offense level incorporates any
minimum terms of imprisonment required by statute as well as
the statutory maximum term of imprisonment, where applicable.

Guilty plea -- a plea in response to formal charges
admitting that the defendant committed offenses as charged. 
In this Compendium, this category also includes pleas of
nolo contendere.  

Hispanic -- ethnic category based on classification by
reporting agency.  Hispanic persons may be of any race.

Home detention -- a form of confinement and supervision
either as a substitute for imprisonment or as a condition of
probation that restricts the defendant to his place of 
residence continuously (except for authorized absences) and
enforced by appropriate means of surveillance by the
probation office.  Under the Federal sentencing guidelines,
home detention may be a substitute for imprisonment on
a day to day basis for defendants with a guideline maximum
sentence of less than 16 months imprisonment.  (See also,
U.S.S.G. & 5C1.1.) 

Homicide -- see "Murder."

Immigration offenses -- offenses involving illegal
entrance into the United States, illegally reentering after
being deported, willfully failing to deport when so ordered,
willfully remaining beyond days allowed on conditional
permit, or falsely representing oneself to be a
citizen of the United States.  Includes violations relating to 
provisions for special agricultural workers and to those
relating to limitations on immigrant status (such as
employment).  Also includes bringing in or harboring
any aliens not duly admitted by an immigration officer
(for example, 8 U.S.C. && 1160, 1252(d), 1255, 1282(a),
1286, 1324-25, and 1326(a)). 

Incarceration -- any sentence of confinement,
including prison, jail, and other residential placements.

Indeterminate sentence -- a prison sentence whose maximum or
minimum term is not specifically established at the time of
sentencing (18 U.S.C. && 4205(b)(1)(2)).

Indictment -- the formal charging of the defendant with a
particular crime by a grand jury.  In the Federal system, a
defendant may waive indictment and be proceeded against
through an information.  (See also,  Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(b).)

Information -- the formal accusation charging the defendant
with a particular crime but brought by the U.S. Attorney
rather than by the grand jury. 

Infraction -- an offense for which the maximum term of
imprisonment is 5 days or less, or where no imprisonment is
authorized, according to 18 U.S.C. ' 3559.

Instant offense -- the offense of conviction, and all
relevant conduct under U.S.S.G & 1B1.3.    

Intermittent confinement -- a form of commitment, in a
prison or jail, either as a substitute for imprisonment or
as a condition of probation.  Under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, intermittent confinement may be a substitute for
imprisonment (each 24 hours of intermittent confinement is
credited as 1 day of incarceration) for defendants with a
guideline maximum of less than 16 months imprisonment. 
(See also, U.S.S.G. & 5C1.1.)  

Jurisdictional offenses -- acts that are Federal crimes
because of the place in which they occur (such as on an
aircraft, on Federal land or property) and for certain
crimes on Indian reservations or at sea, but which cannot be
classified in a more specific substantive category.
 
Juvenile -- a person who has not attained the age of
18 years; or for the purposes of a juvenile delinquency
hearing, a person who has not attained the age of 21
years (18 U.S.C. & 5031).  

Juvenile delinquency -- a violation of Federal law
committed by a person prior to the age of 18 years which would
have been a crime if committed by an adult (18 U.S.C. &
5031).

Kidnaping -- unlawfully seizing any person as defined in 18
U.S.C. & 1201 for ransom or reward, except in the case of a
minor by a parent.  Includes receiving, possessing, or
disposing of any money or other property that has been
delivered as ransom or reward in connection with a kidnaping
as well as conspiring to kidnap.  Also, includes kidnaping
or attempting to kidnap any Government official, the
President of the United States, the President-elect, the
Vice President, any foreign official, any official guest, or
any internationally protected person.  (See also, 18 U.S.C.
& 351(b); and hostage taking as defined in 18 U.S.C. & 1203.) 

Labor law violations -- violations of, for example, the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 and the Taft-Hartley Act, which
govern a broad spectrum of activities relating to
labor-management relations (for example, 29 U.S.C. &&
186(a), 461(a), 463, 1021(b), 1022, 1023(b)(d), 1024(a)(c),
1027, 1111(a)(b), 1112(c), 1811, 1816, 1821 and 1851). 

Larceny -- the act of taking and carrying away any personal
property of another with intent to steal or convert it to
one's own use or gain.  Includes stealing, possessing or
illegally selling or disposing of anything of value to the
United States or any of its departments or agencies; or
stealing from a bank, the Postal Service, or any interstate
or foreign shipments by carrier.  Also encompasses receiving
or possessing stolen property or pirate property; and
stealing or obtaining by fraud any funds, assets, or that
belong to, or are entrusted to, the custody of an Indian
tribal organization (for example, 18 U.S.C. && 641, 659,
661-62, 667, 1168(a), 1704, 1707, and 2113(b)).  (This
offense category excludes the transportation of stolen
property.)

Liquor violations -- violations of Internal Revenue Service
laws on liquor, as well as violations of liquor laws not
cited under these laws, such as dispensing or unlawfully
possessing intoxicants in Indian country; transporting
intoxicating liquors into any State, territory, district, or
possession where sale is prohibited; shipping packages
containing unmarked and unlabeled intoxicants; shipping
liquor by C.O.D.; knowingly delivering a liquor shipment to
someone other than to whom it has been consigned; and
violating in any way the Federal Alcohol Administration Act
(for example, 18 U.S.C. && 1154, 1156, 1263 and 1265; 26
U.S.C. && 5113, 5171(c), 5179, 5214, 5222, 5291, 5301(b),
5601, 5603(a), 5604, 5606, 5608(a), 5661(a), 5662, 5672,
5681(a)(c), 5683, 5685(b) and 5687; and 27 U.S.C. && 203,
205(f), 206(b) and 208(a)). 

Magistrates (U.S.) (Federal) -- judicial officers appointed
by judges of Federal district courts having many but not all
of the powers of a judge.  Magistrates are designated to
hear a wide variety of motions and other pretrial matters in
both criminal and civil cases.  With consent of the parties,
they may conduct civil or misdemeanor criminal trials.
Magistrates, however, may not preside over felony trials or
over jury selection in felony cases.

Mailing or transportation of obscene materials -- a
violation of Federal law relating to knowingly using the
mail for mailing obscene or crime-inciting matter, as
defined in 18 U.S.C. & 1461 and 39 U.S.C. & 3001(e).  Also
includes transporting for sale or distribution, importing,
or transporting any obscene matter in interstate or foreign
commerce.  (See also, 18 U.S.C. && 1462-63.)

Major offense (while on conditional release) -- allegation,
arrest, or conviction of a crime for which the minimum
sentence is incarceration for over 90 days or greater than 1
year on probation.  (See also, PACTS Statistical Reporting
Guide, Version 1.0, Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.)  

Mandatory sentences -- a sentence that includes a minimum
term of imprisonment that the sentencing court is
statutorily required to impose barring the government's
motion of substantial assistance.  See, for example, 18
U.S.C. && 841 and 960, which provide for mandatory sentences
ranging from 5 years imprisonment to life imprisonment
depending on the quantity of drugs involved. 
 
Mandatory sentencing enhancement -- a form of mandatory
sentence in which the minimum term of imprisonment is to be
imposed consecutive to any other term of imprisonment
imposed.  See, for example, 18 U.S.C. & 924(c), which
provides for a 5-year to lifetime enhancement for the
use of a firearm during the commission of a crime; 18 U.S.C.
& 844(h), which provides for a 5-year enhancement for
use of firearms or explosives during the commission of a
crime; and 18 U.S.C. & 929 which provides for a 5-year
enhancement for the use of armor-piercing ammunition during the
commission of a crime. 

Mandatory release -- the release of an inmate from prison
after confinement for a time period equal to his or her full
sentence minus statutory good-time, if any.  Federal prisoners
released on mandatory release may still be subject
to a period of post-release community supervision.
 
Matter -- in this Compendium, a potential case under review
by a U.S. attorney on which more than 1 hour is expended.
 
Matters concluded -- in this Compendium, matters about which
a final decision has been reached by a U.S. attorney. 
Specifically includes matters filed as cases, matters
declined after investigation, matters referred for
disposition by U.S. magistrates, and matters otherwise
terminated without reaching court.

Migratory birds offenses -- violations of acts relating to
birds which move from one place to another in season. 
Includes taking, killing, or possessing migratory birds, or
any part, nest, or egg thereof, in violation of Federal
regulations or the transportation laws of the State,
territory, or district from which the bird was taken.  Also,
misuse or non-use of a migratory-bird hunting and
conservation stamp (for example, 16 U.S.C. && 690(g), 701,
703, 704-6, 707(b), 708, 711, and 718(a)(e)(g)). 

Minor offense (while on conditional release) -- conviction
of a crime for which the maximum sentence is incarceration
for 90 days or less, probation of 1 year or less, or a 
fine of $500 or less.  (See also, PACTS Statistical
Reporting Guide, Version 1.0, Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts.)  

Misdemeanor -- a criminal offense punishable by a jail 
term not exceeding 1 year and any offense specifically
defined as a misdemeanor by the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts for the purposes of data collection.  According
to 18 U.S.C. & 3559, misdemeanors are classified in 3 letter
grades, based on the maximum terms of imprisonment:  Class
A, if 1 year or less, but more than 6 months; Class B, 
if 6 months or less, but more than 30 days; and Class C, 30
days or less, but more than 5 days.  (This category
includes offenses previously called minor offenses that were
reclassified under the Federal Magistrate Act of
1979.)

Mixed sentence -- a sentence requiring the convicted
offender to serve a term of imprisonment, followed by a term
of probation.  Unless otherwise noted, offenders receiving
mixed sentences are included in both incarceration and
probation categories.  (See also, "Split sentence.")
 
Most serious offense -- in this Compendium, the offense with
the greatest potential sentence; or with respect to tables
describing Federal prisoners, the offense with the greatest
imposed sentence (for example, prison data in Chapter 6).

Motor carrier violations -- violations of the Federal
statutes relating to the Motor Carrier Act, which regulates (routes,
rates) of motor carriers of freight and passengers in
interstate commerce.  The Act is administered by the Interstate
Commerce Commission (for example, 15 U.S.C. && 1984, 1986, 1988 and
1990; 49 U.S.C. && 117(a), 301(f), 303(f), 322(a)(d), 411, 526,
917(f), 1021(b)(f), 11703, 11903(a), 11904, 11907, 11909(a),
11909(c), 11910, 11913, and 11914; and 49A U.S.C. & 120).

Motor vehicle theft -- interstate or foreign transporting,
receiving, concealing, storing, bartering, selling, or
disposing of any stolen motor vehicle or aircraft (for example, 18
U.S.C. && 2119, 2313, and 2322; and 49A U.S.C. & 1472(i)).

Murder -- the unlawful killing of a human being with malice
aforethought, either express or implied.  Nonnegligent
manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being
without malice.  This offense covers committing or
attempting to commit murder (first or second degree) or
voluntary manslaughter within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States (18 U.S.C. &
7).  Includes killing or attempting to kill any Government
official, the President of the United States, the
President-elect, the Vice President, any officers and
employees of the United States, any foreign officials, any
official guests, or any internationally protected persons. 
As applied to the owner or charterer of any steamboat or
vessel, knowingly and willfully causing or allowing fraud,
neglect, misconduct, or violation of any law resulting in
loss of life (18 U.S.C. && 113(a), 115(a), 1111-13, 1115,
1117, 1512(a)(1), 1751(a), and 2332(b)).
 
National defense violations -- violations of the national
defense laws on the Military Selective Service Act, the
Defense Production Act of 1950, the Economic Stabilization
Act of 1970 (which includes prices, rents, and wages), the
Subversive Activities Control Act, alien registration,
treason (including espionage, sabotage, sedition, and the
Smith Act of 1940); also violations relating to energy
facilities, curfew and restricted areas, exportation of war
materials, trading with an enemy, illegal use of uniform and
any other violations of the Federal statutes concerning
national defense (for example, 8 U.S.C. && 1304(e) and
1306(b)(d); 10 U.S.C. && 976 and 2408; 18 U.S.C. && 703,
705, 711, 713, 792, 794, 797, 799, 953, 961, 965, 967, 970,
1366(a), 1382, 2152, 2153(b), 2154(b), 2155(b), 2156(b),
2382, 2384, 2386, 2388(a)(c), and 2390; 22 U.S.C. && 253,
286, 447, 447(c), 450, 455, 612, 614(b)(f), 617, 1178(c),
1182, 1199, 1978(c), 2778(b), 4198, 4202 and 5113(c); 42
U.S.C. && 2274(b), 2276, 2278(b) and 2384(b); and 50A U.S.C.
&& 2, 3(a)(c), 16, 167, 210, 322, 324, 326, 328, 421(a)(c),
462, 468(b), 643(a), 781, 783(b)(d), 789, 794, 797, 851,
1152, 1705, 1436(e), 1809(c), 2062, 2071(b), 2073, 2405(a)(b), and 2410(b)).

Negligent manslaughter -- causing the death of another,
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of
the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. & 7, by  wanton or
reckless disregard for human life.  Also negligent manslaughter
of any Government official, the President of
the United States, the President-elect, the Vice President,
any officers and employees of the United States, any foreign
officials, any official guests, or any internationally
protected persons.  This offense category also includes
misconduct, negligence, or inattention to duties by ship
officers on a steamboat or vessel resulting in death to any
person (18 U.S.C. & 1112).

New law -- In this Compendium defendants convicted and
sentenced pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 
(See also "Old law.")

Nolo contendere -- defendant's plea in a criminal case
indicating that he or she will not contest charges, but not
admitting or denying guilt.

Non-citizen -- a person who is without U.S. citizenship,
including legal aliens (for example, resident aliens,
tourists, and refugees/asylees) and illegal aliens.

Not convicted -- acquittal by bench or jury trial, mistrial,
and dismissal (including nolle prosequi and deferred prosecution). 

Not guilty --  plea entered by the accused to a criminal
charge.  If the defendant refuses to plead, the court will
enter a plea of not guilty.  Also the form of a verdict in a
criminal trial where the jury acquits the defendant.
 
Offense -- violation of U.S. criminal law.  In this
Compendium, where more than 1 offense is charged, the
offense with the greatest potential penalty is reported.

Offense level -- under the Federal sentencing guidelines, a
quantification of the relative seriousness of the offense of
conviction and any offense-specific aggravating or
mitigating factors.  Guideline offense levels range from
level 1 (the least serious offense) to level 43 (the most
serious offense).

Old law -- in this Compendium, defendants convicted and
sentenced pursuant to laws applicable before the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984.  (See also, "New law.")

Parole -- period of supervision after release from custody
before the expiration of sentence.  The U.S. Parole
Commission is empowered to grant, modify or revoke the
parole of all Federal offenders.  Pursuant to the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984, parole was abolished and defendants are
required to serve the imposed sentence (less 54 days per
year good-time for sentences greater than 1 year, but not
life imprisonment), followed by a term of supervised
release.  Because of the number of Federal inmates sentenced
under pre-Sentencing Reform provisions, parole is being
phased out.  Approximately 2,300 Federal inmates were
paroled by the U.S. Parole Commission during 1996.

Perjury -- a false material declaration under oath in any
proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of
the United States.  Includes knowingly or willfully giving
false evidence or swearing to false statements under oath or
by any means procuring or instigating any person to commit
perjury.  This offense also includes any officers and
employees of the Government listed under 13 U.S.C. && 21-25
who willfully or knowingly furnish, or cause to be
furnished, any false information or statement (for example, 
2 U.S.C. & 192; 13 U.S.C. & 213; 15 U.S.C. & 2614; 18 U.S.C.
&& 401, 402, 1504, 1506, 1508, 1510, 1512(b), 1513, and
1622; 28 U.S.C. & 1866(g); 42 U.S.C. & 5411; 43 U.S.C. &
104; and 49A U.S.C. && 1472 (m)(o)). 

Personal recognizance -- pretrial release condition in which
the defendant promises to appear at trial and no financial
conditions are required to be met. 

Petty offense -- a Class B misdemeanor, a Class C
misdemeanor, or an infraction with fines as specified in 18
U.S.C. && 3571.  (See also, "Misdemeanor" and "Infraction.")

Plea bargaining -- practice whereby a defendant in a
criminal proceeding agrees to plead guilty to a charge in
exchange for the prosecution's cooperation in securing a
more lenient sentence or some other mitigation.

Pornographic -- that which is of or pertaining to obscene
literature; obscene, licentious.  Material is pornographic
or obscene if the average person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find that the work taken as a
whole appeals to the prurient interest; and if it depicts in
a patently offensive way sexual conduct; and if the work
taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.  (See Milla v. California,
113 U.S. 15 (1973).)

Possession -- offense involving the possession of a
controlled substance, acquiring a controlled substance by
misrepresentation or fraud, attempting or conspiring to
possess, or simple possession of a controlled substance in
schedules I-V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. && 812).  Includes
possession of a controlled substance in schedule I or II, or
a narcotic drug in schedule III or IV on board a vessel of
the United States or vessels within custom waters of the
United States, or by any citizen of the United States on
board a vessel.  Also, possessing any punch, die, plate,
stone, or any other thing designed to reproduce the label
upon any drug or container is an offense under this
category.  Distributing a small amount of marijuana for no
remuneration is treated as simple possession and, therefore,
is included in this offense category (for example, 21 U.S.C.
&& 829 (a)(b)(c), 841(a)(b)(d)(g), 842(a)(c), 843(a),
844(a), 846, 955, and 962). 

Presentence Investigation Report (PSR) -- following a
presentence investigation, a report to the court prepared by
the probation officer before the imposition of sentence, as
required by law; unless the court finds that there is
information in the record sufficient to enable the
meaningful exercise of sentencing authority pursuant to 18
U.S.C. & 3553, and the court explains this finding on the record. 

Presentment -- an accusation initiated by the grand jury
itself, and in effect, an instruction that an indictment be
drawn.

Pretrial diversion -- an agreement to defer (and possibly
drop)prosecution conditioned on the defendant's good
behavior and/or participation in programs (such as job
training, counseling, education) during a stated period.

Pretrial release -- the release of a defendant from custody,
for all or part of the time, before or during prosecution. 
The defendant may be released either on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond or on financial conditions. 
The category includes defendants released within 2 days
after arrest and defendants who were initially detained but
subsequently released after raising bail or having release
conditions changed at a subsequent hearing.

Probation -- sentence imposed for commission of a crime
whereby the convicted criminal offender is released into the
community under the supervision of a probation officer in
lieu of incarceration.  An act of clemency available only to
those found eligible by the court, probation offers a chance
for reform and rehabilitation for the defendant.  For this
purpose, the defendant must agree to specified standards of
conduct; violation of such standards subjects his liberty to
revocation.  
 

Property offenses, fraudulent -- property offenses involving
the elements of deceit or intentional misrepresentation. 
Specifically includes embezzlement, fraud (excluding tax
fraud), forgery, and counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraudulent -- violent offenses
against property:  burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft,
arson, transportation of stolen property, and other property
offenses (destruction of property and trespassing).  These
offenses are termed "non-fraudulent" only for the purpose of
distinguishing them from the category "Property offenses,
fraudulent," above. 

Property offenses, other -- offenses that involve the
destruction of property moving in interstate or foreign
commerce in the possession of a common or contract carrier. 
Includes the malicious destruction of Government property,
or injury to U.S. postal property such as mailboxes or
mailbags.  Trespassing on timber and Government lands
is also included in this category of offenses (for
example, 2 U.S.C. & 167(c)(g); 15 U.S.C. & 1281; 16 U.S.C. && 3,
45(d), 114, 121, 123, 152, 430(q), 433, 470, 478, 481, 551,
and 605; 18 U.S.C. && 1164, 1361-62, 1364, 1852, 1854,
1856, 1858, 1860, 1863, 1864(c), and 2071(b); 40 U.S.C. &&
193 (h)(q)(r)(s); 43 U.S.C. & 316; and 47 U.S.C. && 13 and
22). 

Public-order offenses, non-regulatory -- offenses concerning
weapons; immigration; tax law violations (tax fraud);
bribery; perjury; national defense; escape; racketeering and
extortion; gambling; liquor; mailing or transporting of
obscene materials; traffic; migratory birds; conspiracy,
aiding and abetting, and jurisdictional offenses; and "other
public-order offenses."  These offenses are termed
"non-regulatory" only for  the purpose of distinguishing
them from the category "Public-order offenses, regulatory"
below. 

Public-order offenses, other -- violations of laws
pertaining to bigamy, disorderly conduct on the U.S. Capitol
grounds, civil disorder, and travel to incite to riot (for
example, 18 U.S.C. && 228, 231, 1367, and 1385; 40 U.S.C. &&
193(b)(d)(g)(o)(p); and 47 U.S.C. && 223(a)(b)).  Included
in "Public-order offenses, non-regulatory."

Public-order offenses, regulatory -- violations of
regulatory laws and regulations in agriculture, antitrust,
labor law, food and drug, motor carrier, and other
regulatory offenses that are not specifically listed in the
category "Public-order offenses, non-regulatory."  

Racketeering and extortion -- racketeering is demanding,
soliciting, or receiving anything of value from the owner,
proprietor or other person having a financial interest in a
business, by means of a threat or promise, either express or
implied.  Extortion is the obtaining of money or property
from another, without his consent, induced by the wrongful
use of force or fear.  This offense code covers using
interstate or foreign commerce or any facility in interstate
or foreign commerce to aid racketeering enterprises such as
arson, bribery, gambling, liquor, narcotics, prostitution,
and extortionate credit transactions; obtaining property or
money from another, with his or her consent induced by
actual or threatened force; violence, blackmail, or
committing unlawful interference with employment or
business; transmitting by interstate commerce or through the
mail any threat to injure the property, the person, or the
reputation of the addressee or of another; or kidnaping any
person with intent to extort.  Applies to officers or
employees of the United States, or anyone representing
himself or herself as such (for example, 18 U.S.C. && 831,
872, 874, 875(b)(d), 877, 878(b), 892, 894, 1365(d),
1952-53, 1 955-60, 1962-63). 

Rape -- rape, assault with intent to commit rape, and carnal
knowledge of a female under 16 who is not one's wife, within
the territorial and special maritime jurisdictions of the
United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. & 7 (for example, 22D
U.S.C. & 2801).  Also includes cases of sexual abuse,
including of a minor (18 U.S.C. && 2241(a) (c), 2242(2)(B),
and 2243) and in Federal prisons (18 U.S.C. & 2244(a)).

Regulatory offenses, other -- violations covering areas such
as civil rights, election laws, the Communication Act of
1934 (including wire tapping and wire interception), custom
laws (except narcotics and liquor), interstate commerce (the
Hot Oil Act, transportation or importation of prison-made
goods, and the railroad and transportation acts), maritime
and shipping laws, laws regarding stowaways, the Federal
Boat Safety Act of 1971, U.S. postal laws (excluding injury
to postal property), intimidation of witness laws, aircraft
regulations, and any other regulatory offenses not listed
above.  (For citations refer to the United States Title and
Code Criminal Offense Citations, Administrative Office of
the U.S. Courts, June, 1995.)  

Release

Extraordinary release -- unusual methods of prisoners
exiting prison, such as death, commutation, and transfer to
another facility.

Standard release -- the usual way prisoners exit prison,
including full-term sentence expirations, expirations with
good time, mandatory releases, and releases to parole.

Remand -- to send back.  The act of an appellate court in
sending a case back to the lower court for further action.
  
Remove -- transfer from Federal court (usually to a State
court).

Restitution -- the action of restoring or giving back
something to its proper owner, or making reparations to one
for loss or injury previously inflicted.

Reversal -- the act of an appellate court annulling a
judgment of a lower court because of an error.

Revocation -- termination of a probation, parole, or 
mandatory release order because of either a rule violation
or a new offense, and forcing the offender to begin or
continue serving his or her sentence.

Robbery -- taking anything of value from the person or
presence of another by force or by intimidation, within the
special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United
States (18 U.S.C. && 7).  Includes robbery of bank property,
U.S. postal property, or personal property of the United
States.  Also, assaulting or putting the life of any person
in jeopardy by the use of a dangerous weapon while
committing or attempting to commit such robbery (for
example, 18 U.S.C. && 1661, 1991, 2112, 2113(c) (d), 2114,
2116, and 2118(a)). 

Rule 20 transfer -- upon petition by a defendant, a transfer
of proceedings to the district in which the defendant is
arrested, when the defendant is arrested, held, or present
in a district other than that in which an indictment or
information is pending against him.  In this case, the
defendant may state in writing a wish to plead guilty or
nolo contendere, to waive trial in the district in which the
indictment or information is pending, and to consent to the
disposition of the case in the district in which the
defendant was arrested (Fed. R. Crim. P. 20). 

Rule 40 transfer -- upon petition by the U.S. attorney,
commitment to another district; transfer proceedings of a
defendant arrested in a district for an alleged offense
committed in the another district (Fed. R. Crim. P. 40).

Sentence -- sanction imposed on a convicted offender.  For
sentences to incarceration, the maximum time the offender
may be held in custody is reported.  (See also, "Split
sentence," "Mixed sentence," "Indeterminate sentence," and
"Mandatory sentence.")

Sentencing Guidelines (Federal) -- guidelines established by
the United States Sentencing Commission to be followed by
the Federal courts in the sentencing of those convicted of
Federal offenses.  Established pursuant to the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984, the sentencing guidelines prescribe a
range of sentences for each class of convicted persons as
determined by categories of offense behavior and offender
characteristics.   

Sex offenses, other -- transporting, coercing, or enticing
any individual (including minors) to go from one place to
another in interstate or foreign commerce, in the District
of Columbia, or in any territory or possession of the United
States with the intent and purpose to engage in
prostitution, or any sexual activity for which any person
can be charged with a criminal offense (8 U.S.C. & 1328 and
18 U.S.C. && 1460, 1466, 2251-52, 2257, 2421 and 2423). 

Shock incarceration -- an intense confinement program,
consisting of a highly regimented schedule that provides the
strict discipline, physical training, hard labor, drill, and
ceremony characteristic of military basic training. 
 
Special maritime and territorial jurisdiction -- areas of
Federal jurisdiction outside the jurisdiction of any State,
including (1) the high seas, Great Lakes, and connecting
waterways; (2) Federal lands; and (3) U.S.-owned aircraft in
flight over the high seas (18 U.S.C. & 7).
 
Split sentence --  See, "Mixed sentence."

Stale -- the case/matter is too old to support successful
prosecution.

Substantial assistance -- a form of cooperation with the
government in which the defendant provides the government
with information, testimony, or other assistance relating to
the criminal activities of other persons in exchange for a
sentence reduction.  Substantial assistance provides the
only mechanism for judges to impose a sentence below an
applicable mandatory sentence (U.S.S.G. 5K1.1 as codified at
18 U.S.C. & 3553(e)). 

Supervised release -- under the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, a form of post-imprisonment supervision to be imposed
by the court as a part of the sentence of imprisonment at
the time of initial sentencing.  Unlike parole, a term of
supervised release does not replace a portion of the
sentence of imprisonment, but rather is an order of
supervision in addition to any term of imprisonment imposed
by the court (compare also with probation).

Surety bond -- an agreement by the defendant as a condition
of his or her release that requires a third party (usually a
bail bondsman) to promise to pay the full bail amount in the
event that the defendant fails to appear.
 
Suspect -- a person who is under investigation or
interrogation as a likely perpetrator of a specific criminal
offense.

Tax law violations -- tax fraud offenses such as income tax
evasion and fraud; counterfeiting any stamps with intent to
defraud the collection or payment of tax; willfully failing
to collect or pay tax; failure to obey summons to produce
any papers concerning taxes; failing to furnish receipts for
employees of tax withheld; failing to furnish information 
relating to certain trusts, annuity, and bond purchase
plans; putting fraudulent or false statements on tax
returns; and not obtaining a license for a business that
makes a profit from foreign items.  Also included in this
offense category are violations of excise and wagering tax
laws and any other laws listed below from the Internal
Revenue Service Code (for example, 26 U.S.C. && 3402, 4412,
5751, 5762(a1), 6047(a)(c), 6331, 6420(e2), 6674, 7121,
7201, 7203(c), 7204, 7206(a)(c), 7208(a)(c), 7210, 7213(b),
(d), 7214(b), 7216, 7232, 7513, 7602, and 7604(b)). 

Technical violation -- failure to comply with any of the
conditions of pretrial release, probation, or parole,
excluding alleged  new criminal activity.  May result in
revocation of release status.  Examples of conditions that
may be imposed and then violated include remaining within a
specified jurisdiction, or appearing at specified intervals
for drug tests.

Termination -- at the pretrial services stage:  execution of
sentence, acquittal, dismissal, diversion, or fugitive
status; in the U.S. district court:  conviction, acquittal,
or dismissal; and at probation or supervised release:  the
removal of a person from supervision either for successful
completion of the term of supervision or as the result of a
revocation.  
 
Threats against the President -- knowingly and willfully
depositing in the mail, at any post office, or by any letter
carrier a letter, paper, writing, print, missive, or
document containing any threat to take the life of or to
inflict bodily harm upon the President, Vice President, or
any other officer in order of succession to the Presidency. 
Knowingly and willfully making such threats in any way to
the above-named people (18 U.S.C. & 871). 
 
Traffic offenses -- driving while intoxicated, or any moving
or parking violations on Federal lands (for example, 40
U.S.C. & 212(b)).
 
Trafficking -- knowingly and intentionally importing or
exporting any controlled substance in schedule I, II, III,
IV, or V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. && 812).  Includes
manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, selling, or 
possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute, or sell a
controlled substance or a counterfeit substance; exporting
any controlled substance in schedules I-V; manufacturing or
distributing a controlled substance in schedule I or II for
purposes of unlawful importation; or making or distributing
any punch, die, plate, stone, or any other thing designed to
reproduce the label upon any drug or container, or removing
or obliterating the label or symbol of any drug or container.
Also includes knowingly opening, maintaining or
managing any place for the purpose of manufacturing,
distributing, or using any controlled substance (for
example, 19 U.S.C. & 1590; 21 U.S.C. && 333(e), 825(a)-(d),
830(a), 841(a)-(b) (d)(e)(g), 842(a), 843(a)(b), 845, 846,
848, 854, 856, 858, 859(a)(b), 860(a), 861(c)(f), 952(a)(b),
953(a)(e), 957, 959, 960(a)(b)(d), 961, 962, and 963; and
46A U.S.C. && 1903(g) and (j)).

Transportation of stolen property -- transporting, selling,
or receiving stolen goods, stolen securities, stolen moneys,
stolen cattle, fraudulent State tax stamps, or articles used
in counterfeiting, if the above articles or goods involve or
constitute interstate or foreign commerce (18 U.S.C. &&
2315, 2317).  

Trial conviction -- conviction by judge or jury after trial.

True bill -- an indictment.

United States -- includes the outlying territories (Guam,
Puerto Rico, Northern Marianas Islands, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands) and the territory occupied by the 50 States and the
District of Columbia.

U.S. attorneys -- all United States attorneys.
Prosecutorial data in this Compendium come from the Central 
System and Central Charge Files of the Executive Office for
U.S. Attorneys. 

Unsecured bond -- an agreement by the defendant as a
condition of his or her release in which the defendant
agrees to pay full bond amount in the event of nonappearance
at trial, but is not required to post security as a
condition to release. 


Violation (of pretrial release, probation, or parole) --
allegation of a new crime or a technical violation while on
pretrial release, probation, or parole.

Violent offenses -- threatening, attempting, or actually 
using physical force against a person.  Includes murder,
negligent manslaughter, assault, robbery, rape, other sex
offenses (some of which may be nonviolent), kidnaping, and
threats against the President.  (See also, specific offenses
for citations.)

Weapons violations -- violations of any of the provisions of
18 U.S.C. && 922 and 923 concerning the manufacturing,
importing, possessing, receiving, and licensing of firearms
and ammunition.  Includes manufacturing, selling,
possessing, or transporting (within any territory or
possession of the United States, within Indian country, or
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of
the United States) (18 U.S.C. && 7) any switchblade knife;
or making, receiving, possessing, or transporting a firearm
not registered in the National Firearms Registration
Transfer Record.  Also, engaging in importing,
manufacturing, or dealing in firearms if not registered with
the secretary in the Internal Revenue Service District in
which the business is conducted or not having paid a special
occupational tax.  In addition, this code covers cases where
in a crime of violence or drug trafficking enhanced
punishment is handed down when committed with a deadly
weapon (for example, 15 U.S.C. & 1242; 18 U.S.C. &&
922(a)(c)(e) (g)(i)(k)(m)(n)(q), 923, 924(a)(c)(f)(h)
and 930; 26 U.S.C. && 5801, 5811, 5821, 5841, 5843, 5851,
and 5861(b)(d)(h)(j)(l); 40 U.S.C. & 193f(a); and 49A
U.S.C. & 1472(q)). 


END OF FILE

01/15/99 pm