U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojb.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cfjs

Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1995

February 1998, NCJ-164259

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director, BJS

This Bureau of Justice Statistics Report was prepared by the
Urban Institute under the supervision of Steven K. Smith and
John Scalia, Jr., of the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The
project is supported by BJS grant number 95-BJ-CX-K001.
Principal staff for the project at the Urban Institute were
William J. Sabol, Ph.D., Jeffrey A. Roth, Ph.D., William Adams,
John McGready, Barbara Parthasarathy, Adam Pollack, Pamela
Rigby, Andrew Scott, Katherine Rosich, Harvey Meyerson, Yan
Yuan, Christine Arriola, and Yingjie Shu. Layout and design were
by O. Jay Arwood and David Williams. Tom Hester of BJS provided
editorial review.

This report is made possible through the cooperation of the
following Federal agencies and their staffs: The Administrative
Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC), the Executive Office
for U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA), the U.S. Bureau of Prisons (BOP),
the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), and the Federal
Judicial Center (FJC). The staff who provided expert advice
about the source records include: Steven Schlesinger, Catherine
Whitaker, Thomas Bak, Virginia Salter, Patrick Walker, Pragati
Patrick, and Preston James (AOUSC); Eileen Menton and Vernlyn
Bryant (EOUSA); Gerald Gaes and Christopher Innes (BOP);
Elizabeth McGrath and Richard McNeil (USSC); and David Rauma and
George Cort (FJC).
 
The contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the
views or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the
U.S. Department of Justice.

BJS authorizes any person to reproduce, publish, translate, or
otherwise use all or any part of the copyrighted material in
this publication; citation to source, however, is appreciated.

A portable document format  version of this report as well as 
the Lotus spreadsheets and the data analyzed in the report may 
be found on the Internet at the following address: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Contents

Highlights
Introduction
Organization of the Compendium
Modifications to the 1995 Compendium
Notes to reader
System overview
Chapter 1: Prosecution
Federal prosecutions
U.S. attorneys' decisions
Suspects in matters received
Suspects in matters concluded
Chapter notes
Chapter 2: Pretrial release
Release procedures
Types of pretrial release
Factors relating to release or detention
Pretrial outcomes by offense categories
Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups
Chapter notes
Chapter 3: Adjudication
Defendants in cases filed
Defendants in cases terminated
Case processing times
Convictions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted defendants
Chapter notes
Chapter 4: Sentencing
Offenders convicted and sentences imposed
Average prison sentences imposed
Relationship between sentence imposed
and mode of conviction
Characteristics of offenders sentenced to prison
Chapter notes
Chapter 5: Appeals
Appeals filed
Appeals terminated
Chapter notes
Chapter 6: Corrections
Supervision
Probation outcomes
Parole and supervised release outcomes
Entrants into supervision
Characteristics of offenders completing supervision
Federal offenders under supervision
Federal prisoners: First releases and time served
Admissions, releases, and standing population of Federal prisoners
Characteristics of Federal prisoners
Sentences imposed and time served until first release
Chapter notes
Methodology
The Federal justice database
Table construction and interpretation
Offense classifications
Glossary

*****************************************************
Highlights

During 1995 more than 102,000 suspects were investigated by U.S.
attorneys for possible violations of the U.S. code, and criminal
charges were filed in U.S. district courts against about 64,000
defendants, one-third of whom were prosecuted for drug offenses.

The majority (84%) of the 56,480 defendants whose cases were
terminated in U.S. district courts during 1995 were convicted. 
Among those convicted, 67% were sentenced to prison for an
average of 61 months.  At the end of 1995, the Federal Bureau of
Prisons held more than 88,650 prisoners who had been convicted
of a Federal offense, an increase of 6% over 1994.  Sixty
percent of those held by the Bureau of Prisons were convicted
and sentenced for drug offenses.

Prosecution

During 1995 U.S. attorneys initiated criminal investigations
against 102,220 suspects, and they concluded their
investigations against 102,309 suspects.  Of the suspects
investigated, slightly more than 31% were investigated for each
of property, drug, and public-order offenses, while the
remaining 6% were investigated for violent offenses.

Of the suspects in criminal matters concluded, U.S. attorneys
prosecuted 55,703 in U.S. district courts (54% of all suspects
in matters concluded) and declined to prosecute 35,896 suspects
(35%), while U.S. magistrates disposed of another 10,710
suspects (11%).

Suspects in criminal matters involving drug or violent offenses
were slightly more likely to be prosecuted in a U.S. district
court (69% and 60% respectively) than were the suspects involved
in public-order or property offenses (48% and 47% respectively).
Suspects involved in property offenses such as fraud or
regulatory public-order offenses were more likely to be declined
for prosecution (50% and 67% respectively) than were the
suspects investigated for drug or violent offenses (24% and 35%
respectively).

Pretrial release

During 1995 about 58% of the 45,635 defendants who terminated
pretrial services were released at some time prior to their
criminal trial.  Defendants charged with property offenses such
as embezzlement, fraud, and forgery and those charged with
regulatory public-order offenses or tax law violations were more
likely to be released prior to trial (between 80% and 96% of
these defendants were released) than were defendants charged
with violent offenses, drug trafficking, weapons, or immigration
offenses (between 25% and 52% of these defendants were released).

Defendants having a prior criminal history of serious or violent
crimes were less likely to be released than those without a
prior criminal history, and as the extent of a defendant's
criminal history increased, the likelihood of release decreased.
Thirty-one percent of the defendants with a prior violent
felony conviction were released prior to trial, while 70% of the
defendants with no prior convictions were released.  Sixty-one
percent of defendants with one prior conviction were released,
as compared to 47% of defendants having 2 to 4 prior convictions
and 33% of defendants having 5 or more prior convictions.

Of the defendants released prior to trial, about 84% of them
completed their periods of release without violating the
conditions of their release.  Sixteen percent of defendants
released violated the conditions of their release, and about 6%
of defendants had their release revoked.  Defendants charged
with drug and violent offenses were more likely to have at least
one violation of their conditions of release (26% and 21%
respectively) and to have their release revoked (9% and 10%
respectively) than were other defendants.

Adjudication

Criminal charges were filed in U.S. district courts against
63,547 defendants during 1995, about 80% of whom were charged
with felonies.  Of the defendants charged with felonies, 40%
were prosecuted for drug trafficking offenses, 27% for property
offenses, 25% for public-order offenses, and 6% for violent
offenses.

Criminal cases were concluded against 56,480 defendants during
1995, 79% of whom had been charged with felonies.  Eighty-four
percent (or 47,584) of all defendants were convicted; 81% of
these were felony convictions.

Eighty-seven percent of defendants charged with felonies were
convicted; this rate was about the same for all major offenses
categories.  For example, 89% of violent offenders, 87% of
property offenders, 86% of drug offenders, and 87% of
public-order offenders were convicted.  Most felony convictions
were obtained by guilty plea (91%).

Drug defendants comprised 40% of felony convictions; defendants
charged with property and public-order offenses comprised 28%
and 25%, respectively, of the felony convictions, and defendants
charged with violent offenses comprised the remaining 7% of
felony convictions.

Sentencing

Of the 47,556 offenders sentenced during 1995, about 67% were
incarcerated, another 27% were placed on probation (either alone
or with some incarceration), and 7% were ordered to pay a fine.

About 91% of violent felony offenders and 91% of drug
trafficking offenders received prison sentences, as did 79% of
felony public-order offenders and 59% of felony property
offenders.

The 31,805 offenders sentenced to prison received, on average,
61 months of imprisonment, while the 12,986 offenders sentenced
to probation received, on average, 33 months of probation.
Offenders sentenced for felony violent offenses and felony drug
offenses received longer average prison terms (92 and 85 months,
respectively) than those convicted of felony property and
public-order offenses (26 and 51 months, respectively).

Average length of sentences imposed, by offense, October 1, 1994
to September 30, 1995

Most serious offense        
of conviction               Average sentence length
-----------------------     ------------------------  
     All offenses                 61 mo
Felonies                          60
   Violent offenses               92
   Property offenses              26
   Drug offenses                  85
   Public-order offenses          51
Misdemeanors                      10

Appeals

During 1995 the U.S. Court of Appeals received 10,162 criminal
appeals.  Forty-four percent of the appeals filed challenged
both the conviction and sentence imposed.  Only four percent of
appeals were filed by the Government.  Of the 10,852 appeals
terminated during 1995, 80% (or 8,684) were terminated on the
merits.  In 86% of the appeals terminated on the merits, the
district court ruling was affirmed, at least in part.

Corrections

A total of 18,144 offenders were serving terms of probation
supervision that terminated during 1995.  Most of these
offenders (84%) completed their terms of probation successfully.
About 14% of offenders violated their conditions of probation;
4% of probationers committed new crimes.

A total of 17,879 offenders completed terms of parole or
supervised release during 1995. Sixty-one percent of these
offenders successfully completed their terms without violating
conditions of release; 12% committed new crimes; 24% committed
technical violations.  

Regardless of the type of supervision, offenders convicted of
violent offenses were less likely than others to successfully
complete a term of supervision.

At the end of 1995, there were 85,662 offenders under
supervision.  About 47% were under terms of supervised release;
another 42% were on probation; and 11% were on parole.  Drug
offenders comprised 48% of offenders under terms of supervised
release, 58% of offenders on parole, and 12% of offenders on 
probation.  Property offenders comprised 40% of the offenders on 
probation, 29% of offenders serving terms of supervised release,
and 13% of offenders on parole.

The Federal prison population increased by 4,787 offenders
during 1995 to reach 88,658 persons in prison.  During 1995,
32,566 prisoners were received by the Bureau of Prisons from
U.S.district court commitments, and an additional 12,527
prisoners were returned to Federal prison for violating
conditions of probation, parole, supervise d release, or
otherwise admitted to Federal prison but not committed from a
U.S. district court.

Distribution of admissions, releases, and prisoners at yearend,
by offense, October 1, 1994 - September 30, 1995                   
            
                                                                               
Most serious offense                                 Population
of conviction          All admissions  All releases  at yearend           
---------------------------------------------------------------       
      All offenses        45093         40306          88658    
Percent violent offenses   10             10             13   
Percent property offens    21             24              9  
Percent drug offenses      39             38             59   
Percent public-order 
  offenses                 29             27             18   
                                   

During 1995, 27,127 prisoners were released for the first time
from Federal prison after commitment from a U.S. district court.
These "first releases" served, on average, 26.5 months before
their release, or about 90% of the sentence imposed.  Drug
offenders served an average of 38 months before first release,
while property offenders served an average of 16 months before
first release.

Average time to first release, by offense, October 1, 1994
to September 30, 1995

Most serious original
offense of conviction            Mean time served
---------------------         -----------------------
     All offenses                    26 mo
Violent offenses                     52
Property offenses                    16
Drug offenses                        38
Public-order offenses                15

An additional 13,179 prisoners were released from subsequent
commitments to Federal prison.  

Drug offenders -- who comprised about 40% of persons admitted into
Federal prison -- comprised the largest percentage of persons in
prison (60%) at the end of 1995.

****************************************************
Introduction

This Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) report presents an
overview of case processing in the Federal criminal justice
system.  The data presented are compiled from the BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database.  The FJSP database
includes data provided by the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, the Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys, the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons, and the U.S. Sentencing Commission. 
The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, in addition to
providing data describing defendants in cases processed by the
Federal judiciary, provides data describing defendants processed
by the Federal pretrial services agencies and the Federal
probation and supervision service.  The data provided by the
agencies are archived for public use at the National Archive of
Criminal Justice Data (ICPSR 9296).

While each agency reports on those defendants it processed
during a given year in an annual statistical report and because
many of the case processing statistics reported vary across
agencies, these annual statistical reports are often
not comparable.  As reported by an interagency working group,
headed by BJS, the differences in the case processing statistics
are attributable, in part, to the differing needs and missions
of the agencies.  The working group found that the differences
in reported statistics are attributable to: the universe of
cases reported during a given period  some agencies report on
those case processing events that occurred during a particular
period, whereas others report on those events recorded during a
particular period; and many of the commonly used case processing 
statistics suspect/defendant processed, offense committed, 
disposition, and sentence imposed  are defined differently across 
agencies.

BJS, through its Federal Justice Statistics Program, however,
has recognized the lack of comparability of these annual statistical
reports and has attempted to reconcile many of the differences
identified by the working group.  For instance, by combining
databases from several years, BJS is able to report on those
cases that actually occurred during the reporting period.  
Additionally, commonly used case processing statistics are made
comparable across stages by applying uniform definitions to data
obtained from each agency.  Because the definitions used in the
Federal Justice Statistics Program are consistent with those
categories used in other BJS programs describing the defendants
convicted, sentenced, and imprisoned at the State level, the
comparison of Federal and State case processing statistics is
facilitated.

The 1995 Compendium, tenth in a series which also includes 1984,
1985, 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, and 1994, describes
defendants processed at each stage of the Federal justice system
 investigation and prosecution by the U.S. attorneys (chapter
1), pretrial release or detention (chapter 2), adjudication in
the U.S. district courts (chapter 3), sentencing (chapter 4),
appeal of the conviction and/or sentence imposed (chapter 5),
and corrections (chapter 6)  for the 12-month period ending
September 30, 1995 (the Federal fiscal year).  Chapter 5 is new
to the 1995 Compendium; future editions will incorporate
additional data they become available.

Generally, the tables presented include both individual and
organizational defendants.  Organizational defendants are not
included in tables describing pretrial release and detention or
tables showing defendants sentenced to incarceration.  Felony
and misdemeanor distinctions are provided where possible (see
"Table construction and interpretation" in Methodology).

Organization of the Compendium

Each chapter of the Compendium describes a major stage in the
processing of criminal suspects and defendants.  Each chapter
contains Chapter notes that describe the universes of data used
in the tables and information relevant to the interpretation of
individual tables.  The contents of the Compendium include:

Chapter 1.  This chapter describes decisions taken by Federal
prosecutors in screening criminal matters and the
characteristics of defendants in cases prosecuted or declined
for prosecution.

Chapter 2.  This chapter describes the pretrial release and
detention practices of the Federal judiciary, including the
characteristics of defendants detained or released pending trial.

Chapter 3.  This chapter describes actions by the Federal
judiciary in adjudicating defendants in cases filed by the U.S.
attorneys, including the offense charged and characteristics of
defendants convicted.

Chapter 4.  This chapter describes the sentences imposed by the
Federal judiciary on convicted defendants, including the
characteristics of defendants sentenced.

Chapter 5.  This chapter describes appeals of criminal
convictions and sentences imposed in the Federal courts,
including the original offense charged.

Chapter 6.  This chapter describes defendants under Federal
correctional supervision _ probation, parole, and supervised
release _ including the outcome of the supervision (successful
completion, any violations, and revocation), admissions to, and
releases from Federal prison and time served by Federal inmates.

Methodology.  This section describes the procedures followed in
analyzing data and developing tables.

Glossary.  This section contains definitions for terms used in
the Compendium.  Since many terms used in the text and tables
have specialized meanings (either because they refer to Federal
law or because of reporting procedures by the Federal agencies
supplying the data), readers are encouraged to check the
glossary for exact definitions of tabulated data.

Comparing Case Processing Statistics.  This document, prepared
by an interagency working group tasked to reconcile differences
in Federal criminal case processing statistics, identifies and
describes the major differences in the way Federal criminal
justice agencies collect, tabulate, and report criminal case
processing events.

Modifications in the 1995 Compendium

This Compendium continues the modifications started with the
1994 Compendium.  These were designed to improve the
understanding of the Federal criminal justice system and to
enhance comparability with other Federal criminal justice
agencies' annual reports.

The reporting period was changed to reflect the Federal fiscal
year -- October 1 through September 30.  This represents a
departure from previous editions of the compendium and other BJS
reports.  The change to a fiscal year reporting period was made
to facilitate the comparability of the compendium with the
agencies' annual publications.  (All of the agencies whose data
are presented in this report publish an annual statistical
report describing events occurring or reported, where
applicable, between October 1 and September 30.)

In chapter 1, the tables describing defendants investigated and
prosecuted by the U.S. attorneys were updated to distinguish
between suspects in criminal matters from those in criminal
appeals.  Therefore, tables describing suspects investigated by
the U.S. attorneys are not directly comparable with prior years'
compendia.  However, included in the Chapter notes are tables
describing criminal appeals handled by U.S. attorneys to
facilitate that comparison.

In several tables included in chapter 2, the percentages
reporting the type of pretrial release and method of pretrial
detention were calculated from the base of defendant released or
detained, where appropriate, rather than all defendants who
terminated pretrial release or detention.

In chapter 3, a table describing defendants in criminal cases
filed in U.S. district court was added.  Additionally, the table
describing defendants in cases handled by U.S. magistrates uses
data provided by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
rather than the U.S. attorneys.  The data provided by the U.S.
attorneys includes a substantial number of fugitive criminal
defendants whose cases were originally filed before a U.S.
magistrate because the defendant crossed State boundaries to
evade apprehension.  Ultimately, these matters were dismissed by
the U.S. attorney, and these defendants were prosecuted in State
courts upon their apprehension and extradition.

A chapter on criminal appeals (chapter 5) was added in order to
provide more complete coverage of the Federal criminal justice
system.

Many of the tables in chapter 6 describing Federal prisoners
were expanded to distinguish between defendants sentenced
pursuant to the provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984
("new law") and the previous sentencing policies ("old law").

Notes to reader:

The tables in the Compendium were constructed to permit valid
comparisons within each table and to allow the reader to compare
percentages (but not raw totals) across tables.  It should be
understood, however, that the total number of subjects or
defendants shown in a particular table may not equal the number
of subjects/defendants involved in a particular stage of
processing, since some records could not be linked and some data
sources did not include information on particular data elements
classified in a particular table.  Data notes indicate the exact
universe for individual tables.

The Compendium is a statistical presentation of Federal criminal
justice information with limited analyses of trends or
explanatory factors underlying the statistics.  Analyses of
Federal justice statistics may be found in special reports and
other publications, some of which are cited in the compendium. 
Assessment of changing patterns in the compendium tabulations
may depend on detailed examination of subcategories not shown in
the tabulations or may require other sources of information,
such as knowledge of legislation or Federal agency procedures.

****************************************************
Chapter 1:  Prosecution

Federal prosecutions

Federal criminal cases may be brought by the U.S. Attorney's
Office, by the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of
Justice, or by other authorized agencies. The 93 U.S. attorneys
serve as the chief federal law enforcement officers within their
respective districts.

Investigations are most commonly referred to a U.S. attorney by
a Federal investigative agency (primarily the Drug Enforcement
Administration; the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the Postal
Inspection Service; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms; and the Secret Service), by the Criminal Division, or
by a State or local investigative agency. Investigations may
also be initiated -- and cases brought directly -- by U.S.
attorneys or by the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of
Justice. This chapter reports only on suspects investigated, at
least in part, by U.S. attorneys.

U.S. attorneys' decisions

After criminal investigations are initiated and criminal
suspects are referred to them, U.S. attorneys may file charges
against defendants in a U.S. district court, or they may decline
to file these charges for reasons such as weak or insufficient
evidence, minimal Federal interest, lack of resources, or lack
of Federal offense or criminal intent. Matters that are declined
may be referred to another authority for prosecution or be
settled through alternative resolution procedures. U.S.
attorneys may also file cases before U.S. magistrates, who have
the authority to adjudicate misdemeanor offenses (18 U.S.C.
Section 3401). Because of the relatively less serious nature of
these cases and because they are handled by magistrates, U.S.
attorneys consider these cases as criminal matters disposed by
U.S. magistrates.

The decision to prosecute a suspect in a criminal matter depends
upon a number of factors, including the Attorney General's
priorities, U.S. attorney priorities and resources, laws
governing each type of offense, and the strength of evidence in
a case.

Nevertheless, suspects are prosecuted at different rates
depending upon their offense. During 1995 suspects involved in
violent and drug offenses were more likely to be prosecuted
before U.S. district court judges than were those involved in
property and public-order offenses.  Drug offenders were the
most likely to be prosecuted (69%) and least likely to be
declined for prosecution (23%) (figure 1.1). Suspects in
property offenses were the least likely to be prosecuted (47%)
and most likely to be declined for prosecution (46%).  However,
more suspects involved in property offenses had their matters
referred to, or handled by, other authorities -- including
authorities who resolved criminal matters by restitution or by
civil or administrative procedures -- than did suspects
involved in other types of criminal matters.

Suspects in matters received (table 1.1)

During 1995 there were 102,220 suspects in matters received by
U.S. attorneys.  (See Chapter notes, item 1.  The 1995 data are 
not directly comparable to the 1993 or prior compendia.)  Of
these suspects, about 32% were investigated for property
offenses, 31% for public-order offenses, and 31% for drug
offenses.  Just under 6% of all suspects were investigated for
violent crimes. Relative percentages of offenses reflect both
criminal activity and Federal investigative, prosecutorial, and 
statutory priorities. For example, during 1995 priority areas for 
U.S. attorneys included violent crimes (including firearms 
prosecutions and violent street gangs), narcotics prosecutions, 
organized crime, national security, immigration, white collar 
crime, and civil rights prosecutions.  (Statistical report, United 
States Attorneys' Offices, Fiscal Year 1995.  U.S. Department 
of Justice, Executive Office for United States Attorneys, 
Washington, DC.)

Suspects in matters concluded (tables 1.2-1.5)

Upon receiving a matter, a U.S. attorney will either immediately
decline it for prosecution or conduct further investigation,
which can take from 1 hour to a few years. A matter may then be
filed as a criminal case in a U.S. district court, referred to a
U.S. magistrate, or declined for prosecution.  Of the 102,309
suspects in criminal matters concluded during 1995, 33% were
investigated for property offenses, 31% for drug offenses, 30%
for public-order offenses, and 5% for violent offenses (table
1.2). Of the suspects in matters concluded, 54% were prosecuted
in U.S. district court, 11% were referred to U.S. magistrates,
and 35% were declined for prosecution.  (The number of suspects
in criminal matters concluded is not comparable to the 1993 or
prior compendia. See Chapter notes, item 2, for details.)

Suspects prosecuted (table 1.2) -- The likelihood that a suspect
in a matter was prosecuted varied widely across offense categories 
during 1995. Those in drug and violent offenses were more likely 
to be prosecuted than those involved in property and public-order 
offenses. U.S. attorneys prosecuted approximately 69% of suspects 
in drug offenses, 60% of those in violent offenses, 47% of those
in property offenses, and 48% of those in public-order offenses.  
Differences in rates of prosecution within specific categories
were substantial. For example, among violent offenses, 74% of 
robbery suspects were prosecuted while 63% of murder, 45% of rape, 
and 48% of assault suspects were prosecuted.  Among property
offenses, suspects investigated for counterfeiting were
prosecuted at a higher rate than those involved in fraud (63%
compared to 45%), and among suspects in public-order offenses,
weapons, immigration, and tax law violators were much more
likely to be prosecuted than suspects in bribery offenses (66%,
65%, and 66% versus 36%).

Suspects in matters declined (tables 1.2-1.4)-- As with the
decision to prosecute a case, the likelihood that a matter was
declined for prosecution varied across offense categories.
Suspects in matters involving violent offenses were less likely
to be declined for prosecution (35%) than those in property
offenses (47%) but more likely than those in drug offenses
(24%). Suspects in public-order offenses were only slightly less
likely to be declined for prosecution than those involved in
violent offenses (34% compared to 35%).

Suspects investigated for immigration offenses were the least
likely (6%) to be declined for prosecution. Although matters
involving suspects in civil rights cases were declined at high
rates, most of them were declined because of weak evidence (29%)
or departmental policy (23%), and a number were also declined
due to the absence of a Federal offense (9%) and lack of
criminal intent (17%) (not shown in a table).

The decision to decline prosecution is based on a number of
factors, including the lack of a prosecutable offense,
alternative resolution, or case-and suspect-related reasons
(table 1.3). Of the 35,896 declinations during 1995, 22%
occurred because there was no crime or criminal intent was
lacking; 26% occurred because of case-related reasons, mostly
due to weak evidence (22%); and 22% occurred for other reasons,
such as minimal Federal interest (4%) and U.S. attorney policy
(4%).

The U.S. attorneys also reported that 1,901 cases (5%) were
declined due to lack of resources, down from 2,314 during 1994.
Over half of the declinations for lack of resources during 1995
were fraud cases, and 13% were drug offenses. Additionally, 139
racketeering and extortion cases, 74 weapons cases, and 88
embezzlement cases were declined due to a lack of resources (not
shown in a table).

Not all suspects whose matters are declined for prosecution
avoid prosecution.  Approximately 21% of the suspects in matters
declined for prosecution by U.S. attorneys were referred to
another authority for prosecution (table 1.4). An additional 6%
were settled through alternative resolution procedures. While
suspects involved in property offenses constituted the largest
number of suspects who were referred by U.S. attorneys to other
authorities for prosecution or resolution (figure 1.1),of the
suspects whose matters were declined, those involved in drug
offenses were the most likely to be referred to other
authorities for prosecution or alternative resolution (figure
1.2). Thirty-five percent of the drug suspects whose matters
were declined prosecution by U.S. attorneys were referred for
other prosecution or resolution, as were 25% of the
public-order, 24% of the property, and 23% of violent offense
suspects.

Within major offense categories, the likelihood that suspects in
matters declined for prosecution also were referred varied among
specific offenses. For example, within property offenses, this
occurred with 45% of persons involved in burglaries, compared to
22% of suspects in fraud offenses.  Within the public-order
category, 34% of suspects in weapons offenses were referred to
other authorities or settled through alternative procedures,
compared to 18% of suspects in racketeering and extortion
offenses.

Defendants in cases concluded by U.S. magistrates (table 1.2) --
Cases concluded by U.S. magistrates are, by statute,
misdemeanors.  (At the time that U.S. attorneys receive them,
matters may not be classifiable as felonies or misdemeanors. By
the time a U.S. magistrate disposes a case -- or what the U.S.
attorneys call a matter -- its offense level has been determined
and is, by statute, a misdemeanor.)  Overall, U.S. magistrates 
disposed of about 11% of all criminal matters originally handled 
by U.S. attorneys. For most offenses, the likelihood that a U.S. 
magistrate concluded the matter was also relatively low.
Exceptions included suspects in the escape and immigration 
offense categories.  Fifty-seven percent of matters involving 
escape offenses and 30% of those involving immigration offenses 
were concluded by U.S. magistrates.  Together, these two 
categories accounted for 38% of the 10,710 matters concluded 
before U.S. magistrates.

Most of the 3,672 escape violations were against defendants who
absconded to avoid prosecution in State courts. These cases are 
normally dismissed by U.S. magistrates and turned over to the
State for prosecution on the original warrant once the suspect is
captured. Other types of offenses having comparatively high rates
of referral to U.S. magistrates included national defense
violations (14%); postal law violations (20%); and conspiracy,
aiding and abetting, traffic, and jurisdictional offenses (36%).

Processing times (table 1.5) -- Overall, the average number of
months from receipt of a matter to its conclusion by a U.S.
attorney as a case filing or declination or its disposal by a
U.S. magistrate was 10.5 months, for matters concluded during
1995. However, the time to process matters varied with the
outcome of the matter. Matters concluded by U.S. magistrates in
which the suspect was convicted took the least amount of time --
an average of 2.1 months. Matters ultimately declined for
prosecution by U.S. attorneys took the longest amount of time --
an average of 18.4 months. Matters prosecuted in U.S. district
court generally fell between these extremes.  While the average 
processing time for a conviction by a U.S. magistrate was 2.1 
months, at least 50% of these convictions occurred in about 3 
days. Similarly, 50% of the matters declined for prosecution 
were declined in fewer than 13 months.

Overall, suspects in violent and drug offenses were processed
more quickly than suspects in other types of offenses. For key
decisions, such as whether to file a case or decline a matter
for prosecution, violent offenses were concluded more quickly
than drug offenses. At an average of 15.8 months, fraudulent
property offenses took longer to conclude than other offenses.

Chapter notes, Chapter 1:

1) Tables 1.1- 1.5 were created from the Central System data
files of the EOUSA. For table 1.1, only records which showed a
matter received during fiscal year 1995 were selected. For
tables 1.2-1.5, only records which show a matter terminated by
reason of declination, disposition by a U.S. magistrate, or
filed as a case in U.S. district court from October 1, 1994,
through September 30, 1995, were selected.  In all of these
tables, matters "declined immediately" were excluded.

2) The number of suspects in matters investigated in table 1.1,
and the number of suspects in matters concluded in tables 1.2
and 1.5 are not directly comparable to previous compendia
counts. In prior years, these statistics included appellants in
appeals filed or appeals terminated.  In table 1.1 of this
Compendium, the number of suspects in matters received is
limited to suspects in criminal matters that were filed as cases
in U.S. district courts, handled by U.S. magistrates, or
declined for prosecution.  In the 1993 and prior compendia, the
number of suspects in criminal matters received included
individuals in those criminal appeals which involved U.S.
attorneys. To obtain a number of suspects that is comparable to
the statistic reported in the 1993 and prior compendia, add to
the data in table 1.1 of this Compendium, the number of
appellants in appeals filed which were handled by U.S.
attorneys. The table below shows these data for the major
offense categories.
                                                                
                                 Number of appellants
Nature of the                    in appeals filed & handled
underlying offense               by U.S. attorneys
-----------------------          ---------------------------------
    All offenses                           9,216
Violent offenses                             697
Property offenses                          1,784
  Fraudulent property                      1,527
  Other property                             257
Drug offenses                              4,435
Public-order offenses                      2,213
  Regulatory public-order                    142
  Other public order                       2,071
Unknown or indeterminable offenses            87

In tables 1.2 and 1.5 of this Compendium, the number of suspects
in matters concluded also is limited to those suspects whose
matters were concluded by a case filing in a U.S. district
court, by declination, or by disposition by a U.S. magistrate. 
In the 1993 and prior compendia, this number included appellants
in criminal appeals terminated.

To obtain a number that is comparable to the number reported in
these earlier compendia, the number of appellants in appeals
terminated and handled by U.S. attorneys needs to be added to
the totals in table 1.2. The table below shows the number of
appellants in appeals cases terminated during fiscal year 1995.

                                               Number of
                                               appellants
                                               in appeals
Nature of the                                  concluded
underlying offense                             by U.S. attorneys
------------------                             -----------------
     All offenses                                   9,209
Violent offenses                                      652
Property offenses                                   1,779
  Fraudulent property                               1,452
  Other property                                      327
Drug offenses                                       4,601
Public-order offenses                               2,123
  Regulatory public-order                             135
  Other public order                                1,988
Unknown or indeterminable offenses                     54

3) Offenses in the Central System data files are classified by
the title and section of the United States Code for the most
serious offense investigated, as determined by the assistant
U.S. attorney responsible for the matter. For tables in this
compendium, these citations were translated into the
corresponding four-digit offense codes used by the
Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC). 
These four-digit codes were then aggregated into the categories
shown in the tables. U.S. Code citations often do not permit
detailed classification of drug offenses by type of criminal
activity involved.  A person charged with conspiracy is
classified under the substantive offense alleged (for example,
conspiracy to defraud is classified as a fraud) unless the type
of conspiracy cannot be determined from the U.S. Code citation.
Unclassified conspiracies are included among "conspiracy, aiding
and abetting, traffic, and jurisdictional offenses" in tables
1.1, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.5.

The most serious offense investigated is based on the criminal
lead charge as determined by the assistant U.S. attorney
responsible for the criminal matter.

4) In the tables in this chapter, the "all offenses" row or
"total declinations" row (in table 1.3) includes records whose
offense category (basis for declination) is missing or
indeterminable. The percentage distributions in these tables,
however, are based on the number of observations with
non-missing offenses (basis for declination) values. The number
of missing values are reported either on a separate line or in a
footnote.

**************************************************** 
Chapter 2:  Pretrial release

The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 U.S.C.   3141) sets the terms
for release and detention of defendants facing charges in
Federal courts. At the time defendants first appear before a
judicial officer, they may be (1) released on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond; (2) released subject to
conditions imposed by the court, possibly including traditional
bail; (3) temporarily detained without bail (limited to 10
working days) to permit deportation, exclusion, or the
revocation of previously granted conditional release; or (4)
detained without bail after a hearing. (18 U.S.C.   3142(e)
(1984).)

Federal defendants may be detained without bail if charged with
specified categories of offenses, or if it is determined at a
special hearing that no financial or other conditions will
reasonably assure the required appearance of the person and/or
guarantee the safety of any other person in the community. 
Defendants not detained under these criteria must be released, 
either on personal recognizance, unsecured bond, or such 
conditions as are necessary to assure their appearance at trial 
and the public safety. (18 U.S.C.   3142(c) (1984).)  The law 
explicitly states that the court may not impose a financial
condition that results in the pretrial detention of the person.  

According to statute, a defendant must be brought before a 
judicial officer without "unnecessary delay" upon arrest. The 
judicial officer, who may be a judge but is generally a U.S. 
magistrate, determines whether the defendant will be released 
or detained prior to trial. If a hearing is required, the release 
decision may be delayed no longer than 3 days (or 5 days if 
requested by the defendant).

Release procedures

Defendants may be released at any time before trial. Some
defendants, therefore, are detained for a time and then released
before trial. This generally occurs when an appeal results in a
lowering of bail conditions or the defendant requires additional
time to arrange compliance with the originally set terms of
release. Defendants who have been detained prior to their
release are included in tabulations of both defendants detained
and defendants released.

Types of pretrial release

Defendants may be released without financial conditions
according to the following:

Personal recognizance -- defendant is released subject to no
financial or other conditions.

Unsecured bond -- no money is required to be posted before
release, but defendant is liable for full bail amount if he or
she fails to appear.

Conditional release -- any combination of restrictions that are
deemed necessary to guarantee the defendant's appearance at
trial or the safety of the community. Non-financial conditions
commonly place restrictions on the defendant's movements,
associations, and/or actions. They may also involve employment,
education, or treatment for medical, psychological, or substance
abuse conditions.

Defendants may also be released on financial conditions.
Financial conditions include (1) deposit bond (the defendant is
required to post a percentage of the total bail amount, usually
10%), (2) surety bond (the defendant is released subject to
guarantees by a third person that the full amount will be paid),
or (3) collateral bond (collateral equal to the full bail amount
required to be posted by the defendant before release).
Financial conditions may occur in combination with non-financial
conditions.

Factors relating to release or detention

In deciding whether to release a defendant and in setting
release conditions, the court is directed to consider the nature
and circumstances of the offense charged, the weight of evidence
against the defendant, the defendant's character, physical and
mental condition, family ties, employment, financial resources,
length of residence in the community, community ties, past
conduct, history relating to drug or alcohol abuse, criminal
history, and record concerning appearance at court proceedings.

During 1995, 26,380 defendants were released prior to trial
(table 2.1). Those defendants released made up nearly 58% of
45,635 defendants who terminated pretrial services during 1995.
Of the defendants released, 84% completed pretrial services
without violating the conditions of their release (table 2.8).
By comparison, during 1994, 27,607 of 45,584 defendants were
released, and 85% of those released completed pretrial services
without violating the conditions of their release.

In 1995, 27,004 defendants were detained for some period of time
prior to the disposition of their case (table 2.3). Those
defendants detained comprised about 59% of all defendants who
terminated pretrial services during 1995. Included are those who
were detained prior to having a preliminary hearing with the
magistrate, at which point they could have been either released
or ordered to have a detention hearing. Of the 27,004 defendants
detained, 52% were denied bail, which guaranteed that they would
remain detained through their case disposition. In 1994, 26,299
defendants were detained, about 58% of those who terminated
pretrial services. Fifty-four percent of those defendants
detained were denied bail in 1994.

Pretrial detention hearings were held for 18,935 defendants. Of
these, 13,955, or 74%, were ordered detained (table 2.5). In
1994, 18,608 defendants had pretrial detention hearings, and
more than 75% were detained.

Of the 26,380 defendants released prior to trial, 16% violated a
condition of their release (table 2.7). The majority (76%) of
these violations were technical violations of the bail
conditions. Defendants released on financial conditions were
more likely (22%) than other defendants to incur some violation
of the conditions of their release (table 2.8). Conversely,
defendants given conditional release violated their release at
the lowest rate (4%). Nearly 6% of all released  defendants had
their release revoked.

Pretrial outcomes by offense categories

Releases (table 2.1) -- Defendants charged with violent offenses
were less likely than other defendants to be released prior to
criminal trial -- only 38% were released during 1995.  However,
among violent defendants, the likelihood of release varied
greatly; 20% of those charged with robbery were released
compared to 72% of those charged with rape and 67% of those
charged with assault. The least likely to be released were
defendants charged with threatening the President (28%),
immigration offenses (25%), kidnaping (24%), escape (20%), and
robbery (20%). Persons accused of murder (43%) or threatening
the President were more likely to be released than persons
accused of immigration violations.

Property defendants made up the largest part of those defendants
who were released, while drug defendants made up the largest
part of those defendants who were detained. Defendants
investigated for violent offenses composed the smallest part of
defendants in both groups. 

About half of all drug defendants were released. Drug defendants
charged with trafficking were less likely to be released than
those charged with non-trafficking offenses (47% compared to
61%), but defendants charged with trafficking offenses
outnumbered those charged with non-trafficking offenses by
nearly 5 to 1. This represents a significant change in the
make-up of drug defendants; in 1994, drug trafficking charges
outnumbered all other drug-related charges by nearly 8 to 1.

The release types for those defendants who were released prior
to trial varied among offense categories.   Within each offense
category, the highest percentage of defendants released was on
unsecured bond, except for violent defendants.  Of the 38% of
violent defendants released, 39% were released on unsecured bond
and 40% on personal recognizance compared to the 82% property
offenders released, where 52% were released on unsecured bond
and 36% on personal recognizance.

Detentions (tables 2.3-2.6) -- Defendants charged with violent
offenses were more likely to be detained (78%) than other
defendants (table 2.3 ). Violent defendants were also more
likely to be denied bail (66% of those detained). Of defendants
charged with drug offenses, 76% were detained, and of those
detained, 55% were denied bail. Property and public-order
defendants were less likely to be detained than violent and drug
defendants -- 60% of public-order and 30% of property defendants
were detained.  Of  those defendants detained, 49% of
public-order and 40% of property defendants were denied bail. Of
public-order defendants, those charged with immigration offenses
were the most likely to be detained (86%). 

For 64% of defendants charged with violent offenses, it was
decided at the preliminary hearing that a detention hearing was
warranted (table 2.5,). This rate varied by offense category, as
58% of those charged with drug-related offenses, 36% of those
charged with public-order offenses, and 19% of those charged
with property offenses were ordered to have a detention hearing.
Of those charged with violent offenses, the most likely to have
a pretrial detention hearing were those charged with murder,
kidnaping, robbery, or threats against the President. The least
likely were those charged with sex offenses other than rape. 

However, given that a defendant was ordered to have a detention
hearing, the chances of being detained were less variable across
offense categories.   Of the 64% of defendants charged with
violent offenses and given a pretrial detention hearing, 80%
were ordered detained. By comparison, 84% were ordered detained
in 1994. In 1995, the highest rate of defendants ordered
detained were those charged with public-order offenses (81%).
Seventy-one percent of those charged with drug-related offenses
and 64% of those charged with property offenses were ordered
detained.

Violations (table 2.7) -- Of defendants released prior to trial
and terminating pretrial services during 1995, those charged
with drug offenses were more likely (26%) than other defendants
to incur at least one violation during the release period. Those
charged with public-order offenses were less likely (11%) to
violate conditions of their release. Those charged with violent
offenses were more likely to have their release revoked (10%),
and those charged with property offenses were less likely to
have their release revoked (3%).

Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups

Releases (table 2.2) -- Females were more likely (80%) than
males (54%) to be released during 1995. Males had nearly twice
the chance of having a financial condition imposed on them as
did females (19% versus 11%). Sixty-eight percent of all
defendants identified as non-Hispanic were released during 1995
compared to 36% of Hispanics.  Non-Hispanic releases had greater
than twice the chance of being released on personal recognizance.

The higher the education level of the defendant, the greater the
probability of release. About half the defendants with less than
a high school education were released during 1995 while 82% of
those who had completed college were released. Releasees with a
college degree were less likely to receive financial conditions
(15%) and slightly more likely to be released on personal
recognizance (34%) than their counterparts who had less
education.

Defendants with a known history of drug abuse were released less
frequently than those defendants with no known drug history.
However, among all released defendants, drug abuse history does
not appear to have had a major effect on the form of pretrial
release.

Detentions (tables 2.4 and 2.6) -- Males were nearly twice as
likely as females to be detained (table 2.4).  Of all detainees,
53% of the men and 42% of the women were denied bail. Hispanics 
were also nearly twice as likely as non-Hispanics to be detained. 
However, among detainees, Hispanics had a 48% chance and 
non-Hispanics a 55% chance of being denied bail.

Younger defendants were more likely than older ones to be
detained. Sixty-five percent of defendants between 16 and 18
years were detained compared to 43% of those over 40.  However,
among all defendants detained, the chances of being denied bail
were similar across all age groups. These patterns were more
dramatic with education level. Those defendants with lower
levels of education were more likely to be detained and denied
bail. Seventy-two percent of those who did not graduate from
high school were detained versus 31% of college graduates. Of
those detained, 53% of defendants without a high school diploma
were denied bail compared to 45% of college graduates.

Not only were male defendants nearly twice as likely as female
defendants to have a detention hearing (45% versus 25%), they
were also more likely to be ordered detained as a result of the
hearing (table 2.6)  Blacks had a higher chance of having a
detention hearing (49%) than those of other races (38% for whites,
42% for other).   Blacks were also slightly more likely to be
ordered detained as a result of their detention hearing.

The likelihood of having a detention hearing increased with the
number of prior convictions, severity of the defendant's
criminal history, and current sentence of supervision. Further,
49% of those with a history of drug abuse had detention hearings
compared to 37% of those without such a past. Those with a known
history of drug abuse were also more likely to be ordered
detained.

Violations (table 2.9) -- Released males were more likely than
females to incur a violation during the pretrial release period
(18% versus 12%) and were also more likely to have their release
revoked. Defendants with no prior criminal history were less
likely to have a pretrial release violation than those with a
prior conviction.  Among defendants having prior convictions,
those previously convicted for violent crimes were most likely
to incur a violation (30%).  Released defendants with a known
drug history had almost 3 times the likelihood of incurring a
violation as those with no known drug history.  Also, those
with a history of drug use were more likely to have their
release revoked.

Length of pretrial detention (table 2.10) -- Among defendants
detained for any time prior to case disposition, those charged
with drug offenses were detained the longest (an average of 77.5
days) compared to violent offenders (75.3 days), property
offenders (49.7 days), and public-order offenders (47.5 days).  

Overall, defendants released on personal recognizance spent the
greatest average number of days detained (51.7) compared to
defendants released on unsecured bond (42.2 days), financial
conditions (38.9 days), and conditional release (35.6 days).
However, this trend changes across major offense categories. For
defendants charged with drug offenses, those released on
conditional release spent the greatest average number of days
detained (82.7) compared to personal recognizance (59.4 days),
unsecured bond (41.1 days), and financial conditions (40.3 days).

Of defendants not released, those denied bail were detained
longer, on average, than those held on financial conditions
(121.0 days compared to 72.6 days)

Chapter notes, Chapter 2:

1) All tables in chapter 2 were created from data in the
Pretrial Services Information Act System data base, which is
maintained by the Pretrial Services Administration (PSA) within
the AOUSC. The data describe 45,635 defendants who terminated
pretrial services during October 1, 1994, through September 30,
1995, and whose cases were filed by complaint, indictment, or
information. In these tables, the totals (e.g., "all offenses")
included records whose offense or other attributes were missing 
or indeterminable. The percentage distributions were based on 
non-missing values, and missing values were reported in
a separate row or in a footnote. 

Offenses in the PSA are based on the most serious charged
offense, as determined by the probation officer responsible for
the interview with the defendant. The probation officer
classifies the major offense charged into AOUSC four-digit
offense codes. For defendants charged with more than one offense
on an indictment, the probation officer chooses as the most
major charged offense the one carrying the most severe penalty
or, in the case of two or more charges carrying the same
penalty, the one with the highest offense severity. The offense
severity level is determined by the AOUSC, which ranks offenses
according to the maximum sentence, type of crime, and maximum
fine amount. These four-digit codes are then aggregated into the
same offense categories as those used in chapter 1.

For drug offenses, the type of drug activity -- trafficking or
possession -- is obtained by the probation officers from their
reading of the indictment or other charging documents. The AOUSC
citation manual provides probation officers with detailed
instructions on how to code drug crimes.

2) In tables 2.1-2.4, the percentages showing the methods of
release or methods of detention were based on the number of
defendants released or the number of defendants detained. In
tables 2.5 and 2.6, the percentages were based on the number of
defendants who had hearings and were ordered detained. This
method departs from the 1993 and prior compendia, in which the
percentages were based on the number of defendants terminating
pretrial services.

****************************************************
Chapter 3:  Adjudication

Federal criminal cases may result in conviction of the defendant
following plea or trial, acquittal of the defendant after trial,
or dismissal of the case.  (Unless otherwise noted, data
describe felony and misdemeanor cases in U.S. district courts and
include Class A misdemeanors handled by U.S. magistrates.  The
data also include Class B misdemeanors that are handled by U.S.
district court judges, which occur infrequently.)

Defendants in cases filed (table 3.1)

During 1995, 63,547 defendants had criminal charges filed
against them in U.S. district courts, and 50,483 (79%) of these
defendants were charged with felonies. The 20,983 drug felony
defendants comprised one-third of all criminal defendants in
cases filed and 42% of all felony defendants.  Felony property
and public-order defendants comprised 22% and 20%, respectively,
of all defendants in cases filed. The number of misdemeanor
cases filed fell from 14,980 in 1994 to 13,036 in 1995.
Approximately 40% of all misdemeanors were charged with traffic
violations during 1995.

Defendants in cases terminated (table 3.2)

Cases were terminated against 56,480 defendants during 1995,
44,462 (79%) of whom were felony defendants. During 1995 the
18,189 drug-related felony defendants comprised 32% of all
defendants in cases terminated and 41% of all felony defendants.

Over 84% of all defendants were convicted: 87% of felony
defendants and 75% of misdemeanor defendants.  For major felony
offense categories, conviction rates ranged only from 86% for
drug offenses to 89% for violent offenses. Within major offense
categories, however, the conviction rates varied more widely.
For example, within the violent offense category, the conviction
rate ranged from 70% for the crime of threats against the
President to 93% for robbery. Within the public-order category,
the conviction rate ranged from 64% for civil rights violations
to 91% for tax law violations, 92% for bribery offenses, and 94%
for immigration offenses.

Most defendants who were convicted pleaded guilty. Overall, 92%
of those convicted pleaded guilty, while only 8% were convicted
at trial. For the major offense categories, guilty pleas were
registered for 87% of violent offenders, 90% of drug offenders,
92% of public-order offenders, and 94% of property offenders.

During 1995, 4,809 defendants exercised their right to a trial.
A higher percentage of violent and drug offenders went to trial
than property and public-order offenders. Fourteen percent of
violent offenders and 10% of drug offenders went to trial
compared to 7% of property and 9% of public-order offenders.

Of defendants who exercised their right to a trial, 3,671 (76%)
were convicted either by a jury or bench trial.  The felony
trial conviction rate was 81%, while the misdemeanor conviction
rate was 51%. Among felony offenses, trial conviction rates
ranged from 77% for property defendants to 84% for drug
defendants. Violent and public-order offenders fell in between,
as 79% of defendants in both categories were convicted at trial.

Case processing times (table 3.3)

The data in table 3.3 cover the interval from the time a case is
filed in U.S. district court through sentencing for those
convicted as well as the interval from case filing through
disposition for those not convicted, or those whose cases are
dismissed.  Title I of the Speedy Trial Act of 1974, as amended,
sets time requirements for processing criminal cases in Federal
courts. Except for certain exclusions, indictment must occur
within 30 days of arrest; defendants are guaranteed at least 30
days to prepare for trial; and the Government must be ready for
trial within 70 days.  The Speedy Trial Act does not specify a
time interval from trial to sentencing.  (The Sentencing Reform
Act of 1984 specifies minimum intervals for the disclosure and
objections to the presentence report. See Rule 31, Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure.)  The time limits set by the Act exclude
several enumerated periods of pretrial procedure such as time
spent awaiting rulings on motions.  (18U.SC Section 3161
et. seq.)  Additionally, defendants may waive their rights within
the Speedy Trial Act. As a result, the actual processing time
for most defendants can be longer than the statutory limits
without violating the provisions of the Act.

Overall, the average time for processing defendants was 8.8
months. Defendants who pleaded guilty were processed faster (7.8
months), on average, than defendants who went to trial (10.8
months). Defendants whose cases were ultimately dismissed took
longest to process (13.3 months), on average. Among major felony
offense categories, case processing times were similar to the
overall pattern, with two exceptions. For those charged with 
drug felonies other than trafficking, cases disposed of by plea 
took 7.7 months, on average, to complete, while those cases 
that went to trial were disposed in 7 months, on average.   
For those charged with escape felonies, cases disposed of by 
plea took longer to complete than those that went to trial.

Convictions by U.S. magistrates (table 3.4)

During 1995 U.S. magistrates disposed of 10,587 misdemeanor
criminal defendants, over 75% of whom were convicted. Traffic
violators comprised 45% of the defendants disposed by U.S.
magistrates, while misdemeanor property offenses comprised
another 29% of U.S. magistrates' cases.

Characteristics of convicted defendants (table 3.5)

Of defendants who were convicted, 85% were men, 64% were white,
31% were black, and 28% were Hispanic. Most were U.S. citizens
(75%), had graduated high school or completed some higher
education (61%), and had some criminal history (51%).

Among defendants convicted there were over 5 times as many men
as women (85% versus 15%); over twice as many whites as blacks
(64% versus 31%); and over 2.5 times as many non-Hispanics as
Hispanics (72% versus 28%). U.S. citizens comprised 75% of
defendants; non-citizens comprised 25%. Persons completing at
least high school represented 61% of all defendants while
persons over age 30 represented 59% of defendants, and persons
with no known criminal history comprised just under half (49%)
of convicted defendants. 

Chapter notes, Chapter 3:

1) Tables 3.1-3.4 were derived from the Administrative Office of
U.S. Courts (AOUSC) criminal master data files. Only records
with cases filed in U.S. district court (table 3.1) or cases
that terminated in U.S. district court during October 1, 1994,
through September 30, 1995, were selected. Offenses were
classified according to the most serious offense charged. In 
the case of multiple offenses, the offense carrying the most
severe potential penalty was selected.

2) Table 3.5 was created by matching the AOUSC master data files
with the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) monitoring system
files and the Pretrial Services Agency (PSA) data files. These
latter two data files contain information on the characteristics
of defendants. The USSC monitoring system files are limited to
records of defendants sentenced under the Federal sentencing
guidelines only. These include defendants convicted of felonies
or Class A misdemeanors. Excluded from the USSC data were
defendants convicted only of Class B or C misdemeanors or
infractions, defendants whose offenses were committed before
November 1, 1987, and juvenile offenders. Juveniles are not
subject to guidelines, and they were not included in table 3.5.
Some of the defendants excluded from the USSC data files were
included in the PSA data. (See Chapter 2 Chapter notes for more
information on the PSA data.) Table 3.5 indicates the number of
records for which relevant data were available. Percentage
distributions were based on records with known values of
defendant characteristics and offenses.

3) Criminal record, as reported in table 3.5, is limited to
prior adult convictions. For some defendants in this table, it
is further limited to the portion of their criminal record that
is relevant for calculating sentences under the Federal
sentencing guidelines. In general, this is limited to sentences
imposed within a 15-year period prior to the current offense and
offenses committed within the United States.  For most
defendants, the criminal history used to calculate sentencing
guideline ranges is tantamount to their entire adult criminal
history.

****************************************************
Chapter 4:  Sentencing

Depending upon the type and severity of the offense, convicted
offenders may be sentenced to incarceration, probation, a fine,
or a combination of sanctions such as a split or mixed sentence
(imprisonment as well as a period of probation supervision). 
(For a definition of mixed sentences, see Glossary, p.167.)  The
Federal sentencing guidelines require a term of supervised
release following service of any prison sentence of more than 1
year. In addition, courts have the discretion to impose
supervised release in any other case.

Except where otherwise indicated, tables in this chapter are
based on the most serious offense of conviction.  They are not
directly comparable with tables in earlier chapters that are
based on the most serious offense investigated or most serious
offense charged (see "Offense classifications" in Methodology,
p. 89).

Offenders convicted and sentences imposed (table 4.1)

Of the 47,556 offenders sentenced during 1995, 31,805 (67%) were
sentenced to prison; 12,986 (27%) were sentenced to probation;
and 3,242 (7%) were ordered to pay only a fine.  (Offenders
given an intermediate sanction  such as intermittent confinement
or community confinement that also included probation
supervision are counted among offenders given probation.)  Of
the 31,805 offenders sentenced to prison, 29,759 (94%) were
convicted of felonies, and 79% of convicted felons were
sentenced to prison. Violent and drug offenders were more likely
to receive prison sentences (both at 91%) than were either
property offenders or public-order offenders (59% and 79%,
respectively).

Among public-order offenders, persons convicted of weapons
(92%), immigration (90%), and escape offenses (91%) were about
as likely as violent and drug offenders to receive prison
sentences.

Among property offenders, persons convicted of burglary (87%)
and motor vehicle theft (86%) were also almost as likely as
violent and drug offenders to receive prison sentences.


Overall, 27% of convicted offenders were sentenced to probation.
The percentage of misdemeanants sentenced to probation (48%) was
more than twice that of convicted felons (22%). Among felons,
persons convicted of agriculture (68%), gambling (65%), food and
drug (63%), and tax law violations (62%) were the most likely to
be given probation.

While less than 1% of all convicted felons were ordered to only
pay a fine, 51% of the felons convicted of antitrust violations
were so ordered. Fines generally were reserved for misdemeanor
offenders, 31% of whom received fines.

Average prison sentences imposed (table 4.2)

For all offenders given prison terms, the average term of
imprisonment imposed was 60.9 months. Persons convicted of
felonies received an average prison term of 64.5 months.

The average length of prison sentence imposed varied among major
offense categories. Property offenders received the shortest
sentence, on average, while violent offenders received the
longest (26.4 months compared to 92.3 months). Drug offenders
received 85.4 months, on average, and public-order offenders
received 51.1 months. The average prison term for public-order
offenders was driven up largely by the average term for weapons
offenders. The 2,803 weapons offenders sentenced to prison
comprised 39% of the 7,261 public-order offenders sent to
prison; weapons offenders received an average prison term of
91.2 months, and public-order offenders other than weapons
offenders received an average prison term of 28.9 months.

Relationship between sentence imposed and mode of conviction
(table 4.3)

Offenders convicted by plea were less likely to receive prison
sentences than those convicted at trial. Sixty-five percent of the
offenders convicted by guilty plea received some prison time, 
while 87% of the offenders convicted at trial received prison 
sentences.

For violent offenders, 90% of those convicted by plea received
prison sentences, as did 97% of those convicted at trial.
For fraudulent property offenders, 56% of those convicted by 
plea received prison sentences,  compared to 87% of those
convicted at trial. And, for regulatory public-order offenders,
47% of those convicted by plea went to prison, but 72% of those
convicted at trial did.

The average prison term imposed on defendants convicted at trial
was longer than the term imposed on defendants convicted by
plea. Defendants convicted at trial received 143.1 months, on
average, while those convicted by plea received an average of
52.3 months (figure 4.1).  Drug offenders convicted at trial
received an average of 187.9 months as compared to the 73.7
months for drug offenders convicted by a guilty plea. Violent
offenders who went to trial received an average sentence of
164.1 months as compared to the 82.6 months for those convicted
by plea.

The ratio of average sentence imposed for offenders convicted at
trial versus those convicted by plea was 2.75 for all offenders,
2.5 for drug, 2 for violent, and 2.4 for fraudulent property
offenders and regulatory public-order offenders. While
fraudulent property offenders (which include embezzlement,
fraud, forgery, and counterfeiting) convicted at trial received
average sentences that were 2.4 times longer than those who
plead guilty, the same ratio for those convicted of other
property offenses (which include burglary, larceny, and motor
vehicle theft) was almost 3.

Characteristics of offenders sentenced to prison (tables 4.4-4.6)

The majority of persons sentenced to prison during 1995 were
male (89%), white (63%), non-Hispanic (69%), and U.S. citizens 
(72%). The percentage sentenced to prison was not uniform across 
all categories of age, race, sex, education, and ethnicity.  
Similarly, the average sentences imposed were not uniform across 
these categories (table 4.5). However, conclusions about the 
effect that characteristics may have had on sentencing cannot be 
drawn from the aggregate patterns in the data. Such an assessment 
would require detailed information for each category showing the 
presence or absence of factors that are legally intended to affect 
sentencing, such as offense severity, weapon use, role in the 
offense, victim injury, dollar loss, and so forth.

One such study of the factors affecting sentencing found that
"nearly all of the aggregate differences among sentences for
whites, blacks, and Hispanics during 1989-90 can be attributed
to characteristics of offenses and offenders that current law
and sentencing guidelines establish as legitimate considerations
in sentencing decisions."  (Douglas C. McDonald and Kenneth E.
Carlson, Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does Race Matter?,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, December 1993 (NCJ-145328).)

Average sentences imposed were longest for males (63.3 months),
blacks (85.4 months), non-Hispanics (64.4 months), and U.S.
citizens (65.7 months). These longer terms are due in large part
because these categories of offenders (males, blacks,
non-Hispanics, and U.S. citizens) are more highly concentrated
in the offense types (table 4.4) that also are associated with
longer average sentences (table 4.2). For example, incarceration
rates for blacks exceed those of whites in the violent, drug,
and nonregulatory public-order offense categories. These
offenses are associated with longer average sentences (table
4.2) than are property offenses or regulatory public-order
offenses -- the categories in which whites' incarceration rates
exceed those of blacks. 

In general, within categories of offender characteristics,
average prison terms were longer for violent and drug offenses
than for property and regulatory public-order offenses. These
two offense categories generally are considered to be more
serious under the Federal sentencing guidelines than are
property and regulatory public-order offenses. As a result, for
aggregate tables like the ones presented in this chapter,
persons with a certain characteristic may appear to receive more
severe sentences on average. The primary reason for the longer
averages is the larger number of serious offenses that made up
the average sentences.

Chapter notes, Chapter 4:

1) Tables 4.1-4.3 were derived from the AOUSC criminal master
data files. Only records of defendants sentenced during October
1, 1994, through September 30, 1995, were selected. Offenses
shown in these tables -- offenses of conviction -- are based on
the longest actual sentence imposed.

2) Tables 4.4-4.6 were derived from the United States Sentencing
Commission (USSC) monitoring system files, which are limited to
records of defendants sentenced under the Federal sentencing
guidelines only. Only records of defendants who were sentenced
during fiscal year 1995 were selected. These include defendants
convicted of felonies or Class A misdemeanors. Excluded from the
USSC data were defendants convicted only of Class B or C
misdemeanors or infractions, defendants whose offenses were
committed before November 1, 1987, and juvenile offenders.
Juveniles are not subject to guidelines, and they were not
included in tables 4.4-4.6; however, persons under 18 years of
age who were sentenced as adults were included in these tables.
Corporate defendants were excluded from them. Tables 4.4-4.6
indicate the number of records for which relevant data were
available. Percentage distributions were based on records with
known values of defendant characteristics and offenses. USSC
offense codes were translated into the corresponding AOUSC
four-digit offense codes, and these four-digit codes were then
aggregated into the offense categories shown in the tables. 

3) Criminal record, as reported in tables 4.4-4.6, is limited
to the portion of a defendant's criminal record that is relevant
for calculating sentences under the Federal sentencing
guidelines. In general, this is limited to sentences imposed
within a 15-year period prior to the current offense and
offenses committed within the United States. Specifically, the
number of prior adult incarcerations reported in tables 4.4-4.6
included two types of prison sentences covering different
periods of time. First, it included prior sentences of
imprisonment exceeding 13 months that were imposed or served
(all or in part) during the 15 years prior to the commencement
of the instant offense. Second, it included other prior
sentences of shorter lengths imposed within 10 years of the
defendant's commencement of the instant offense. Prior prison
sentences not falling within these time periods or meeting these
criteria were not counted.

****************************************************

Chapter 5:  Appeals

Prior to implementation of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984,
only criminal convictions could be appealed.  However, the 
Sentencing Reform Act provided for the appellate review of 
sentences imposed provided the sentence was (1) imposed
 in violation of the law; (2) imposed as the result of an
incorrect sentencing guideline application; (3) outside the
recommended guideline sentencing range; or (4) imposed for an
offense for which no sentencing guideline exists and is plainly
unreasonable. Both the defendant and the Government have the
right to appeal an imposed sentence (18 U.S.C. Section 3742).  

Appeals filed (tables 5.1 and 5.2) 

During 1995 the U.S. Court of Appeals received 10,162 criminal
appeals.  About 21% of all criminal cases resulted in an appeal;
4% of appeals (441) were filed by the Government.  The appeal
rate varied substantially across offense categories. During 1995
offenses with high rates of appeal included kidnaping;
communications charges; perjury, contempt, and intimidation
charges; arson and explosive charges; and civil rights charges.
Offenses with lower rates of appeal included immigration
offenses, agriculture violations, larceny, embezzlement, postal
law violations, and violations of customs laws.

Forty-four percent of the appeals filed challenged both the
conviction and the sentence imposed. About 1 in 4 challenged
only the sentence imposed, and about 14% were appeals of
convictions for crimes committed before 1987, when the 
sentencing guidelines took effect.

The type of appeal filed (sentence, conviction, or both) was
relatively constant across the offense categories underlying the
appeal. However, for immigration offenders, 40% of those
convicted appealed only their sentences, compared to 23% for
public-order offenses and 25% for all criminal categories.

Appeals from drug convictions comprised 49% of all appeals
filed. Public-order offenses were about 24% of all appeals, and
property offenses made up 19% of appeals.  Violent offenders
comprised 8% of appeals filed.

Appeals terminated (tables 5.3-5.5)

Of the 10,852 appeals terminated during 1995, 8,684 (80% of all
appeals) were terminated on the merits (table 5.4). In 86% of
cases terminated on the merits, at least part of the district
court ruling was affirmed. District court decisions were
remanded or reversed in 9% of these cases. Cases were dismissed
or remanded to criminal court relatively infrequently.  In
addition, 2,168 appeals terminated on procedural grounds (20% of
all appeals).

Chapter notes, Chapter 5:

Tables in chapter 5 were created from the AOUSC appeals
database. Records of appellants in appeals filed or terminated
during October 1, 1994, through September 30, 1995, were
selected. Data include records of 10,162 appellants in criminal
appeals filed during fiscal year 1995 and 10,852 appellants in
appeals terminated during the same period. Appeals were
classified into the offense categories that represent the
underlying offense of conviction. Offenses represent the
statutory offense charged against a defendant in a criminal
appeal. Offenses were classified by the AOUSC into their
four-digit offense codes. These were then aggregated into the
offense categories shown in the tables.

****************************************************
Chapter 6:  Corrections

Supervision 

During 1995, 36,023 offenders terminated active supervision of
probation, parole or mandatory release, or a term of supervised
release.

Active supervision can terminate upon one of two events: (1) a
temporary removal or (2) a permanent closure. A temporary
removal to inactive status can occur because of a violation
(usually absconding, a warrant for arrest, or failure to appear
for a hearing) or for some other reason, such as long-term
hospitalization.  A permanent closure of supervision occurs in
one of three ways: (1) the offender successfully completes the
supervision term without violating conditions; (2) the offender
is returned to prison following a violation of conditions or
conviction for a new crime; or (3) the offender's supervision is
closed for administrative reasons. The tables in this chapter
classify termination of active supervision as "no violation" (a
successful completion or a removal without violations), as
technical violations or new crimes (removals with violations or
returns to prison), or as administrative case closures. 

Violation of the conditions of supervision or arrest for a new
offense can result in imposition of additional restrictions or
in removal from active supervision. Removal from active
supervision may entail incarceration of a probationer or
reincarceration of an offender who was under parole or
supervised release. Offenders who are removed from active
supervision with violations, but who are not incarcerated, may
have some other action taken against them, such as deportation,
issuance of an arrest warrant, assignment to community
corrections, or supervision by some other State or local
authority.

Probation outcomes (table 6.1)

During 1995, 18,144 offenders completed one or more terms of
active probation. Overall, 84% of offenders successfully
completed their term of probation, another 14% violated their
conditions of probation, and the remaining 2% were
administrative closures. Of those who violated their conditions
of probation, 4% committed a new crime. Most committed technical
violations, including drug use (2%) and absconding (2%).

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were less likely than
others to successfully complete a term of probation without a
violation. The percentages of probationers who violated the
conditions of their probation decreased from 1994 to 1995.
During 1995, 26% of probationers convicted of violent offenses
violated their conditions of probation, as did 13% of drug, 12%
of property, and 8% of public-order offenders. During 1994, 33%
of probationers convicted of violent offenses, 16% of property,
16% of drug, and 12% of public-order offenders violated their
conditions of probation. During 1995 violent offenders were also
more likely to commit new crimes (7%) than were probationers
convicted of property (3%), drug (5%), and public-order (3%)
offenses, continuing the trend during 1994.

Parole and supervised release outcomes (table 6.3) 

During 1995, 17,879 offenders completed terms of either parole
or supervised release. Overall, 61% of these offenders
successfully completed parole or supervised release, compared to
56% during 1994. During 1995, 12% of these offenders violated
their probation supervision by committing a new crime; 24%
committed technical violations, such as drug use (9%) and
absconding (4%); and 4% completed their parole term through an
administrative case closure.

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were less likely than
others to complete a term of parole or supervised release
without a violation. Fifty-six percent of violent offenders
violated conditions of parole or supervised release, while 34%
of public-order, 32% of property, and 32% of drug offenders
violated parole or supervised release. Violent offenders were
also more likely to commit new crimes (19%) than offenders
convicted of property (11%), drug (10%), or public-order (12%)
offenses.  During 1994 violent offenders were also more likely
than others to violate their probation supervision, as well as
more likely to commit new crimes.

Entrants into supervision (table 6.5)

The rate of violating conditions of supervision was highest for
parolees and lowest for probationers. After 12 months of
supervision, 20% of parolees had violated conditions of release,
compared to 9% of probationers. Overall, 12% of offenders
entering supervision during 1995 had violated conditions of
release within 12 months of their entry into supervision, the
same rate as during 1994.

Characteristics of offenders completing supervision (tables 6.2
and 6.4)

Probation (table 6.2) -- Among offenders who completed a term of
probation, 74% were male; 70% were white and 91% were of
non-Hispanic origin; 30% were less than age 31 (compared to 39%
over age 40); 27% had less than a high school diploma (compared
to 38% who had a high school diploma and 34% who had at least
some college education); and 81% had no known drug history.  

Offender characteristics -- such as age, history of drug abuse,
and education -- were associated with the probability of
violating terms of supervision. Offenders ages 16 to 20 were
more likely (32%) to violate conditions of supervision than
probationers in other age groups -- 21% of those age 21 to 30
and 11% of those over age 30.

Probationers with a history of drug abuse were almost 7 times
more likely to violate probation for drug use than offenders who
were not drug abusers. Probationers with known histories of drug
abuse were also more likely to violate supervision for other
reasons (fugitive status and new crimes) than were other
probationers.

Probationers with lower levels of education were more likely to
violate the conditions of probation than those with higher
levels of education.  Those who did not graduate high school had
a 20% violation rate, those who were high school graduates had a
14% violation rate, those with some college had a 12% violation
rate, and those with a college degree had only a 5% violation
rate.

Parole and supervised release (table 6.4) -- Among those who
completed a term of parole or supervised release, 87% were male;
67% were white; 85% were of non-Hispanic origin; 22% were less
than age 31 (42% were over age 40); 41% had only some high
school (34% had a high school diploma and 25% had at least some
college); and 54% had no known drug history.

Offender characteristics -- such as age, history of drug abuse,
and education -- were associated with the likelihood that an
offender would violate a condition of the supervised release or
parole. Offenders age 16 to 20 were more likely to violate
conditions of their supervision than offenders in other age
groups -- 87% of those age 16 to 20 violated a condition of
their supervision compared to 47% of those age 21 to 30 and 31%
of those over age 30.  

Releasees with a history of drug abuse were almost 5 times more
likely to terminate their supervision for technical violations
of drug use as were releasees who were not drug abusers.
Releasees with known histories of drug abuse were also more
likely to violate supervision with technical violations or new
crimes.

Similarly, releasees with lower levels of education were more
likely to violate conditions of parole or supervised release
than those with higher levels of education. Those who did not
graduate from high school had a 42% violation rate, those who
were high school graduates had a 34% violation rate, those with
some college had a 28% violation rate, and those with a college
degree had a 14% violation rate.

Federal offenders under supervision (table 6.6)

As of the end of the fiscal year 1995, there were 85,662
offenders under active Federal supervision, of which most (87%)
were felons. About 58% of these offenders were receiving one of
two forms of post-incarceration supervision: supervised release
(40,040) or parole (9,844). The remainder (35,778) were under
probation supervision.  Most of the probationer population had
been convicted of either a property felony (41%) or some type of
misdemeanor offense (30%). Over 48% of offenders under
supervised release and nearly 58% of parolees had been convicted
of a drug offense.

Federal prisoners: First releases and time served (tables
6.7-6.9)

During 1995, 27,127 prisoners were released from Federal prison
by standard means for the first time after serving a sentence
imposed by a U.S. district court.  (Tables 6.7- 6.9 include only
prisoners committed by U.S. district courts and released by the
Bureau of Prisons.)  These releasees served an average of 26.5
months in prison (90% of the e sentence imposed, on average)
(table 6.9).   (Average time to first release is the number of months 
in Bureau of Prisons facilities minus credits for time spent in jail 
prior to final disposition or sentencing.  Percent of sentence served 
is the average percentage of each individual prisoner's percent of 
total sentence obligation served until first release.)  Over two-thirds 
of the releasees  had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment 
exceeding one year.

Old law offenders -- those who committed crimes before the
implementation of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines in November
1987 -- that were released in 1995 served an average of 69
months in prison (59% of the sentence imposed, on average).  New
law offenders released during 1995 served, on average, 23 months
in prison (92% of the sentence imposed). Since the Federal
Sentencing Guidelines only became effective as of November 1987,
those new law offenders sentenced to longer terms of
imprisonment (greater than 111 months) could not possibly have
been released yet, unless they left prison due to extraordinary
reasons such as death or commutation (for a breakout of
extraordinary releases, see Chapter notes, item 6, p. 87). 
Prisoners released for extraordinary reasons have been excluded
from all time served and percent of sentence served
calculations. The Federal Sentencing Guidelines allow a prisoner
up to 54 days per year for good behavior, so a prisoner
sentenced to 111 months in November 1987 could have served 95
months of his or her sentence and been released in 1995.  As
more new law offenders sentenced to longer terms complete their
sentences, time served to first release should increase.

Time served until first release varied by offense: Violent
offenders served an average of 51.9 months; drug offenders
served an average of 37.6 months; and property and public-order
offenders served an average of fewer than 16 months. During 1994
violent offenders also served the longest time until first
release, serving an average of 53.9 months. During both 1994 and
1995 the average time to first release for public-order
offenders was influenced heavily by the relatively short time
served by immigration offenders. On average, immigration
offenders served 6.9 months until first release during 1995.
This was less than half of the average time served for all
public-order offenders. Exclusive of immigration offenders,
public-order offenders served an average of 24.3 months until
first release (not shown in a table).

Admissions, releases, and standing population of Federal
prisoners (table 6.10)

The Federal prison population grew by 4,787 persons during
fiscal year 1995, increasing from 83,871 to 88,658. The greatest
growth was of drug and public-order offenders, particularly
immigration and weapons offenders. The greatest growth during
1994 was of drug, weapons, and robbery offenders. The number of
drug offenders in prison grew by 2,303 during 1995, less than
the 2,539 new drug offenders in prison during 1994. The number
of immigration offenders grew by 984, and the number of weapon
offenders grew by 792. The number of property offenders,
however, decreased by 82.

Characteristics of Federal prisoners (tables 6.11 and 6.12)

Prisoners released (table 6.11) -- Of prisoners released during
1995, 89% were male, 74% were white, 23% were black, 35% were
Hispanic, and 66% were U.S. citizens. Fifty-eight percent were
31 years of age or older. These patterns held across offenses
and between old and new law offenders, except with
non-regulatory public-order offenses. Of released offenders
convicted of those offenses, 59% were Hispanic and 38% were U.S.
citizens.

Time served to first release (table 6.12) -- Of persons
released, males served more time than females, blacks served
more time than whites, non-Hispanics served more time than
Hispanics, older persons served more time than younger (until
over age 40), and U.S. citizens served more time than
noncitizens. However, among the offenses, the overall pattern
does not always hold, except for males and females. For example,
blacks served more time on average than whites, but among
non-fraudulent property offenders released from prison, whites
served more time than blacks.

Sentences imposed and time served until first release

Prison terms imposed on offenders sentenced since the Federal
sentencing guidelines were implemented have increased. The
average length of prison term imposed rose from 57.2 months
during 1990 to 61.2 months during 1994 then decreased to 60.9
months during 1995 (not shown in a table). Prisoners sentenced
pursuant to the Federal sentencing guidelines (new law) released
during 1995 served an average of 26.5 months in prison (table
6.8), or 90% of the sentence imposed (table 6.9). Prisoners
sentenced pursuant to old law sentencing policy and released
during 1995 served an average of 69.1 months (table 6.8), or 59%
of the sentence imposed (table 6.9.)

Chapter notes, Chapter 6:

1) Tables 6.1-6.4 were created from the probation, parole, and
supervision data files of the Federal Probation Supervision
Information System (FPSIS), which is maintained by the AOUSC.
Only records with one or more terminations of active supervision
during October 1, 1994, through September 30, 1995, were
selected.  Each termination was counted separately. Technical
violations and terminations for new crimes are shown only if
supervision terminated with incarceration or removal from active
supervision for reasons of a violation.

Corporate defendants were excluded from tables 6.1-6.4.

2) Offenders were classified according to their most serious
offense at conviction. In cases involving multiple offenses, the
AOUSC offense severity hierarchy was applied. The most serious
offense was the one with the most severe penalty imposed. If
equal prison terms were imposed, or there was no imprisonment,
the offense with the highest severity code, as determined by the
U.S. Title and Code Criminal Offense Citations Manual, was
selected.

3) Table 6.5 was also created from the FPSIS data files. Records
with supervision opened or reinstated during fiscal year 1995
were selected and tracked for a period of 12 months, or, if the
offender violated their supervision before the 12-month period
concluded, until the time of the violation. This represents a
departure from the 1993 and prior compendia, which only
considered time that fell within the calendar year in which an
offender began supervision. Therefore, direct comparisons
between this Compendium and the 1993 and prior compendia are not
valid. 

Corporate defendants were also excluded from table 6.5.

4) Table 6.6 was created using the FPSIS data files as well.
Year-end pending cases (that is, records with offenders who were
under active supervision as of the end of the fiscal year,
September 30, 1995) were selected.

Corporate defendants were excluded from table 6.6.

5) Tables 6.7-6.12 were created from the Federal Bureau of
Prisons (BOP) data files.

Tables 6.7-6.9 and 6.11-6.12 include only prisoners committed by
U.S. district courts or released by standard methods by the BOP 
during fiscal year 1995. Standard methods of release include
full-term sentence expirations, expirations with good time, mandatory
releases, and releases to parole. Table 6.10 also shows sentenced 
prisoners in the custody of the BOP at the end of fiscal year 1995.

In these tables, a single person may be counted more than once
if that person was committed into, or released from, the BOP
more than one time during fiscal year 1995, or if that person
appears in more than one column in a table, e.g., commitment and
population.

Offense categories in these tables were based on combinations of
offense designations used by the BOP. They are similar, but may
not be directly comparable, to the categories used in other
tables of this Compendium. Offenses for some prisoners admitted
or released were not able to be classified; these offenders were
included in the totals and are shown as "other prisoners" on the
last line of tables.

In these tables, offenses were classified according to the
offense associated with the longest single sentence actually
imposed. Classifications in other tables may have been based on
the longest potential sentence allowed by law. 

6) Types of release for persons released from Federal prison
during fiscal year 1995 are shown in the table below. 

Type of                   
Release                             Total      Old law      New law
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     All releases                 27,896      2,113        25,783
Standard releases*                27,127      2,043        25,084
Extraordinary releases               769         70           699
Commutation                          342         27           315
Death                                195         34           161
Transfers                            159          9           150
Other                                 73          0            73

*Standard releases include expirations, mandatory release, and
release to parole.

7) Tables 6.7-6.12 distinguish between prisoners committed by
U.S. district courts for violations of the U.S. Code and other
prisoners. Prisoners released after commitment from U.S.
district court are called "first releases." Only first releases
that have standard methods of release are included in tables
6.7-6.12. The other admissions and releases include offenders
who returned to prison after their first release (such as
probation, parole, or supervised release violators), offenders
convicted in other courts (such as military or District of
Columbia courts), and persons admitted to prison as material
witnesses or for purposes of treatment, examination, or transfer
to another authority. Offenders who entered or left a prison
temporarily -- such as for transit to another location, for
health care, or to serve a weekend sentence -- were not counted
as admitted or released. Persons who were detained for
deportation by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and
who were not criminal offenders were also not included in the
tables.

8) Tables 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11, and 6.12 include only prisoners
committed by U.S. district courts and released by standard
means by the BOP during fiscal year 1995. Prisoners committed by
U.S. district court -- but not for a violation of the U.S. Code,
or whose offense could not be classified -- were included in the
total but are not shown separately. Table 6.10, however, shows
these prisoners separately. Other prisoners -- such as probation
and parole violators and prisoners committed by other courts,
such as courts martial or District of Columbia Superior Court --
were excluded from tables 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11, and 6.12, as were
other persons admitted to Federal prison but not committed from
a U.S. district court.

9) In tables 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11, and 6.12, time served was
calculated for prisoners committed from U.S. district courts
only. Time served in prison is the number of months from the
prisoner's arrival into jurisdiction of the BOP until first
release from prison, plus any jail time served and credited. The
calculation is the same as that currently used by the BOP.
Prisoners serving consecutive sentences may have total imposed
sentences exceeding the longest single sentence length.
Accordingly, time actually served may exceed the longest single
imposed sentence.  The percent of sentence served (in tables
6.7, 6.8, and 6.9) is the average of each individual prisoner's
percent of sentence served. Because other publications may
include different groups of prisoners, calculate time served
differently, or use a different offense classification, data in
tables in this Compendium may differ from estimates of time
served in previous publications by the BOP or in publications
based on other data sources.

Time served, as reported in tables 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11, and 6.12
in this Compendium, may not be directly comparable to the calculation 
of time served in the 1993 and prior compendia. The methodology in 
this report uses additional information to identify prison commitment 
dates and account for jail credit.  In previous reports, jail credits 
were overestimated in some cases. In addition, the current method of
calculating time served includes only prisoners who were
released by standard methods.  Those released by non-standard
methods, or "extraordinary" means, such as death, commutation,
and transfer are excluded from the time-served calculation.  The
table below shows the estimates of time served for all offenses
and for major offense categories based on the current and former
methodologies.

                                          Current          Former
                                          method           method
-----------------------------------------------------------------
All offenses                              26.8              28.0
Violent offenses                          52.2              57.9
Property offenses                         15.8              16.9
Drug offenses                             37.7              39.3
Public-order offenses                     15.0              15.4

10) Table 6.10 shows all persons admitted to, or released from,
the jurisdiction of the BOP during fiscal year 1995 and those
persons in Federal prisons at the start and end of the fiscal
year. A single person may be counted in one or more columns of
this table.  The column heading "first release" refers to those
prisoners whose commitment to the BOP was by a U.S. district
court during any year, but who were first released during fiscal
year 1995. Prisoners counted in this column are the same as
prisoners included in tables 6.7, 6.8, and 6.9.  The release
column labeled "All other" includes prisoners re-leased by
extraordinary means, which include death, commutation, and
release by transfer. Table 6.10 shows in separate columns, as
well as in the total, prisoners committed by a U.S. district
court -- but not for a violation of the U.S. code, or whose
offense could not be classified. Other columns in table 6.10
include prisoners who were committed by other courts, returned
to prison for violation of the conditions of supervision, or
were received for examination, treatment, or transfer to another
jurisdiction. Offenders who returned to prison for a violation
of the conditions of supervision, without a new court
commitment, were classified according to the offense with the
longest single sentence originally imposed at conviction.

**************************************************
Methodology

The Federal justice database 

Source of data 

The source of data for all tables in this Compendium is the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) Federal justice database. The
database is presently constructed from source files provided by
the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts, the United States Sentencing
Commission, and the U.S. Bureau of Prisons. The Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts also maintains the data collected by
the Pretrial Services Administration, the U.S. Court of Appeals,
and the U.S. Probation offices. Federal law prohibits the use of
these files for any purposes other than research or statistics. 
A description of the source agency data files is provided in the
table at the end of this section.

Some records in the Federal justice database are matched
according to a statistically weighted combination of names,
other personal identifiers, dates of court appearances, types of
offenses, and other relevant information contained in the files.
Using the matched data files, it is possible to combine
information about two or more stages of the processing of a
criminal matter or case, for example from adjudication to
probation or parole supervision.

Reporting period

Wherever possible, matters or cases have been selected according
to some event which occurred during fiscal year 1995 (October 1,
1994, through September 30, 1995). Some data files provided by
source agencies are organized according to a calendar year time
frame; these have been combined and divided into fiscal years
for purposes of the Compendium. Files which are organized by
their source agencies according to fiscal year nonetheless
include some pertinent records in later years' files. For
example, tabulations of suspects in matters concluded during
fiscal year 1995 in this Compendium have been assembled from
source files containing records of 1995 matters concluded which
were entered into the data system during fiscal years 1995 or
1996.

Availability of data items 

The availability of particular items of information is affected
by the data source. For example, data on prosecutors' decisions
prior to court filing are provided for cases investigated by
U.S. attorneys, but not for those handled by other litigating
divisions of  the U.S. Department of Justice. Criminal Division 
cases enter the data base once they are filed in U.S. district
court, however. 

Many items of social and demographic information come from
pre-sentence investigation records, supervision records, or
sentencing records, and are available only for arrested
defendants who were convicted and/or began serving a sentence
involving supervised re-lease.  This particularly affects sex,
race, ethnicity, and prior record information.

Data on offender characteristics in chapters 3 and 4 are limited
to offenders convicted and sentenced pursuant to the Federal
sentencing guidelines whose records have been reported to the
U.S. Sentencing Commission. Currently, it is estimated that more
than 90% of the felony defendants convicted in U.S. district
courts are sentenced pursuant to the Federal sentencing
guidelines. The Federal sentencing guidelines do not cover class
B and C misdemeanors or infractions or traffic offenses
occurring on Federal land.

Table construction and interpretation

Unit of analysis

The unit of analysis in chapters 1 through 5 is a combination of
a person (or corporation) and a matter or case. For example, if
a single person is involved in three different criminal cases
during the time period specified in the table, he or she is
counted three times in the tabulation. Similarly, if a single
criminal case involves a corporate defendant and four individual
defendants, it counts five times in the tabulation. In chapter
6, the unit of analysis for incarceration, probation, parole, or
other supervised release is a person entering custody or
supervision, or a person leaving custody or supervision.  For
example, a person convicted in two concurrent cases and
committed once to the custody of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons in
the indicated time period is counted as one admission to a term
of incarceration. A person who terminates probation twice in the
indicated time period, such as with a violation and again after
reinstatement, is counted as two terminations of probation.

Interpretation

The tables in the Compendium are constructed to permit the user
to make valid comparisons of numbers within each table and to
compare percentage rates across tables. The total numbers of
subjects in Compendium tables that are based on records linked
between two files are generally less than the total number of
records in either source file. Accordingly, comparisons of
absolute numbers across two or more tables in this volume and
other data sources are not necessarily valid. 

Offense classifications

Procedure

The offense classification procedure used in this Compendium is
based on the classification system followed by the Administrative 
Office of the U.S. Courts. Specific offenses in the Administrative 
Office classification are combined to form the BJS categories 
shown in the Compendium tables. (These categories correspond 
to the Bureau of Justice Statistics crime definitions and, to the 
extent possible, are organized and presented consistent with BJS
publications on State criminal justice systems).

For data from the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, which
include United States Code citations but do not include the
Administrative Office offense classifications, United States
Code titles and sections are translated into the Administrative
Office classification system and then aggregated into the offense
categories used in the tables. Offense categories for prisoners
in chapter 6 are based on combinations of offense designations
used by the Bureau of Prisons. They are similar to the
categories in other chapters and other tables in chapter 6, but
may not be directly comparable.

Felony/misdemeanor distinctions

Felony and misdemeanor distinctions are provided where possible.
Felony offenses are those with a maximum penalty of more than 1
year in prison. Misdemeanor offenses are those with a maximum
penalty of 1 year or less. Felonies and misdemeanors are further
classified using the maximum term of imprisonment authorized.
Section 3559, U.S. Code, Title 18 classifies offenses according
to the following schedule:

Felonies

Class A felony -- life imprisonment, or if the maximum penalty
is death.
Class B felony -- 25 years or more.
Class C felony -- less than 25 years but more than 10 years.
Class D felony -- less than 10 years but more than 5 years.
Class E felony -- less than 5 years but more than 1 year.

Misdemeanors

Class A misdemeanor -- 1 year or less but more than 
1 month.
Class B misdemeanor -- 6 months or less but more than 30 days.
Class C misdemeanor -- 30 days or less but more than 
5 days.
Infraction -- 5 days or less, or if no imprisonment is
authorized.

In this Compendium, felony and misdemeanor distinctions are
provided where the data permit these distinctions.  Chapter 1
does not use this distinction because many suspects cannot be so
classified at the investigation stage in the criminal justice
process. Chapter 2 no longer reports this distinction because
the Pretrial Services Agency no longer gathers this information.
Chapters 3 and 4 distinguish between felony and misdemeanor
offenses, as do tables 6.1-6.6. Tables 6.7-6.10 follow the
convention of other BJS publications by separately tabulating
offenders whose actual imposed sentences are less than or equal
to 1 year and those whose actual sentences are greater than 1
year.

Most serious offense selection Where more than one offense is
charged or adjudicated, the most serious offense (the one that 
may or did result in the most severe sentence) is used to classify 
offenses. The offense description may change as the criminal 
justice process proceeds. Tables indicate whether investigated, 
charged or adjudicated offenses are used. In chapter 1, the most 
serious offense is based on the criminal lead charge as determined 
by the assistant U.S. attorney responsible for the criminal 
proceeding. In chapter 2, the major charged offense is based upon 
the Administrative Office's offense severity classification
system, as determined by the pretrial  officer responsible for the 
case. To select this offense, the officer ranks offenses according 
to severity based on maximum imprisonment, type of crime, and 
maximum fines.  In chapters 3 and 4, the most serious offense 
charged is based on statutory maximum penalties. In chapter 3, the 
most serious offense charged is the one that has the most severe 
potential sentence. For chapter 4, conviction offenses are based 
on statutory maximum penalties. In chapter 5, offenses are
classified by the offense of conviction. In tables 6.1-6.6, the
most serious offense of conviction is either the one having the 
longest sentence imposed or, if equal sentences were imposed or 
there was no imprisonment, it was the offense carrying the highest 
severity code as determined by the Administrative Office's offense 
severity code ranking. In tables 6.7-6.12, prisoners are
classified according to the offense which bears the longest single
incarceration sentence.

Offense categories

For offense categories in all text tables, the following
conditions apply:

"Murder" includes nonnegligent manslaughter.
"Other sex offenses" may include some nonviolent offenses.
"Fraud" includes tax fraud.
"Larceny" excludes transportation of stolen property.
"Other property felonies" excludes fraudulent property offenses,
and includes destruction of property and trespass.
"Tax law violations" includes tax fraud.
"Obscene material" denotes the mail or transport thereof.
"All other felonies" includes felonies with unknown or
unclassifiable offense type.
"Misdemeanors" includes misdemeanors, petty offenses, and
unknown offense levels. 
"Drug possession" also includes other drug misdemeanors.

*************************************************
Glossary

Acquittal -- legal judgment that a criminal defendant has not
been proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the charges
against him.

Affirmed -- in the appellate courts, the decree or order is
declared valid and will stand as rendered in the lower court.

Agriculture violations -- violations of the Federal statutes on
agriculture and conservation: for example, violations of the
Agricultural Acts, Insecticide Act, and the Packers and
Stockyards Act, 1921; also violations of laws concerning plant
quarantine and the handling of animals pertaining to research (7
U.S.C., except sections on food stamps (fraud); also 16 U.S.C.
sections relating generally to violations in operating public
parks, such as trespassing for hunting, shooting, and fishing).

Antitrust violations -- offenses relating to Federal antitrust
statutes, which aim to protect trade and commerce from unlawful
restraints, price fixing, monopolies (for example, 15 U.S.C.   
1, 3, 8, 20, and 70(i)), and discrimination in pricing or in
furnishing services or facilities (15 U.S.C. Sections 13(c) and
13(e)). 

Appeal -- a review by a higher court of a judgment or decision
of a lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of -- an intermediate Federal court,
inferior to the U.S. Supreme Court, but higher than the U.S.
district court. The function of the U.S. court of appeals is to
review the final decisions of the district courts, if
challenged. There are 13 courts of appeal in the Federal system
representing the 12 judicial circuits and the Federal circuit
(28 U.S.C. section 41).

Appellant -- the party which takes an appeal from 1 court or
jurisdiction to another; opposite of appellee.

Appellee -- the party against whom the appeal is taken; opposite
of appellant.

Arson -- willfully or maliciously setting, or attempting to set,
fire to any property within the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C.
Section 7 (18 U.S.C. Section 81; and 49A U.S.C. Sections 1804
and 1809). (See also, "Explosives.")

Assault -- intentionally inflicting or attempting or threatening
to inflict bodily injury to another person. Applies to anyone
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section 7, or to any
Government official, foreign official, official guest,
internationally protected person, or any officer or employee of
the United States designated in 18 U.S.C. Section 1114 (for
example, 16 U.S.C. Sections 1857(e) and 1859; 18 U.S.C. Sections
111(a), 112(b), 113(c)(e), 114, 115(c), 351(d)(e), 372, 373,
1502, 1751(c), 1959, 2118(c), and 2231(a); 21 U.S.C. Sections
461(c), 675(b), and 1041(c); 26 U.S.C. Sections 7212(a)(b); 29
U.S.C. Section 1141; 46 U.S.C. Section 701; and 49A U.S.C.
Section 1472(k)); also certain violations of the Fair Housing
Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. Sections 3610 and 3631).

Bail -- the sum of money promised as a condition of release, to
be paid if a released defendant defaults (18 U.S.C. Section
3142(c)).

Bribery -- offering or promising anything of value with intent
to unlawfully influence a public official in the discharge of
official duties. Applies generally to bank employees, officers
or employees of the U.S. Government, witnesses, or any common
carrier.  Includes soliciting or receiving anything of value in
consideration of aiding a person to obtain employment in the
U.S. Government. Also, receiving or soliciting any remuneration,
directly or indirectly, in cash or any kind in return for
purchasing, ordering, leasing, or recommending to purchase any
good, service, or facility (18 U.S.C. Sections 201(a),
203(a)(b), 204, 207(a)(c), 208, 210, 211, 213, 215, and 663; 21 
U.S.C. Section 622; 46 U.S.C. Section 239(i); and 49 U.S.C. 
Sections 104, 917(b), and 11904(b)).

Burglary -- breaking and entering into another's property with
intent to steal within the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in 18 U.S.C. 7.
Includes breaking and entering into any official bank, credit
union, savings and loan institution, post office, vessel or
steamboat assigned to the use of mail service, or personal
property of the United States; or breaking the seal or lock of
any carrier facility containing interstate or foreign shipments
of freight or express (18 U.S.C. Sections 2111, 2113(a), and
2115-17).

Career offender -- defendants are counted as career offenders if
they are at least 18 years old at the time of the instant
offense, if the instant offense of conviction is a felony --
that is either a crime of violence or a drug crime;
and if they have at least two prior felony convictions of either
a crime of violence or a drug crime.

Case -- in this Compendium, a judicial proceeding for the
determination of a controversy between parties wherein rights
are enforced or protected, or wrongs are prevented or redressed;
any proceeding judicial in its nature.

Collateral bond -- an agreement made by a defendant as a
condition of his or her pretrial release that requires the
defendant to post property valued at the full bail amount as an
assurance of his or her intention to appear at trial.

Community confinement -- a form of commitment either as a
substitute for Federal imprisonment or as a condition of
probation in a community treatment center, halfway house,
restitution center, mental health facility, alcohol or drug
rehabilitation center, or other community facility; and
participation in gainful employment, employment search efforts,
community service, vocational training, treatment, educational
programs, or similar facility-approved programs during
non-residential hours. Under the Federal sentencing guidelines,
community confinement may be a substitute for imprisonment on a
day-to-day basis for defendants with a guideline maximum of less
than 16 months of imprisonment (see also, U.S.S.G. Section 
5C1.1(e)).

Complaint -- a written statement of the essential facts
constituting the offense charged, with an offer to prove the
fact, so that a prosecution may be instituted. The complaint can
be "taken out" by the victim, the police officer, the district
attorney, or other interested party.

Concurrent sentence -- a sentence imposed which is to be served
at the same time as another sentence imposed earlier or during
the same proceeding (18 U.S.C. Section   3584). (See also,
"Consecutive sentence.")

Conditional release -- in this Compendium, at the pretrial
stage, a conditional release is release from detention
contingent on any combination of restrictions that are deemed
necessary to guarantee the defendant's appearance at trial or
the safety of the community (see text in Chapter 2 of this
Compendium.)

Consecutive sentence -- a sentence imposed that will follow
another sentence imposed earlier or during the same proceeding;
opposite of concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy -- an agreement by two or more persons to commit or
to effect the commission of an unlawful act or to use unlawful
means to accomplish an act that is not in itself unlawful; also
any overt act in furtherance of the agreement. A person charged
with conspiracy is classified under the substantive offense 
alleged.

Continuing criminal enterprise -- a felony committed as part of
a continuing series of violations, which is undertaken by a person 
in concert with five or more other persons with respect to whom 
such person occupies a position of organizer, a supervisory 
position, or any other position of management, and from which such 
person obtains substantial income or resources (21 U.S.C. Section 
848(c)).

Conviction -- the result of a criminal trial which ends in a
judgment that the defendant is guilty. The final judgment on a
verdict or finding of guilty, a plea of guilty, or a plea of
nolo contendere, but does not include a final judgment which has
been expunged by pardon, reversed, set aside, or otherwise
rendered invalid.

Corporate surety -- in this Compendium, a surety; one who has
entered into a bond to give surety for another; for example,
bail bondsman. As a condition of his or her release, the
defendant enters into an agreement that requires a third party
such as a bail bondsman to promise to pay the full bail amount
in the event that the defendant fails to appear. (See also,
"Surety bond.")

Counterfeiting -- falsely making, forging, or altering
obligations with a view to deceive or defraud, by passing the
copy or thing forged for that which is original or genuine.
Applies to obligation or security of the United States, foreign
obligation or security, coin or bar stamped at any mint in the
United States, money order issued by the Postal Service,
domestic or foreign stamp, or seal of any department or agency
of the United States. Includes passing, selling, attempting to
pass or sell, or bringing into the United States any of the
above falsely made articles. Also, making, selling, or
possessing any plates or stones (or any other thing or
instrument) used for printing counterfeit obligations or
securities of the United States, foreign obligations or
securities, Government transportation requests, or postal stamp;
or knowingly and intentionally trafficking in falsified labels
affixed to phonorecords, motion pictures, or audio visual works
(for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections  471, 473, 477, 479, 481, 485,
487, 501, 507, 509, 513(b), 2318, and 2320).

Courts -- See "Appeals, U.S. Court of" and "District court,
U.S." Pursuant to Article III of the Constitution, judicial
power is vested in the following Federal Courts: The U.S.
Supreme Court, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia, and the U.S. district court for the District of
Columbia.

Criminal career -- the longitudinal sequence of crimes committed
by an individual offender.

Criminal history category -- under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, a quantification of the defendant's prior criminal
record and the defendant's propensity to recidivate. Guideline
criminal history categories range from Category I (primarily
first-time offenders) to Category VI (career criminals).

Deadly or dangerous weapon -- an instrument capable of
inflicting death or serious bodily injury.

Declination -- the decision by a prosecutor not to file a case
in a matter received for investigation. In this Compendium,
immediate declinations (i.e., where less than 1 hour of time is
spent on a case) are excluded.

Defendant -- the party against whom relief or recovery is sought
in an action or suit, or the accused in a criminal case.

Departure -- under the Federal sentencing guidelines, the term
used to describe a sentence imposed outside the applicable
guideline sentencing range. A court may depart when it finds an
aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a
degree, not adequately taken into consideration by the
Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines that should
result in a sentence different from that described (18 U.S.C.
Section 3553(b); U.S.S.G. Section 5K2.0). (See also,
"Substantial assistance.")

Deposit bond -- an agreement made by a defendant as a condition
of his or her release that requires the defendant to post a
fraction of the bail before he or she is released.

Detention -- the legally authorized confinement of persons after
arrest, whether before or during prosecution. Only those persons
held 2 or more days are classified as detained in this
Compendium.

Dismissal -- termination of a case before trial or other final
judgment (including nolle prosequi and deferred prosecution).

Disposition -- the decision made on a case brought before a
criminal court.

Distribution -- delivery (other than by administering or
dispensing) of a controlled substance (21 U.S.C. Section
802(6)). The term "controlled sub-stance" means any drug or
other substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I,
II, III, IV, or V of part B of subchapter I of Chapter 13 (title
21). The term does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in
subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

District court, U.S. -- trial courts with general Federal
jurisdiction over cases involving Federal laws or offenses and
actions between citizens of different states. 

District of Columbia -- the jurisdiction of the U.S. district
court for the District of Columbia. This Compendium includes
Federal offenses prosecuted in U.S. district courts, and except
for tables based on data from the Bureau of Prisons, excludes
violations of the District of Columbia Code and cases prosecuted
in the District of Columbia Superior Court.

Drug offenses -- offenses under Federal or State laws
prohibiting the manufacture, import, export, distribution, or
dispensing of a controlled substance (or counterfeit substance),
or the possession of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit
substance) with intent to manufacture, import, export,
distribute, or dispense. Also using any communication facilities
to cause or facilitate a felony under title 21, or furnishing of 
fraudulent or false information concerning prescriptions as well 
as any other unspecified drug-related offense. (See also, 
"Distribution," "Possession," and "Trafficking.")

Embezzlement -- the fraudulent appropriation of property by a
person to whom such property has been lawfully entrusted.
Includes offenses committed by bank officers or employees;
officers or employees of the Postal Service; officers of
lending, credit, or insurance institutions; any officer or
employee of a corporation or association engaged in commerce as
a common carrier; court officers of the U.S. courts; or officers
or employees of the United States. Also, stealing from
employment and training funds, programs receiving Federal funds,
and Indian tribal organizations; or selling, conveying, or
disposing of any money, property, records, or thing of value to
the United States or any department thereof without authority
(for example, 15 U.S.C. Section 645(c); 18 U.S.C. Sections 153,
334, 642-57, 665(a)(b), 666(b), 1163, 1709, 1711, 1956, and
1957; 25 U.S.C. Section 450(d); 29 U.S.C. Section 502(b); and 42
U.S.C. Sections 1760, 2971, and 3220(b)).

Escape -- departing or attempting to depart from the custody of
a correctional institution; a judicial, correctional, or law
enforcement officer; or a hospital where one is committed for
drug abuse and drug dependency problems. Knowingly advising,
aiding, assisting, or procuring the escape or attempted escape
of any person from a correctional facility, an officer, or the
above-mentioned hospital as well as concealing an escapee.
Providing or attempting to provide to an inmate in prison a
prohibited object; or making, possessing, obtaining, or
attempting to make or obtain a prohibited object (as defined in
18 U.S.C. Section 1791(d)(1)(A)). Instigating, assisting,
attempting to cause, or causing any mutiny or riot at any
Federal penal, detention, or correctional facility, or conveying
into any of these institutions any dangerous instrumentalities
(for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 751(a)(b), 752(a), 753, 755-56,
1071, 1073, 1791(a)(c), (d)(1)(A), 1792, 3146(a)(b)(d), 3147
and 3615; 28 U.S.C. Section 1826; 42 U.S.C. Sections 261 and
3425; and 50 U.S.C Section 823).

Explosives -- violations of Federal law involving importation,
manufacture, distribution, and storage of explosive material.
Includes unlawful receipt, possession or transportation of
explosives without a license (18 U.S.C. Section 842(a)), where
prohibited by law (18 U.S.C. Section 842(c), or using explosives
during commission of a felony (18 U.S.C. Section 844(h)). Also
includes violations relating to dealing in stolen explosives (18
U.S.C. Section 842(h)), using mail or other form of
communication to threaten an individual with explosives (18
U.S.C. Section 844(e), and possessing explosive materials at an
airport (18 U.S.C. Section 844(g), and 49A U.S.C. Sections 1804
and 1809). (See also, "Arson" and 18 U.S.C. Sections
842(e)(g)(i)(k); and Section 844(b).)

Failure to appear -- willful absence from any court appointment. 

Felony -- a criminal offense punishable by death or imprisonment
for a term exceeding 1 year. According to 18 U.S.C. Section 3559, 
felonies are classified into 5 grades based on maximum terms of 
imprisonment: Class A felony, if the maximum term is life 
imprisonment, or if the maximum penalty is death; Class B, if 25 
years or more; Class C, if less than 25 years, but 10 years or 
more; Class D, if less than 10 years, but five or more years; and 
Class E, if less than 5 years, but more than 1.

Filing -- the initiation of a criminal case in U.S. district
court by formal submission to the court of a charging document
alleging that one or more named persons have committed one or
more specified offenses. In this Compendium, each defendant in a
case is counted separately, and only the most serious alleged
offense is considered.

Financial conditions -- monetary conditions upon which release
of a defendant before trial is contingent.  Includes deposit
bond, surety bond, and collateral bond. (See also, "Specific
definitions.")

First release -- in this Compendium, prisoners who are released
from the Bureau of Prisons for the first time after their
commitment by a U.S. district court (i.e., excludes offenders
who are returned to prison after their first release, such as
probation, parole, etc.).

Food and drug violations -- violations of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act such as regulations for clean and
sanitary movement of animals (21 U.S.C. Section 134(b)),
adulteration or misbranding of any food or drug (21 U.S.C.
Section 331(a)), failure to transmit information about
prescription drugs (21 U.S.C. Section  331(o)), and intent to
defraud and distribute adulterated material (21 U.S.C. Section 
676).  (See also, 18 U.S.C. Section  1365(b); 21 U.S.C. Sections
17, 22, 63, 115, 122, 126, 134(d), 142, 144, 151, 153, 155, 158,
201, 205, 209, 210, 212, 331(b)-(g), 331(i)-(n)(p)(t), 333(a),
458(a), 459, 460(a)-(d), 461(a), 463, 466, 610(a)(c), 611(a), 620, 
642, 1037, 1041(a), and 1175.)

Forgery -- falsely making or materially altering a document with
the intent to defraud. Includes such falsification with intent to
pass off as genuine any of the following: U.S. Postal Service money 
order; postmarking stamp or impression; obligation or security 
of the United States; foreign obligation, security, or bank note; 
contractors' bond, bid, or public record; deed; power of attorney; 
letters patent; seal of a court or any department or agency of the 
U.S. Government; the signature of a judge or court officer; ships' 
papers; documents on entry of vessels; customs matters; coin or
bar; and so forth.   Also includes making, possessing, selling, or
printing plates or stones for counterfeiting obligations or 
securities, and detaching, altering, or defacing any official, 
device, mark or certificate (for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 483, 
493, 495, 497, 503, 505, 510(a)(b), and 511; 19 U.S.C. Section 1436; 
and 21 U.S.C. Sections 458(b)(c)).

Fraud -- unlawfully depriving a person of his or her property or
legal rights through intentional misrepresentation of fact or
deceit other than forgery or counterfeiting. Includes violations
of statutes pertaining to lending and credit institutions, the
Postal Service, interstate wire, radio, television, computer,
credit card, veterans benefits, allotments, bankruptcy,
marketing agreements, commodity credit, the Securities and
Exchange Commission, railroad retirement, unemployment, Social
Security, food stamp, false personation, citizenship, passports,
conspiracy, and claims and statements, excluding tax fraud. The 
category excludes fraud involving tax violations that are shown in
a separate category under "Public-order, other offenses." (See
also, specific offenses in this glossary for citations.)

Fraudulent property offenses -- see "Property offenses,
fraudulent."

Gambling -- the Federal offense of transporting, manufacturing,
selling, possessing, or using any gambling device in the
District of Columbia or any possession of the United States or
within Indian country or the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C.
Section  7. Includes transporting gambling devices in the
jurisdiction of the United States (except under authority of the
Federal Trade Commission or any State that has a law providing
for their exemption from these provisions), transmitting
wagering information in interstate or foreign commerce,
interstate transporting of wagering paraphernalia, importing or
transporting lottery tickets, or mailing lottery tickets or
related matter (for example, 15 U.S.C. Sections 1173 and 1175;
and 18 U.S.C. Sections 1082(a), 1084, 1302, 1956, and 1962).

Good-time -- time credited toward early release to an offender
for good behavior in imprisonment. Under the 1984 Sentencing
Reform Act, two classes of prisoners are ineligible to receive
good-time credits: (1) misdemeanants serving a term of
imprisonment of 1 year or less; and (2) felons serving life
sentences. All other Federal prisoners receive a flat allocation
of 54 days per year of sentence served; credit for a partial
year remaining at the end of the sentence is prorated. The
annual allotment does not change according to the length of time
a Federal inmate already has spent in prison (18 U.S.C. Section
3624(b)).

Guideline sentencing range -- under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, the range of imprisonment corresponding to the
applicable guideline offense level and criminal history
category. The guideline offense level incorporates any minimum
terms of imprisonment required by statute as well as the
statutory maximum term of imprisonment, where applicable.

Guilty plea -- a plea in response to formal charges admitting
that the defendant committed offenses as charged. In this
Compendium, this category also includes pleas of nolo contendere.
Hispanic -- ethnic category based on classification by reporting
agency. Hispanic persons may be of any race.

Home detention -- a form of confinement and supervision either
as a substitute for imprisonment or as a condition of probation
that restricts the defendant to his place of residence
continuously (except for authorized absences) and enforced by
appropriate means of surveillance by the probation office. Under
the Federal sentencing guidelines, home detention may be a
substitute for imprisonment on a day to day basis for defendants
with a guideline maximum sentence of less than 16 months
imprisonment. (See also, U.S.S.G. Section 5C1.1.) 

Homicide -- see "Murder."

Immigration offenses  --  offenses involving illegal entrance
into the United States, illegally reentering after being
deported, willfully failing to deport when so ordered, willfully
remaining beyond days allowed on conditional permit, or falsely
representing oneself to be a citizen of the United States.
Includes violations relating to provisions for special
agricultural workers and to those relating to limitations on
immigrant status (such as employment). Also includes bringing in
or harboring any aliens not duly admitted by an immigration
officer (for example, 8 U.S.C. Sections 1160, 1252(d), 1255, 
1282(a), 1286, 1324-25, and 1326(a)).

Incarceration  --  any sentence of confinement, including
prison, jail, and other residential placements. 

Indeterminate sentence  --  a prison sentence whose maximum or
minimum term is not specifically established at the time of
sentencing (18 U.S.C. Sections 4205(b)(1)(2)).

Indictment  --  the formal charging of the defendant with a
particular crime by a grand jury. In the Federal system, a
defendant may waive indictment and be proceeded against through
an information. (See also, Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(b).)

Information  --  the formal accusation charging the defendant
with a particular crime but brought by the U.S. Attorney rather
than by the grand jury.

Infraction  --  an offense for which the maximum term of
imprisonment is 5 days or less, or where no imprisonment is
authorized, according to 18 U.S.C. Section 3559.

Instant offense  --  the offense of conviction, and all relevant
conduct under U.S.S.G Section  1B1.3.

Intermittent confinement  --  a form of commitment, in a prison
or jail, either as a substitute for imprisonment or as a
condition of probation. Under the Federal sentencing guidelines,
intermittent confinement may be a substitute for imprisonment
(each 24 hours of intermittent confinement is credited as 1 day
of incarceration) for defendants with a guideline maximum of
less than 16 months imprisonment. (See also, U.S.S.G. Section
5C1.1.)

Jurisdictional offenses  --  acts that are Federal crimes
because of the place in which they occur (such as on an
aircraft, on Federal land or property) and for certain crimes on
Indian reservations or at sea, but which cannot be classified in
a more specific substantive category.

Juvenile  --  a person who has not attained the age of 18 years;
or for the purposes of a juvenile delinquency hearing, a person
who has not attained the age of 21 years (18 U.S.C. Section 
5031).

Juvenile delinquency  --  a violation of Federal law committed
by a person prior to the age of 18 years which would have been a
crime if committed by an adult (18 U.S.C. Section  5031).

Kidnaping  --  unlawfully seizing any person as defined in 18
U.S.C. Section 1201 for ransom or reward, except in the case of
a minor by a parent. Includes receiving, possessing, or
disposing of any money or other property that has been delivered
as ransom or reward in connection with a kidnaping as well as
conspiring to kidnap. Also, includes kidnaping or attempting to
kidnap any Government official, the President of the United
States, the President-elect, the Vice President, any foreign
official, any official guest, or any internationally protected
person. (See also, 18 U.S.C. Section  351(b); and hostage taking
as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section  1203.)

Labor law violations  --  violations of, for example, the Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938 and the Taft-Hartley Act, which 
govern a broad spectrum of activities relating to labor-management 
relations (for example, 29 U.S.C. Sections 186(a), 461(a), 463, 
1021(b), 1022, 1023(b)(d), 1024(a)(c), 1027, 1111(a)(b), 1112(c), 
1811, 1816, 1821 and 1851).

Larceny  --  the act of taking and carrying away any personal
property of another with intent to steal or convert it to one's
own use or gain. Includes stealing, possessing or illegally
selling
or disposing of anything of value to the United States or any of
its departments or agencies; or stealing from a bank, the Postal
Service, or any interstate or foreign shipments by carrier. Also
encompasses receiving or possessing stolen property or pirate
property; and stealing or obtaining by fraud any funds, assets,
or that belong to, or are entrusted to, the custody of an Indian
tribal organization (for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 641,659,
661-62, 667, 1168(a), 1704, 1707, and 2113(b)). (This offense
category excludes the transportation of stolen property.)

Liquor violations  --  violations of Internal Revenue Service
laws on liquor, as well as violations of liquor laws not cited
under these laws, such as dispensing or unlawfully possessing
intoxicants in Indian country; transporting intoxicating liquors
into any State, territory, district, or possession where sale is
prohibited; shipping packages containing unmarked and unlabeled
intoxicants; shipping liquor by C.O.D.; knowingly delivering a
liquor shipment to someone other than to whom it has been
consigned; and violating in any way the Federal Alcohol
Administration Act (for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 1154, 1156,
1263 and 1265; 26 U.S.C. Sections 5113, 5171(c), 5179, 5214,
5222, 5291, 5301(b), 5601, 5603(a), 5604, 5606, 5608(a),
5661(a), 5662, 5672, 5681(a)(c), 5683, 5685(b) and 5687; and 27
U.S.C. Sections 203, 205(f), 206(b) and 208(a)).

Magistrates (U.S.) (Federal) -- judicial officers appointed by
judges of Federal district courts having many but not all of the
powers of a judge. Magistrates are designated to hear a wide
variety of motions and other pretrial matters in both criminal
and civil cases. With consent of the parties, they may conduct
civil or misdemeanor criminal trials. Magistrates, however, may
not preside over felony trials or over jury selection in felony
cases.

Mailing or transportation of obscene materials  --  a violation
of Federal law relating to knowingly using the mail for mailing
obscene or crime-inciting matter, as defined in 18 U.S.C.
Section 1461 and 39 U.S.C. Section 3001(e). Also includes
transporting for sale or distribution, importing, or
transporting any obscene matter in interstate or foreign
commerce. (See also, 18 U.S.C. Sections 1462-63.) 

Major offense (while on conditional release)  --  allegation,
arrest, or conviction of a crime for which the minimum sentence
is incarceration for over 90 days or greater than 1 year on
probation. (See also, PACTS Statistical Reporting Guide, Version
1.0, Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.)

Mandatory sentences  --  a sentence that includes a minimum term
of imprisonment that the sentencing court is statutorily
required to impose barring the government's motion of
substantial assistance. See, for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 841
and 960, which provide for mandatory sentences ranging from 5
years imprisonment to life imprisonment depending on the
quantity of drugs involved.

Mandatory sentencing enhancement --  a form of mandatory
sentence in which the minimum term of imprisonment is to be
imposed consecutive to any other term of imprisonment imposed.
See, for example, 18 U.S.C. Section 924(c), which provides for a
5-year to lifetime enhancement for the use of a firearm during
the commission of a crime; 18 U.S.C. Section 844(h), which
provides for a 5-year enhancement for use of firearms or
explosives during the commission of a crime; and 18 U.S.C.
Section 929 which provides for a 5-year enhancement for the use
of armor-piercing ammunition during the commission of a crime.

Mandatory release  --  the release of an inmate from prison
after confinement for a time period equal to his or her full
sentence minus statutory good-time, if any. Federal prisoners
released on mandatory release may still be subject to a period
of post-release community supervision.

Matter  --  in this Compendium, a potential case under review by
a U.S. attorney on which more than 1 hour is expended.

Matters concluded  --  in this Compendium, matters about which a
final decision has been reached by a U.S. attorney. Specifically
includes matters filed as cases, matters declined after
investigation, matters referred for disposition by U.S.
magistrates, and matters otherwise terminated without reaching
court.

Migratory birds offenses  -- violations of acts relating to
birds which move from one place to another in season. Includes
taking, killing, or possessing migratory birds, or any part,
nest, or egg thereof, in violation of Federal regulations or the
transportation laws of the State, territory, or district from
which the bird was taken. Also, misuse or non-use of a
migratory-bird hunting and conservation stamp (for example, 16
U.S.C. Sections 690(g), 701, 703, 704-6, 707(b), 708, 711, and
718(a)(e)(g)).

Minor offense (while on conditional release)  --  conviction of
a crime for which the maximum sentence is incarceration for 90
days or less, probation of 1 year or less, or a fine of $500 or
less. (See also, PACTS Statistical Reporting Guide, Version 1.0,
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.)

Misdemeanor  --  a criminal offense punishable by a jail term
not exceeding 1 year and any offense specifically defined as a
misdemeanor by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for
the purposes of data collection. According to 18 U.S.C. Section
3559, misdemeanors are classified in 3 letter grades, based on
the maximum terms of imprisonment: Class A, if 1 year or less,
but more than 6 months; Class B, if 6 months or less, but more
than 30 days; and Class C, 30 days or less, but more than 5
days. (This category includes offenses previously called minor
offenses that were reclassified under the Federal Magistrate Act
of 1979.) 

Mixed sentence  --  a sentence requiring the convicted offender
to serve a term of imprisonment, followed by a term of
probation. Unless otherwise noted, offenders receiving mixed
sentences are included in both incarceration and probation
categories.  (See also, "Split sentence.")

Most serious offense  --  in this Compendium, the offense with
the greatest potential sentence; or with respect to tables
describing Federal prisoners, the offense with the greatest
imposed sentence (for example, prison data in Chapter 6).

Motor carrier violations  --  violations of the Federal statutes
relating to the Motor Carrier Act, which regulates (routes,
rates) of motor carriers of freight and passengers in interstate
commerce. The Act is administered by the Interstate Commerce
Commission (for example, 15 U.S.C. Sections 1984, 1986, 1988 and
1990; 49 U.S.C. Sections 117(a), 301(f), 303(f), 322(a)(d), 411,
526, 917(f), 1021(b)(f), 11703, 11903(a), 11904, 11907,
11909(a), 11909(c), 11910, 11913, and 11914; and 49A U.S.C.
Section 120).

Motor vehicle theft  --  interstate or foreign transporting,
receiving, concealing, storing, bartering, selling, or disposing
of any stolen motor vehicle or aircraft (for example, 18 U.S.C.
Sections 2119, 2313, and 2322; and 49A U.S.C. Section 1472(i)).

Murder -- the unlawful killing of a human being with malice
aforethought, either express or implied. Nonnegligent
manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without
malice. This offense covers committing or attempting to commit
murder (first or second degree) or voluntary manslaughter within
the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United
States (18 U.S.C. Section 7). Includes killing or attempting to
kill any Government official, the President of the United
States, the President-elect, the Vice President, any officers
and employees of the United States, any foreign officials, any
official guests, or any internationally protected persons. As
applied to the owner or charterer of any steamboat or vessel,
knowingly and willfully causing or allowing fraud, neglect,
misconduct, or violation of any law resulting in loss of life
(18 U.S.C. Sections 113(a), 115(a), 1111-13, 1115, 1117,
1512(a)(1), 1751(a), and 2332(b)).

National defense violations -- violations of the national
defense laws or the Military Selective Service Act, the Defense
Production Act of 1950, the Economic Stabilization Act of 1970
(which includes prices, rents, and wages), the Subversive
Activities Control Act, alien registration, treason (including
espionage, sabotage, sedition, and the Smith Act of 1940); also
violations relating to energy facilities, curfew and restricted
areas, exportation of war materials, trading with an enemy, 
illegal use of uniform and any other violations of the Federal 
statutes concerning national defense (for example, 8 U.S.C. 
Sections 1304(e) and 1306(b)(d); 10 U.S.C. Sections 976 and 2408; 
18 U.S.C. Sections 703, 705, 711, 713, 792, 794, 797, 799, 953, 
961, 965, 967, 970, 1366(a), 1382, 2152, 2153(b), 2154(b), 2155(b), 
2156(b), 2382, 2384, 2386, 2388(a)(c), and 2390; 22 U.S.C. 
Sections 253, 286, 447, 447(c),  450, 455, 612, 614(b)(f), 617, 
1178(c), 1182, 1199, 1978(c), 2778(b), 4198, 4202 and 5113(c); 
42 U.S.C. Sections 2274(b), 2276, 2278(b) and 2384(b); and 
50A U.S.C. Sections 2, 3(a)(c), 16, 167, 210, 322, 324, 326, 328, 
421(a)(c), 462, 468(b), 643(a), 781, 783(b)(d), 789, 794, 797,
851, 1152, 1705, 1436(e), 1809(c), 2062, 2071(b), 2073, 2405(a)(b), 
and 2410(b)).

Negligent manslaughter -- causing the death of another, within
the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United
States as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section 7, by wanton or reckless
disregard for human life. Also negligent manslaughter of any
Government official, the President of the United States, the
President-elect, the Vice President, any officers and employees
of the United States, any foreign officials, any official
guests, or any internationally protected persons. This offense
category also includes misconduct, negligence, or inattention to
duties by ship officers on a steamboat or vessel resulting in
death to any person (18 U.S.C. Section 1112).

New law -- In this Compendium defendants convicted and sentenced
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. (See also "Old
law.")

Nolo contendere -- defendant's plea in a criminal case
indicating that he or she will not contest charges, but not
admitting or denying guilt.

Non-citizen -- a person who is without U.S. citizenship,
including legal aliens (for example, resident aliens, tourists,
and refugees/asylees) and illegal aliens. 

Not convicted -- acquittal by bench or jury trial, mistrial, and
dismissal (including nolle prosequi and deferred prosecution).

Not guilty -- plea entered by the accused to a criminal charge.
If the defendant refuses to plead, the court will enter a plea
of not guilty. Also the form of a verdict in a criminal trial
where the jury acquits the defendant. 

Offense -- violation of U.S. criminal law. In this Compendium,
where more than 1 offense is charged, the offense with the
greatest potential penalty is reported.

Offense level -- under the Federal sentencing guidelines, a
quantification of the relative seriousness of the offense of
conviction and any offense-specific aggravating or mitigating
factors. Guideline offense levels range from level 1 (the least
serious offense) to level 43 (the most serious offense).

Old law -- in this Compendium, defendants convicted and
sentenced pursuant to laws applicable before the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984. (See also, "New law.")

Parole -- period of supervision after release from custody
before the expiration of sentence. The U.S. Parole Commission is
empowered to grant, modify or revoke the parole of all Federal
offenders. Pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, parole
was abolished and defendants are required to serve the imposed
sentence (less 54 days per year good-time for sentences greater
than 1 year, but not life imprisonment), followed by a term of
supervised release.  Because of the number of Federal inmates
sentenced under pre-Sentencing Reform provisions, parole is
being phased out. Approximately 2,500 Federal inmates were
paroled by the U.S. Parole Commission during 1995.

Perjury -- a false material declaration under oath in any
proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of the
United States. Includes knowingly or willfully giving false
evidence or swearing to false statements under oath or by any
means procuring or instigating any person to commit perjury.
This offense also includes any officers and employees of the
Government listed under 13 U.S.C. Sections 21-25 who willfully
or knowingly furnish, or cause to be furnished, any false
information or statement (for example, 2 U.S.C. Section 192; 13
U.S.C. Section 213; 15 U.S.C. Section 2614; 18 U.S.C. Sections
401, 402, 15 4, 1506, 1508, 1510, 1512(b), 1513, and 1622; 28
U.S.C. Section 1866(g); 42 U.S.C. Section 5411; 43 U.S.C.
Section 104; and 49A U.S.C. Sections 472 (m)(o)).

Personal recognizance -- pretrial release condition in which the
defendant promises to appear at trial and no financial conditions 
are required to be met.

Petty offense -- a Class B misdemeanor, a Class C misdemeanor,
or an infraction with fines as specified in 18 U.S.C. Sections
3571. (See also, "Misdemeanor" and "Infraction.")

Plea bargaining -- practice whereby a defendant in a criminal
proceeding agrees to plead guilty to a charge in exchange for
the prosecution's cooperation in securing a more lenient
sentence or some other mitigation.

Pornographic -- that which is of or pertaining to obscene
literature; obscene, licentious. Material is pornographic or
obscene if the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the work taken as a whole appeals to
the prurient interest; and if it depicts in a patently offensive
way sexual con-duct; and if the work taken as a whole lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. (See
Milla v. California, 113 U.S. 15 (1973).)

Possession -- offense involving the possession of a controlled
substance, acquiring a controlled substance by misrepresentation
or fraud, attempting or conspiring to possess, or simple
possession of a controlled substance in schedules I-V (as defined
by 21 U.S.C. Sections 812). Includes possession of a controlled
substance in schedule I or II, or a narcotic drug in schedule
III or IV on board a vessel of the United States or vessels
within custom waters of the United States, or by any citizen of
the United States on board a vessel. Also, possessing any punch,
die, plate, stone, or any other thing designed to reproduce the
label upon any drug or container is an offense under this
category. Distributing a small amount of marijuana for no
remuneration is treated as simple possession and, therefore, is
included in this offense category (for example, 21 U.S.C.
Sections 829 (a)(b)(c), 841(a)(b)(d)(g), 842(a)(c), 843(a),
844(a), 846, 955, and 962).

Presentence Investigation Report (PSR) -- following a
presentence investigation, a report to the court prepared by the
probation officer before the imposition of sentence, as required
by law; unless the court finds that there is information in the
record sufficient to enable the meaningful exercise of
sentencing authority pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 3553, and the
court explains this finding on the record.

Presentment -- an accusation initiated by the grand jury itself,
and in effect, an instruction that an indictment be drawn.

Pretrial diversion -- an agreement to defer (and possibly drop)
prosecution conditioned on the defendant's good behavior and/or
participation in programs (such as job training, counseling,
education) during a stated period.

Pretrial release -- the release of a defendant from custody, for
all or part of the time, before or during prosecution.  The
defendant may be released either on personal recognizance or
unsecured bond or on financial conditions.  The category
includes defendants released within 2 days after arrest and
defendants who were initially detained but subsequently released
after raising bail or having release conditions changed at a
subsequent hearing.

Probation -- sentence imposed for commission of a crime whereby
the convicted criminal offender is released into the community
under the supervision of a probation officer in lieu of
incarceration. An act of clemency available only to those found
eligible by the court, probation offers a chance for reform and
rehabilitation for the defendant. For this purpose, the
defendant must agree to specified standards of conduct;
violation of such standards subjects his liberty to revocation.

Property offenses, fraudulent -- property offenses involving the
elements of deceit or intentional misrepresentation. 
Specifically includes embezzlement, fraud (excluding tax fraud),
forgery, and counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraudulent -- violent offenses against
property: burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, arson,
transportation of stolen property, and other property offenses
(destruction of property and trespassing). These offenses are
termed "non-fraudulent" only for the purpose of distinguishing
them from the category "Property offenses, fraudulent," above.

Property offenses, other -- offenses that involve the
destruction of property moving in interstate or foreign commerce
in the possession of a common or contract carrier. Includes the
malicious destruction of Government property, or injury to U.S.
postal property such as mailboxes or mailbags. Trespassing on
timber and Government lands is also included in this category of
offenses (for example, 2 U.S.C. Section 167(c)(g); 15 U.S.C.
Section 1281; 16 U.S.C. Sections 3, 45(d), 114, 121, 123, 152,
430(q), 433, 470, 478, 481, 551, and 605; 18 U.S.C. Sections
1164, 1361-62, 1364, 1852, 1854, 1856, 1858, 1860, 1863,
1864(c), and 2071(b); 40 U.S.C. Sections 193 (h)(q)(r)(s); 43
U.S.C. Section 316; and 47 U.S.C. Sections 13 and 22).

Public-order offenses, non-regulatory -- offenses concerning
weapons; immigration; tax law violations (tax fraud); bribery;
perjury; national defense; escape; racketeering and extortion;
gambling; liquor; mailing or transporting of obscene materials;
traffic; migratory birds; conspiracy, aiding and abetting, and
jurisdictional offenses; and "other public-order offenses."
These offenses are termed "non-regulatory" only for the purpose
of distinguishing them from the category "Public-order
offenses, regulatory" below.

Public-order offenses, other -- violations of laws pertaining to
bigamy, disorderly conduct on the U.S. Capitol grounds, civil
disorder, and travel to incite to riot (for example, 18 U.S.C.
Sections 228, 231, 1367, and 1385; 40 U.S.C. Sections
193(b)(d)(g)(o)(p); and 47 U.S.C. Sections 223(a)(b)). Included
in "Public-order offenses, non-regulatory."

Public-order offenses, regulatory -- violations of regulatory
laws and regulations in agriculture, antitrust, labor law, food
and drug, motor carrier, and other regulatory offenses that are
not specifically listed in the category "Public-order offenses,
non-regulatory."

Racketeering and extortion -- racketeering is demanding,
soliciting, or receiving anything of value from the owner,
proprietor or other person having a financial interest in a
business, by means of a threat or promise, either express or
implied. Extortion is the obtaining of money or property from
another, without his consent, induced by the wrongful use of
force or fear. This offense code covers using interstate or
foreign commerce or any facility in interstate or foreign
commerce to aid racketeering enterprises such as arson, bribery,
gambling, liquor, narcotics, prostitution, and extortionate
credit transactions; obtaining property or money from another,
with his or her consent induced by actual or threatened force;
violence, blackmail, or committing unlawful interference with
employment or business; transmitting by interstate commerce or
through the mail any threat to injure the property, the person,
or the reputation of the addressee or of another; or kidnaping
any person with intent to extort. Applies to officers or
employees of the United States, or anyone representing himself
or herself as such (for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 831, 872,
874, 875(b)(d), 877, 878(b), 892, 894, 1365(d), 1952-53,
1955-60, 1962-63).

Rape -- rape, assault with intent to commit rape, and carnal
knowledge of a female under 16 who is not one's
wife, within the territorial and special maritime jurisdictions
of the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section 7 (for
example, 22D U.S.C. Section 2801). Also includes cases of sexual
abuse, including of a minor (18 U.S.C. Sections 2241(a) (c),
2242(2)(B), and 2243) and in Federal prisons (18 U.S.C. Section
2244(a)).

Regulatory offenses, other -- violations covering areas such as
civil rights, election laws, the Communication Act of 1934
(including wire tapping and wire interception), custom laws
(except narcotics and liquor), interstate commerce (the Hot Oil
Act, transportation or importation of prison-made goods, and the
railroad and transportation acts), maritime and shipping laws,
laws regarding stowaways, the Federal Boat Safety Act of 1971,
U.S. postal laws (excluding injury to postal property),
intimidation of witness laws, aircraft regulations, and any
other regulatory offenses not listed above. (For citations refer
to the United States Title and Code Criminal Offense Citations,
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, June, 1995.)

Release

Extraordinary release -- unusual methods of prisoners exiting
prison, such as death, commutation, and transfer to another
facility.

Standard release -- the usual way prisoners exit prison,
including full-term sentence expirations, expirations with good
time, mandatory releases, and releases to parole.

Remand -- to send back. The act of an appellate court in sending
a case back to the lower court for further action. 

Remove -- transfer from Federal court (usually to a State court).

Restitution -- the action of restoring or giving back something
to its proper owner, or making reparations to one for loss or
injury previously inflicted.

Reversal -- the act of an appellate court annulling a judgment
of a lower court because of an error.

Revocation -- termination of a probation, parole, or mandatory
release order because of either a rule violation or a new
offense, and forcing the offender to begin or continue serving
his or her sentence.

Robbery -- taking anything of value from the person or presence
of another by force or by intimidation, within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States (18
U.S.C. Sections 7). Includes robbery of bank property, U.S.
postal property, or personal property of the United States.
Also, assaulting or putting the life of any person in jeopardy
by the use of a dangerous weapon while committing or attempting
to commit such robbery (for example, 18 U.S.C. Sections 1661,
1991, 2112, 2113(c) (d), 2114, 2116, and 2118(a)).

Rule 20 transfer -- upon petition by a defendant, a transfer of
proceedings to the district in which the defendant is arrested,
when the defendant is arrested, held, or present in a district
other than that in which an indictment or information is pending
against him. In this case, the defendant may state in writing a
wish to plead guilty or nolo contendere, to waive trial in the
district in which the indictment or information is pending, and
to consent to the disposition of the case in the district in
which the defendant was arrested (Fed. R. Crim. P. 20).

Rule 40 transfer -- upon petition by the U.S. attorney,
commitment to another district; transfer proceedings of a
defendant arrested in a district for an alleged offense
committed in the another district (Fed. R. Crim. P. 40).

Sentence -- sanction imposed on a convicted offender.  For
sentences to incarceration, the maximum time the offender may be
held in custody is reported. (See also, "Split sentence," "Mixed
sentence," "Indeterminate sentence," and "Mandatory sentence.")

Sentencing Guidelines (Federal) -- guidelines established by the
United States Sentencing Commission to be followed by the
Federal courts in the sentencing of those convicted of Federal
offenses. Established pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, the sentencing guidelines prescribe a range of sentences
for each class of convicted persons as determined by categories
of offense behavior and offender characteristics.

Sex offenses, other -- transporting, coercing, or enticing any
individual (including minors) to go from one place to another in
interstate or foreign commerce, in the District of Columbia, or
in any territory or possession of the United States with the
intent and purpose to engage in prostitution, or any sexual
activity for which any person can be charged with a criminal
offense (8 U.S.C. Section 1328 and 18 U.S.C. Sections 1460,
1466, 2251-52, 2257, 2421 and 2423).

Shock incarceration -- an intense confinement program,
consisting of a highly regimented schedule that provides the
strict discipline, physical training, hard labor, drill, and
ceremony characteristic of military basic training.

Special maritime and territorial jurisdiction --  areas of
Federal jurisdiction outside the jurisdiction of any State,
including (1) the high seas, Great Lakes, and connecting
waterways; (2) Federal lands; and (3) U.S.-owned aircraft in
flight over the high seas (18 U.S.C. Section 7).

Split sentence -- See, "Mixed sentence."

Stale -- the case/matter is too old to support successful
prosecution.

Substantial assistance -- a form of cooperation with the
government in which the defendant provides the
government with information, testimony, or other assistance
relating to the criminal activities of other persons in exchange
for a sentence reduction.  Substantial assistance provides the
only mechanism for judges to impose a sentence below an 
applicable mandatory sentence (U.S.S.G. 5K1.1 as codified 
at 18 U.S.C.   3553(e)).

Supervised release -- under the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, a
form of post-imprisonment supervision to be imposed by the court
as a part of the sentence of imprisonment at the time of initial
sentencing. Unlike parole, a term of supervised release does not
replace a portion of the sentence of imprisonment, but rather is
an order of supervision in addition to any term of imprisonment
imposed by the court (compare also with probation).

Surety bond -- an agreement by the defendant as a condition of
his or her release that requires a third party (usually a bail
bondsman) to promise to pay the full bail amount in the event
that the defendant fails to appear.

Suspect -- a person who is under investigation or interrogation
as a likely perpetrator of a specific criminal offense.

Tax law violations -- tax fraud offenses such as income tax
evasion and fraud; counterfeiting any stamps with intent to
defraud the collection or payment of tax; willfully failing to
collect or pay tax; failure to obey summons to produce any
papers concerning taxes; failing to furnish receipts for
employees of tax withheld; failing to furnish information
relating to certain trusts, annuity, and bond purchase plans;
putting fraudulent or false statements on tax returns; and not
obtaining a license for a business that makes a profit from
foreign items. Also included in this offense category are
violations of excise and wagering tax laws and any other laws
listed below from the Internal Revenue  Service Code (for
example, 26 U.S.C. Sections 3402, 4412, 5751, 5762(a1),
6047(a)(c), 6331, 6420(e2), 6674, 7121, 7201, 7203(c), 7204,
7206(a)(c), 7208(a)(c), 7210, 7213(b), (d), 7214(b), 7216, 7232,
7513, 7602, and 7604(b)). 

Technical violation -- failure to comply with any of the
conditions of pretrial release, probation, or parole, excluding
alleged new criminal activity. May result in revocation of
release status. Examples of conditions that may be imposed and
then violated include remaining within a specified jurisdiction,
or appearing at specified intervals for drug tests.

Termination -- at the pretrial services stage: execution of
sentence, acquittal, dismissal, diversion, or fugitive status;
in the U.S. district court: conviction, acquittal, or dismissal;
and at probation or supervised release: the removal of a person
from supervision either for successful completion of the term of
supervision or as the result of a revocation.

Threats against the President -- knowingly and willfully
depositing in the mail, at any post office, or by any letter
carrier a letter, paper, writing, print, missive, or document
containing any threat to take the life of or to inflict bodily
harm upon the President, Vice President, or any other officer in
order of succession to the Presidency. Knowingly and willfully
making such threats in any way to the above-named people (18
U.S.C. Section 871).

Traffic offenses -- driving while intoxicated, or any moving or
parking violations on Federal lands (for example, 40 U.S.C.
Section 212(b)).

Trafficking -- knowingly and intentionally importing or
exporting any controlled substance in schedule I, II, III, IV,
or V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. Sections 812). Includes
manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, selling, or possessing
with intent to manufacture, distribute, or sell a controlled
substance or a counterfeit substance; exporting any controlled
substance in schedules I-V; manufacturing or distributing a
controlled substance in schedule I or II for purposes of
unlawful importation; or making or distributing any punch, die,
plate, stone, or any other thing designed to reproduce the label
upon any drug or container, or removing or obliterating the
label or symbol of any drug or container.  Also includes
knowingly opening, maintaining or managing any place for the
purpose of manufacturing, distributing, or using any controlled
substance (for example, 19 U.S.C. Section 1590; 21 U.S.C.
Sections 333(e), 825(a)-(d), 830(a), 841(a)-(b) (d)(e)(g),
842(a), 843(a)(b), 845, 846, 848, 854, 856, 858, 859(a)(b),
860(a), 861(c)(f), 952(a)(b), 953(a)(e), 957, 959, 960(a)(b)(d),
961, 962, and 963; and 46A U.S.C. Sections 1903(g) and (j)).

Transportation of stolen property -- transporting, selling, or
receiving stolen goods, stolen securities, stolen moneys, stolen
cattle, fraudulent State tax stamps, or articles used in
counterfeiting, if the above articles or goods involve or
constitute interstate or foreign commerce (18 U.S.C. Sections
2315, 2317).

Trial conviction -- conviction by judge or jury after trial. 

True bill -- an indictment.

United States -- includes the outlying territories (Guam, Puerto
Rico, Northern Mariannas Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) 
and the territory occupied by the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia.

U.S. attorneys -- all United States attorneys. Prosecutorial
data in this Compendium come from the Central System and Central
Charge Files of the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys.

Unsecured bond -- an agreement by the defendant as a condition
of his or her release in which the defendant agrees to pay full
bond amount in the event of nonappearance at trial, but is not 
required to post security as a condition to release.

Violation (of pretrial release, probation, or parole) --
allegation of a new crime or a technical violation while on
pretrial release, probation, or parole.

Violent offenses -- threatening, attempting, or actually using
physical force against a person. Includes murder, negligent
manslaughter, assault, robbery, rape, other sex offenses (some
of which may be nonviolent), kidnaping, and threats against the
President. (See also, specific offenses for citations.)

Weapons violations -- violations of any of the provisions of 18
U.S.C. Sections 922 and 923 concerning the manufacturing,
importing, possessing, receiving, and licensing of firearms and
ammunition. Includes manufacturing, selling, possessing, or
transporting (within any territory or possession of the United
States, within Indian country, or within the special maritime
and territorial jurisdiction of the United States) (18 U.S.C.
Sections 7) any switchblade knife; or making, receiving,
possessing, or transporting a firearm not registered in the
National Firearms Registration Transfer Record. Also, engaging
in importing, manufacturing, or dealing in firearms if not
registered with the secretary in the Internal Revenue Service
District in which the business is conducted or not having paid a
special occupational tax. In addition, this code covers cases
where in a crime of violence or drug trafficking, when committed 
with a deadly weapon, enhanced punishment is handed down
(for example, 15 U.S.C. Section 1242; 18 U.S.C. Sections
922(a)(c)(e) (g)(i)(k)(m)(n)(q), 923, 924(a)(c)(f)(h) and 930;
26 U.S.C. Sections 5801, 5811, 5821, 5841, 5843, 5851, and
5861(b)(d)(h)(j)(l); 40 U.S.C. Section 193f(a); and 49A U.S.C.
Section 1472(q)).

(End of File)











 



 




