U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 
2000


August 2002, NCJ 194067


---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in 
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cfjs00.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cfjs
----------------------------------------------------------------

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Acting Director, BJS

This Bureau of Justice Statistics Report
was prepared by the Urban Institute under
the supervision of Steven K. Smith and
Marika Litras of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS).  This report was prepared
under BJS grant number 98-BJ-CX-K015. 
Principal staff at the Urban Institute were
Laura Winterfield, William J. Sabol, William
Adams, Avi Bhati, Barbara Parthasarathy,
and Yan Yuan.  Layout and design were
by David Williams.
 
This report is made possible through the
cooperation of the following Federal
agencies and their staffs:  The United
States Marshals Service (USMS), the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), the
Administrative Office of the United States
Courts (AOUSC), the Executive Office for
U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA), and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP).  The staff who
provided expert advice about the source
records include: Joe Briggs (USMS);
Steven Schlesinger and Catherine
Whitaker (AOUSC); Siobhan Sperin and
Barbara Tone (EOUSA); and Gerald Gaes
and Nancy Miller (BOP).

The contents of this document do not
necessarily reflect the views or policies 
of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or 
the U.S. Department of Justice.

BJS authorizes any person to reproduce,
publish, translate, or otherwise use all 
or any part of the material in this 
publication; citation to source, however, 
is appreciated.

An electronic version of this report and 
the data underlying graphics may be found 
on the BJS Internet Home Page
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/).  The
BJS-sponsored Federal Justice Statistics
Resource Center (FJSRC) Internet Home
Page (http://fjsrc.urban.org) provides
online access to the Federal Justice
database.  Users may download data from
the Federal Justice database for
independent analysis or use the online
query system to quickly obtain customized
statistics.

To order additional copies of this report 
or CD-ROMs containing the Federal Justice
database, call the BJS Clearinghouse at
1-800-732-3277.

Chapter 1
Arrests for Federal offenses 

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000

Suspects arrested for Federal offenses, 
by offense

Suspects arrested for Federal offenses and
booked by USMS, by Federal law enforcement
agency

Characteristics of Federal arrestees

Characteristics of suspects arrested by Drug
Enforcement Administration agents, by type of
drug

Characteristics of suspects arrested by Drug
Enforcement Administration agents, by weapon
use at time of arrest

Chapter notes

Sixty-nine Federal agencies employ full-time 
personnel empowered to make arrests.  As of 
June 2000, these agencies employed about 
88,000 officers.***Footnote 1: Brian A. Reaves
and Timothy C. Hart, Federal Law Enforcement
Officers, 2000, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Washington, DC (NCJ-187231).***  The 
Department of Justice employed more than half 
(58%) of all law enforcement officers. The 
Department of Treasury employed 21% of all 
officers.

Suspects arrested by Federal agencies are 
transferred to the custody of the U.S.
Marshals Service for processing, transportation, 
and detention.***Footnote 2: The Federal agency
initiating the investigation involving the
arrestee.  Statistics describing agencies
initiating investigations are shown in table 
2.3 Of chapter 2, "Prosecution."***  During 
2000, the U.S. Marshals Service received 
115,589 suspects for processing from the 
Federal law enforcement agencies, including 
nearly 30,000 suspects arrested by deputy U.S. 
Marshals, and over 12,000 by the DEA.

Arrests by offense categories 

During 2000, 115,574 suspects were arrested 
by Federal law enforcement agencies for 
violations of Federal law. Over one-third 
of all arrests were for public-order offenses; 
28% for drug offenses; 15% for property 
offenses; 15% for supervision violations; 
4% for violent offenses; and 4% to secure 
and safeguard a material witness.

Thirty-seven percent of drug arrests
involved cocaine (crack or powder); 27%,
marijuana; 11%, amphetamine (or 
methamphetamine); 7%, heroin; and the
remainder other drugs or drug paraphernalia. 

Almost two-thirds of arrests for public-
order offenses were immigration offenses.  
Most(82%) of these were for illegal entry 
into the United States; 13% involved alien 
smuggling; 4% involved false claims of 
citizenship by entrants to the United 
States; and 1% involved other immigration 
violations. 

Arrests by law enforcement 
agencies 

During 2000, 72% of all arrests for Federal
offenses were made by components of the
Department of Justice; the Treasury
components accounted for 11% of all
arrests.  In addition, 3% of arrests were
made by State and local agencies and 7%
of suspects were arrested after voluntarily
reporting to the U.S. Marshals following a
summons.

Within the Department of Justice, 36% of
arrests were made by the U.S. Marshals
Service, 26% were made by the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service, 15% each were 
made by the FBI and the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, and less than 1% were made 
by other Department of Justice components.

Within the Treasury Department, the U.S.
Customs Service made 57% of arrests, the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
made 24%, 14% were made by the Secret
Service, and the IRS made 5%.

Arrests across demographic 
groups

Most (86%) of suspects arrested by Federal 
law enforcement agencies during 2000 were 
male. Most (71%) were white and about a 
quarter were black.  Individuals between the 
ages of 21 and 40 years comprised 70% of all 
those arrested.  More than one-third of 
those arrested were identified as 
noncitizens.

Most(67%) suspects arrested for drug
offenses were white, while 31% were
black. Of those suspects arrested on
charges involving cocaine, 40% were
white and 59% were black.  Of those
suspects arrested on charges involving
marijuana, 91% were white and 8% were
black.

Arrests by Drug Enforcement
Administration agents

During 2000, agents of the Drug En-
forcement Administration arrested
38,411 suspects. Although not all of 
these suspects were booked for viola-
tions of Federal law by the U.S. Marshals 
(see Chapter notes).  Some of these 
suspects were referred to U.S. attorneys 
for a prosecutorial decision; others were
referred to a State prosecutor. Suspects
arrested by DEA agents were predominantly 
white (68%) non-Hispanic (62%) male (83%) 
U.S. citizens (77%). The highest 
proportion of them were between 21 and 30 
years old (43%).

Whites were usually the highest proportion
of suspects arrested for all drug types
except crack cocaine, for which blacks
were the highest proportion.

A little over 4% of all suspects were armed
at the time of their arrest. Males were over
twice as likely to be armed at arrests as
females (4% versus 2%). Non-Hispanics (5%) 
and U.S. citizens (5%) were more likely to 
armed at time of arrest than were Hispanics 
(3%)and noncitizens (3%).

If armed at arrest, suspects from all
demographic subgroups were more likely
to be armed with a handgun than any
other weapon.

Chapter notes

Tables 1.1-1.3 were derived from the U.S.
Marshals Prisoner Tracking System. Only
records of arrests made during October 1,
1999, through September 30, 2000, were
selected. Information on individual cases,
offenses, and detainees were used to
construct the tables.

Data were derived from the DEA Defendants 
Statistical System. Only records of arrests 
made during October 1, 1999, through September 
30, 2000, were selected.  Some suspects 
arrested by DEA agents may be transferred to 
state or local jurisdiction and not the U.S. 
Marshals Service.  Therefore, counts of DEA 
arrests from tables 1.4-1.5 will be higher 
than those reported in.

Offenses of arrest were classified by the
U.S. Marshals into their four-digit offense
codes.  These were then aggregated into
the offense categories shown in the tables. 
These categories are similar, but may not
be directly comparable, to categories used
in other tables of this Compendium.

Chapter 2

Prosecution

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000

Suspects in matters received by U.S.
attorneys, by offense

Disposition of suspects in matters
concluded, by offense

Suspects in matters concluded and 
declined, by investigating agency

Basis for declination of prosecution 
by U.S. attorneys

Disposition of matters declined for 
prosecution by U.S. attorneys, by 
offense

Mean and median processing times from 
receipt to filing or declination, by 
offense

Chapter notes

Federal criminal cases may be brought by
the U.S. Attorney's Office, by the Criminal
Division of the U.S. Department of Justice,
or by other authorized agencies such as
the U.S. Marshals Service.  The 93 U.S.
attorneys serve as the chief Federal law
enforcement officers within their respective
districts.

Investigations are most commonly referred
to a U.S. attorney by a Federal
investigative agency (primarily the Drug
Enforcement Administration; the Federal
Bureau of Investigation; the Postal
Inspection Service; the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms; and the Secret
Service), by the Criminal Division, or by 
a State or local investigative agency. 
Investigations may also be initiated -- and
cases brought directly -- by U.S. attorneys
or by the Criminal Division of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  This chapter
reports on suspects whom U.S. attorneys
investigated at some time.

U.S. attorneys' decisions

After criminal investigations are initiated
and criminal suspects are referred to them,
U.S. attorneys may file charges against
defendants in a U.S. district court, or 
they may decline to file these charges 
for reasons such as weak or insufficient
evidence, minimal Federal interest, lack 
of resources, or lack of criminal intent. 
Matters that are declined may be referred
to another authority for prosecution or be
settled through alternative resolution
procedures.  U.S. attorneys may also file
cases before U.S. magistrates, who have
the authority to adjudicate misdemeanor
offenses (18 U.S.C. sec. 3401).  Because
of the relatively less serious nature of
these cases, and because they are
handled by magistrates, the U.S. attorneys
count these cases as criminal matters
disposed by U.S. magistrates.

The decision to prosecute a suspect in a
criminal matter depends upon many factors, 
including the Attorney General's priorities, 
U.S. attorney priorities and resources, 
laws governing each type of offense, and 
the strength of evidence in each case.

During 2000, 62% of suspects in all
offense categories were prosecuted before
a U.S. district court judge, while U.S.
magistrates handled an additional 12%. 
Suspects were prosecuted at different
rates depending on their offense. 
Suspects involved in violent and drug
offenses were more likely to be prosecuted
before U.S. district court judges than were
those involved in property and public-order
offenses.  Suspects involved in drug
offenses were the most likely (78%) to be
prosecuted.  Suspects involved in property
offenses were the least likely to be
prosecuted (54%).  Moreover, suspects
involved in property offenses were more
likely to have their matters declined and
not referred to other authorities for
prosecution (39%) than were suspects
involved in other types of criminal matters. 
Property cases tended to be resolved by
other means, including restitution, civil/
administrative procedures, and pretrial
diversion.

Suspects in matters received (table 2.1)

During 2000 there were 123,559 suspects
in new matters received for investigation
by U.S. attorneys.***Footnote 1: See 
Chapter notes, item 1, p. 33.  The 2000 
data are not directly comparable to the 
1993 and prior compendia.***  Of these 
suspects, about 40% were investigated for 
public-order offenses, 32% for drug offenses, 
and 23% for property offenses. Five percent 
of all suspects were investigated for 
violent crimes.  Relative percentages of 
offenses reflect criminal activity as well 
as Federal investigative, prosecutorial, 
and statutory priorities. For example, 
during 2000 priority areas for U.S. attorneys 
included international crime, international 
and domestic terrorism, violent crime, 
narcotics prosecutions, immigrations, 
organized crime and civil rights prosecutions 
(with the National Church Arson Task Force),
among others.***Footnote 2: Statistical
Report, United States Attorneys' Offices.
Fiscal Year 2000.  U.S. Department of Justice,
Executive Office for United States Attorneys,
Washington, DC.***

Suspects in matters concluded 
(tables 2.2-2.6)

Upon receiving a matter, a U.S. attorney
will either immediately decline it for
prosecution or investigate further.  Upon
conclusion of the investigation, a matter
may be filed as a criminal case in a U.S.
district court, referred to a U.S. magistrate,
or declined for prosecution.  Of the
117,450 suspects in criminal matters
concluded during 2000, 62% were prosecuted 
in U.S. district court, 26% were declined 
for prosecution, and 12% were referred to 
U.S. magistrates.***Footnote 3: The number
of suspects in criminal matters concluded
is not comparable to the 1993 and prior
compendia.  See Chapter notes, item 2, p. 
33, for details.***

Suspects prosecuted (table 2.2)-- 
The likelihood of prosecution in U.S. 
district court varied widely across 
offense categories.  Drug offenders were 
more likely to be prosecuted than those 
involved in violent, public-order and 
property offenses.  U.S. attorneys 
prosecuted approximately 78% of suspects 
involved in drug offenses, 60% of those in 
violent offenses, 56% of those in public-
order offenses, and 53% of those in property 
offenses.

Differences in rates of prosecution within
major categories were substantial.  For
example, among violent offenders, 78% of
robbery suspects were prosecuted, while
48% of murder and assault, and 40%
sexual abuse and kidnaping suspects
were prosecuted. Among suspects arrested 
for property offenses, those investigated 
for counterfeiting had the highest rate 
of prosecution (74%), while those 
investigated for arson and explosives had 
the lowest rate of prosecution (42%). Among 
suspects involved in public-order offenses,
immigration (83%), national defense (76%), 
and tax law violators (67%) were much more 
likely to be prosecuted than suspects in 
escape (25%) and civil rights (7%)offenses.

Suspects in matters concluded and
declined, by investigating agency 
(table 2.3)-- During 2000, 59% of suspects 
in matters concluded were investigated by
components of the Department of Justice;
the Treasury Department investigated 19%
of suspects in matters concluded.  In
addition, independent Federal agencies
and State/local agencies investigated 10%
of suspects in matters concluded.

Among the investigating agencies, the
Central Intelligence Agency (1%), the
Immigration and Naturalization Service
(3%) and the National Park Service (7%)
had among the lowest declination rates,
while the Food and Consumer Service
(77%), the Bureau of Indian Affairs (53%),
agencies within the Department of Energy
(78%), and the Environmental Protection
Agency (61%) were among those with the
highest declination rates.  The declination
rate for matters investigated by
components of the Department of Justice
(27%) was the same as the overall
declination rate.

Suspects in matters declined (tables 2.4-
2.5)-- Suspects in matters involving violent
offenses were less likely to be declined for
prosecution (39%) than those involved in
property offenses (40%) but more likely
than those in drug offenses (17%). 
Suspects in public-order offenses were
slightly less likely to be declined for
prosecution than those involved in violent
offenses -- 24% compared to 39%.

The decision to decline prosecution is
based on a number of factors, including
the lack of prosecutable offense,
alternative resolution, or case-and
suspect-related reasons.  Of the 30,444
declinations during 2000, 26% occurred
because of case-related reasons, mostly
due to weak evidence (21%); 23%
occurred because there was no crime or
criminal intent was lacking; and 23%
occurred for other reasons, such as
agency requests (7%) and minimal
Federal resources (6%).

Not all suspects whose matters were
declined for prosecution avoided
prosecution.  Twenty-two percent of the
suspects in matters declined were referred
to another authority for prosecution.  
An additional 4% were settled through
alternative resolution procedures. Suspects 
involved in public-order offenses
constituted the largest number of suspects
who were referred by U.S. attorneys to
other authorities for prosecution or
resolution. Of the suspects whose matters
were declined those involved in drug
offenses were the most likely to be
referred to other authorities for 
prosecution or alternative resolution.  
Thirty-five percent of the drug suspects 
whose matters were declined prosecution 
by U.S. attorneys were referred for other 
prosecution or resolution, as were 25% of 
the public-order, 24% of violent and 23% 
of property offense suspects.

Within major offense categories, the
likelihood that suspects in matters
declined for prosecution were referred 
to other authorities for prosecution or
alternative resolution varied among
specific offenses.  Within property
offenses, referral occurred with 36% 
of persons involved in counterfeiting,
compared to 15% of suspects in fraud
cases.  Within public-order offenses, 
38% of immigration offenses and 62% of
escape suspects were referred to other
authorities or had their case settled
through alternative procedures, compared
to 5% of suspects in civil rights cases.
Defendants in cases concluded by U.S.
magistrates -- Cases concluded by U.S.
magistrates are, by statute, misdemeanors.
***Footnote 4: At the time that U.S. 
attorneys receive them, matters may not 
be classifiable as felonies or misdemeanors.  
If a U.S. magistrate disposes of a case  - 
or what the U.S. attorneys call a "matter" 
 - its offense level has been determined, 
by statute, to be a misdemeanor.***  Overall, 
U.S. magistrates disposed of 12% of all 
criminal matters investigated by U.S. 
attorneys.  For most offenses, the likelihood 
that a U.S. magistrate concluded the matter 
was also relatively low.  The most notable
exceptions were escape and traffic, for
which 53% and 99% of matters respectively 
were concluded by U.S. magistrates. 

Most of the 2,858 escape violations were
against defendants who absconded to
avoid prosecution in State courts, the
so-called "unlawful flight to avoid
prosecution."  Upon apprehension of the
fugitive, these cases are normally
dismissed by U.S. magistrates and turned
over to the State for prosecution on the
original warrant.

Other types of offenses having comparably
high rates of disposal by U.S. magistrates
included migratory birds offenses (84%);
conspiracy, aiding and abetting, and
jurisdictional offenses (82%); and other
property violations (71%).

Processing times (table 2.6) -- For matters
concluded during 2000, the average number 
of months from receipt of a matter to its 
conclusion by a U.S. attorney as a case 
filing or declination or its disposal by
a U.S. magistrate was 7.9 months. However, 
the time to process matters varied with 
the outcome of the matter.  Matters 
concluded by U.S. magistrates in which the 
suspect was convicted took the least amount 
of time -- an average of 3.6 months, and 
at least 50% of these convictions occurred 
in about 1.6 months. Similarly, 50% of the 
matters declined for prosecution were 
declined within 12.6 months.

Overall, suspects in violent and drug
offenses were processed more quickly
than suspects in other offenses.  For key
decisions, such as whether to file a case
or decline a matter for prosecution, drug
offenses were concluded slightly quicker
than violent offenses (5.4 months
compared to 5.9 months).  At an average
of 14.3 months, fraudulent property
offenses took longer to conclude than
other offenses. 

Chapter notes

Tables 2.1-2.6 were created from the
Central System data files of the EOUSA. 
For table 2.1, only records which showed 
a matter received during 2000 were 
selected.  For tables 2.2-2.6, only 
records which show a matter terminated 
by reason of declination, disposition by 
a U.S. magistrate, or filed as a case in 
U.S. district court from October 1, 1999,
through September 30, 2000, were selected.  
In all of these tables, matters "declined 
immediately"-- those cases in which the 
U.S. attorney spent less than 1 hour 
investigating -- were excluded.

The number of suspects in matters 
investigated in table 2.1, and the number
of suspects in matters concluded in tables
2.2 and 2.6 are not directly comparable to
counts in the 1993 and prior compendia. 
In those years, these statistics included
appellants in appeals filed or appeals
terminated. In table 2.1 of this Compendium 
and its corresponding tables in 1994 and 
subsequent compendia, the number of suspects 
in matters received is limited to suspects 
in criminal matters that were filed as cases 
in U.S. district courts, handled by U.S. 
magistrates, or declined for prosecution.  
In the 1993 and prior compendia, the number 
of suspects in criminal matters received 
included criminal appeals.  To obtain a 
number of suspects comparable to the 
statistic reported in the 1993 and prior 
compendia, add to the data in table 2.1 of 
this Compendium, the number of appellants 
in appeals that were handled by U.S. 
attorneys.

In tables 2.2 and 2.6 of this Compendium
and their corresponding tables in the 1994
and subsequent compendia, the number of 
suspects in matters concluded also is
limited to those suspects whose matters
were concluded by a case filing in a U.S.
district court, by declination, or by
disposition by a U.S. magistrate. In the
1993 and prior compendia, this number
included appellants in criminal appeals
terminated.

To obtain a number that is comparable to
the number reported in the 1993 and prior
compendia, the number of appellants in
appeals terminated and handled by U.S.
attorneys needs to be added to the totals
in table 2.2.

Offenses in the Central System data files
are classified by the title and section 
of the United States Code for the most 
serious offense investigated, as determined 
by the assistant U.S. attorney responsible 
for the matter.  For tables in this 
Compendium, these citations were translated 
into the corresponding four-digit offense 
codes used by the Administrative Office of 
the United States Courts (AOUSC).  These
four-digit codes were then aggregated into
the categories shown in the tables.

U.S. Code citations often do not permit
detailed classification of drug offenses by
the type of criminal activity involved.  A
person charged with conspiracy is classified 
under the substantive offense alleged (for 
example, conspiracy to defraud is classified 
as fraud) unless type of conspiracy cannot 
be determined from the U.S. Code citation.  
Unclassified conspiracies are included among
"conspiracy, aiding and abetting, traffic,
and jurisdictional offenses" in tables 2.1,
2.2, 2.5, and 2.6.

The most serious offense investigated is
based on the criminal lead charge as
determined by the assistant U.S. attorney
responsible for the criminal matter.

In the tables in this chapter, the "all
offenses" row or "total declinations" row 
(in table 2.5) includes records whose 
offense category (basis for declination) 
is missing or indeterminable. The percentage
distributions in these tables, however, are
based on the number of observations with
nonmissing offenses (basis for declination)
values.  The number of missing values are
reported either on a separate line or in a
footnote.

In 2000, additional data for "lack of
resources" as a reason for declination
were discovered; these cases previously
were coded as "unknown or indeterminate"
in 1999 and prior years.  Therefore, in
table 2.4, the apparent increase in "lack 
of resources" as a declination reason
(between 1998-99) is due in large part to
this additional information and 
reclassification of declination reasons 
from "unknown and indeterminate."

Chapter 3

Pretrial release

October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000
Type of pretrial release, by offense
Type of pretrial release, by defendant
characteristics
Form of pretrial detention, by offense
Form of pretrial detention, by defendant
characteristics
Pretrial detention hearing outcomes, 
by offense
Pretrial detention hearing outcomes, 
by defendant  characteristics
Behavior of defendants released prior 
to trial, by offense
Behavior of defendants released prior to 
trial, by type of release
Behavior of defendants released prior to 
trial, by defendant  characteristics
Length of pretrial detention, by form 
of release or detention, and most serious 
offense charged

The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 U.S.C.
sec. 3141) sets the terms for release and
detention of defendants facing charges in
Federal courts.  At the time defendants
first appear before a judicial officer, 
they may be (1) released on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond; (2)
released subject to conditions imposed by
the court, possibly including traditional
bail; (3) temporarily detained without bail
(limited to 10 working days) to permit
deportation, exclusion, or the revocation 
of previously granted conditional release; 
or (4) detained pending the outcome of a
detention hearing.***18 U.S.C. sec.
3142(e) (1984).***

According to the statute, a defendant must
be brought before a judicial officer without
"unnecessary delay" upon arrest.  The
judicial officer, who may be a judge, but 
is generally a U.S. magistrate, determines
whether the defendant will be released or
detained prior to trial.  If a hearing is
required, the release decision may be
delayed no longer than 3 days (or 5 days 
if requested by the defendant).

At the initial appearance a recommendation 
to detain the defendant is made by the U.S. 
attorney and/or the pretrial services 
officer.  If the court concurs with the 
recommendation to detain the defendant, a 
pretrial detention hearing is scheduled -- 
typically within 1 week of the initial 
appearance.  At the pretrial detention 
hearing evidence is presented to show cause 
why the defendant should be detained pending
adjudication of the charges.

Recommendations to detain a defendant
are limited to those instances where the
defendant was charged with (1) a crime of
violence, (2) an offense with a statutory
maximum sentence of life imprisonment or
death, (3) a drug offense with a statutory
maximum sentence of 10 years or more
imprisonment, or (4) any felony offense if
the defendant had been convicted on two
or more occasions of an offense described
above or a similar State-level offense. 
Additionally, a detention recommendation
may be made if there is a serious risk that
the defendant would flee in an attempt to
avoid prosecution or would obstruct justice
or intimidate witnesses or jurors.

Types of pretrial release

Defendants may be released without financial
conditions according to the following:

Personal recognizance -- defendant is
released subject to no financial or other
conditions.

Unsecured bond -- no money is required
to be posted before release, but defendant
is liable for full bail amount if he or she
fails to appear.

Conditional release -- any combination of
restrictions that are deemed necessary to
guarantee the defendant's appearance at
trial or the safety of the community. 
Non-financial conditions commonly place
restrictions on the defendant's movements, 
associations, and/or actions. They may also 
involve employment or treatment for medical, 
psychological, or substance abuse conditions.

Defendants may also be released on
financial conditions.  Financial conditions
include (1) deposit bond (the defendant is
required to post a percentage of the total
bail amount, usually 10%), (2) surety bond
(the defendant is released subject to
guarantees by a third person that the full
amount will be paid), or (3) collateral bond
(collateral equal to the full bail amount
required to be posted by the defendant
before release).  Financial conditions may
occur in combination with nonfinancial
conditions.

Factors relating to release or 
detention

In deciding whether to release a defendant
and in setting release conditions, the court
is directed to consider the nature and
circumstances of the offense charges, the
weight of evidence against the defendant,
the defendant's character, physical and
mental condition, family ties, employment,
financial resources, length of residence in
the community, community ties, past conduct, 
history relating to drug or alcohol abuse, 
criminal history, and record concerning 
appearance at court proceedings.

During 2000, 31,040 defendants were
released for some period of time prior to
trial. Those defendants released made up
46% of the 67,903 defendants who terminated 
pretrial services during 2000. Of the 
defendants released, 82% completed pretrial 
services without violating the conditions 
of their release. 

In 2000, 48,894 defendants were detained
for some period of time prior to the
disposition of their case.  Those
defendants detained comprised about
72% of all defendants who terminated
pretrial services during 2000. Included 
are those who were detained prior to having 
a preliminary hearing with the magistrate, 
at which point they could have been either
released or ordered to have a detention
hearing.  Of the defendants detained, 54%
were ordered detained by the court until
case disposition.

Pretrial detention hearings were held for
35,508 defendants.  Of these, 26,325, or
74%, were ordered detained.

Of the 31,040 defendants released prior to
trial, 18% violated a condition of their
release.  The majority (91%) of these
violations were technical violations of the
bail conditions.  Defendants released on
deposit bond were more likely (27%) than
other defendants to incur some violation of
the conditions of their release (table 3.8). 
Conversely, defendants given conditional
release violated their release at the lowest
rates (2%).  Seven percent of all released
defendants had their release revoked.

Pretrial outcomes by offense 
categories

Releases (table 3.1) -- Defendants charged 
with property offenses were more likely than 
other defendants to be released prior to 
criminal trial; in 2000, 80% of the 13,686 
property offenders were released. The percent 
released varied greatly across offense 
categories.  Among  violent offenders, 23% 
of those charged with robbery were released 
compared to 59% of those charged with sexual 
abuse and 61% of those charged with assault. 
Among public-order defendants, 11% of those 
charged with immigration offenses were 
released compared to 95% of those charged 
with tax law violations, 67% of nonviolent 
sex offense defendants, 59% of racketeering 
defendants, and 47% of those with weapons 
offenses.

Forty percent of all drug defendants were
released.  Drug trafficking defendants
were less likely to be released than those
charged with nontrafficking offenses (39%
compared to 55%), but defendants charged 
with trafficking offenses outnumbered those 
charged with nontrafficking offenses by 
more than 10 to 1.

The release types for those defendants
who were released prior to trial varied
among offense categories.  Within each
major offense category except violent
offenses, the highest percentage of
defendants released was on unsecured
bond. Of the 36% of released violent
defendants, 36% were released on
unsecured bond and 49% on personal
recognizance compared to 80% of all
property defendants released, of whom
54% were released on unsecured bond
and 32% on personal recognizance.

Detentions (tables 3.3 and 3.5) -- 
Among the major offense categories, 
defendants charged with drug or violent 
offenses were the most likely (84% and 
83% respectively) to be detained for 
some period of time.  However, violent
defendants were more likely than drug
offenders to be detained by the court 
(61% versus 54%). Property and public-
order defendants were less likely to be 
detained than were drug and violent de-
fendants. During 2000, 78% of public-
order defendants were detained, with 56% 
of these detained by the court. Of
public-order defendants, those charged
with immigration offenses were the most
likely to be detained (97%).  In 2000, 
36% of defendants charged with property
offenses were detained, with 42% of 
these detained by the court.  

For 70% of defendants charged with violent 
offenses, it was decided at the initial 
appearance that a detention hearing was 
warranted.  This rate varied by offense 
category: 64% of those charged with drug-
related offenses, 53% of those charged 
with public-order offenses, and 24% of 
those charged with property offenses were 
ordered to have a detention hearing. Of 
those charged with violent offenses, the 
offenders most likely to have a pretrial 
detention hearing were those charged with 
kidnapping, robbery, or murder; the least 
likely to have a pretrial detention hearing 
were those charged with sexual abuse or 
assault.

Once a defendant was ordered to have a
detention hearing, the chances of being
detained were less variable across offense
categories. The highest rate of defendants
ordered detained were those charged with
public-order offenses (82%) - primarily
immigration (88%), weapons, and
racketeering offenders (71% each). Of the
70% of defendants charged with violent
offenses and given a pretrial detention
hearing, 72% were ordered detained. In
2000, 71% of those charged with drug
offenses and 63% of those charged with
property offenses were ordered detained
following a pretrial hearing.

Violations (table 3.7) -- Of defendants
released prior to trial and terminating
pretrial services during 2000, those
charged with drug offenses were more
likely (28%) than other defendants to 
incur at least one violation during the 
release period.  Among major offense 
categories, those charged with property 
offenses were less likely (12%) than others 
to violate conditions of their release.  
Those charged with drug offenses and violent 
offenses were more likely to have their 
release revoked (10% of all released drug
defendants, 13% of all released violent
defendants).  Only 5% of released
public-order defendants were revoked, as
were 4% of released property defendants.

Pretrial outcomes across 
demographic groups

Releases (table 3.2) -- Females were
more likely (71%) than males (41%) to be
released during 2000.  Males were more
likely to have a financial condition 
imposed on them than females (20% versus 
13%). Sixty-two percent of all defendants
identified as non-Hispanic were released
during 2000 compared to 23% of Hispanics.  
Non-Hispanic releasees were twice as likely 
as Hispanics to be released on personal 
recognizance.  Sixty-three percent of Native 
Americans were released compared with 51% 
of black defendants and 43% of white or 
Asian defendants.

The higher the education level of the
defendant, the greater the probability of
release.  Thirty-eight percent of
defendants with less than a high school
education were released in 2000, while
80% of those who had completed college
were released.  Releasees with a college
degree were less likely to receive financial
conditions (16%) and more likely to be
released on personal recognizance (31%)
than those who had less education.

Defendants with a history of drug abuse
were released less frequently than those
defendants with no known drug history 
(50% versus 58%).  However, among all
released defendants, drug abuse history
does not appear to have had a major
effect on the form of pretrial release.

Detentions (tables 3.4 and 3.6) -- Males
were more likely (76% versus 51%) than
females to be detained.  Of all detainees, 
55% of the men and 42% of the women were 
detained following a detention hearing.  
Hispanics had a substantially higher 
probability of being detained (92%) 
compared with non-Hispanics (58%).  
However, among those detained, Hispanics 
and non-Hispanics had nearly equal chances
of being detained following a detention
hearing (56% compared to 52%).

Younger defendants were more likely than
older ones to be detained. Seventy-six
percent of defendants between the ages 
of 16-18 and 78% of defendants in their
twenties were detained, compared to 56%
of those over 40. However, among all
defendants detained, the chances of 
being detained following a detention 
hearing were similar across all age 
groups. These patterns were more dramatic 
with education levels. Those defendants 
with lower levels of education were more 
likely to be detained. Eighty-two percent 
of those who did not graduate from high
school were detained versus 38% of
college graduates.  Of those detained,
54% of defendants without a high school
diploma were detained following a
detention hearing compared to 41% of
college graduates.

Not only were male defendants more likely 
than female defendants to have a detention 
hearing (56% versus 35%), they were also 
more likely (76% versus 61%) to be ordered 
detained as a result of the hearing. 
 
The likelihood of having a detention
hearing increased with the number of prior
convictions and severity of the defendant's
criminal history.  Furthermore, 56% of
those with a history of drug abuse had
detention hearings as compared to 45% of
those without such a past.  However, those 
with a history of drug abuse were as
likely to be detained after a hearing.

Violations -- Released males were more 
likely than females to incur a violation 
during the pretrial release period (19% 
versus 15%) and were slightly more likely 
to have their release revoked.  A higher 
percentage of blacks incurred at least one 
violation than did either Native Americans 
or whites or Asians (23% versus 22% for 
Native Americans, 17% for whites, and 11% 
for Asians). Native American defendants 
were more likely to have their release 
revoked (14% versus 8% for blacks, 6% for 
whites and 5% for Asians). 

Defendants without a high school diploma
had a higher percentage of release
violations than did defendants with college
degrees (26% versus 8%).

Defendants with no prior criminal history
were less likely to have a pretrial release
violation than those with a prior conviction. 
Released defendants with a known drug history 
were nearly 3 times as likely to incur a 
violation than those with no known drug 
history.  Also, those with a history of
drug use were substantially more likely to
have their release revoked (14% versus 4%).

Length of pretrial detention
(table 3.10) 

Among defendants detained for any time
prior to case disposition, those charged
with violent offenses were detained the
longest (an average of 102.7 days)
compared to drug (81.9 days), public-
order (57.9 days), or property (43.1 
days)defendants (not shown in a table).

Of defendants released, those released
conditionally spent the greatest average
number of days detained (50.9 days)
compared to those released on personal
recognizance (40.2 days), unsecured bond
(32.6 days), or financial conditions (26.3
days). This trend varied only slightly
across all major offense categories -- 
in general, defendants released by
conditional means were detained more
days than defendants who were released
by any other means.

Of defendants not released, those detained 
following a detention hearing were detained 
longer, on average, than those held on 
financial conditions (106.3 days compared 
with 74.6 days). This pattern was true 
across all major offense types.

Chapter notes

All tables in chapter 3 were created from
data in the Pretrial Services Information
Act System data base, which is maintained
by the Pretrial Services Agency (PSA)
within the AOUSC. The data describe
pretrial defendants processed by Federal
pretrial service agencies within each
district.  Defendants who received pretrial
services through a local, non-Federal
agency, such as the District of Columbia,
are not included.  The data describe
67,903 defendants who terminated pretrial
services during October 1, 1999, through
September 30, 2000, and whose cases
were filed by complaint, indictment, or
information.  In these tables, the totals
(e.g., "all offenses") included records
whose offense or other attributes were
missing or indeterminable. The
percentage distributions were based on
nonmissing values, and missing values
were reported in a separate row or in a
footnote.

Offenses in the PSA are based on the most 
serious charged offense, as determined by 
the probation officer responsible for the 
interview with the defendant.  The 
probation officer classifies the major 
offense charged into AOUSC four-digit 
offense codes.  For defendants charged with 
more than one offense on an indictment, 
the probation officer chooses as the major 
charged offense the one carrying the most 
severe penalty or, in the case of two or 
more charges carrying the same penalty, 
the one with the highest offense severity.  
The offense severity level is determined 
by the AOUSC, which ranks offenses according 
to the maximum sentence, type of crime, 
and maximum fine amount.  These four-digit 
codes are then aggregated into the same 
offense categories as those used in chapter 2.

For drug offenses, the type of drug activity
-- trafficking or possession -- is obtained
by the probation officers from their reading
of the indictment or other charging documents.  
The AOUSC citation manual provides probation 
officers with detailed instructions on how to 
code drug crimes.

In tables 3.1-3.4, the percentages showing
the methods of release or methods of
detention were based on the number of
defendants released or the number of
defendants detained.  In tables 3.5 and
3.6, the percentages were based on the
number of defendants who had hearings
and were ordered detained. This method
departs from the 1993 and prior compendia, 
in which the percentages were based on the 
number of defendants terminating pretrial 
services.

Chapter 4

Adjudication

Discussion

Tables
October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000

Defendants in criminal cases commenced,
by offense
Disposition of criminal cases terminated,
by offense
Time from filing to disposition of criminal
cases terminated
Dispositions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted offenders

Chapter notes

Federal criminal cases may result in
conviction of the defendant following 
plea or trial, acquittal of the defendants 
after trial, or dismissal of the 
case.***Footnote 1: Unless otherwise noted,
data describe felony and misdemeanor cases
in U.S. district courts and include Class
A misdemeanors handled by U.S. magistrates.
The data also include Class B misdemeanors
that are handled by U.S. district court
judges, which occur infrequently.***

Defendants in criminal cases filed 
(table 4.1)

During 2000, 83,251 defendants had criminal 
charges filed against them in U.S. district 
courts, and 71,072 (85%) of those defendants 
were charged with felonies. The 29,455 drug 
felony defendants comprised 35% of all 
criminal defendants in cases filed and 41% 
of all felony defendants.  Felony property 
and public-order defendants comprised 18%
and 28%, respectively, of all defendants in
cases filed. The 12,104 misdemeanor
defendants constituted 15% of all defendants 
in cases filed; 38% of those misdemeanor 
defendants were charged with traffic 
violations.

Defendants in criminal cases
terminated (table 4.2)

Cases were terminated against 76,952
defendants during 2000, 65,656 (85%) 
of whom were felony defendants. During
2000, the 27,274 drug-related felony
defendants comprised nearly 35% of all
defendants in cases terminated and 42%
of all felony defendants.

Eighty-nine percent of all defendants, 
92% of all felony defendants and 72% of
misdemeanor defendants were convicted. 
For major felony offense categories,
conviction rates remained around 90%. 
Within major offense categories, however,
the conviction rates varied more widely. 
For example, within the violent offense
category, the conviction rates ranged from
0% for those found guilty of negligent
manslaughter, to 96% for robbery.  Within
the public-order category, the conviction
rate ranged from 66% for civil rights
violations to 96% for tax law violations 
and 100% for mail or transport of obscene
materials.

Most defendants who were convicted pleaded 
guilty.  Overall, over 95% of those
convicted pleaded guilty, while only 4%
were convicted at trial.  For felony
offenses, 96% pleaded guilty to their
charges.  For the major felony offense
categories, guilty pleas were registered 
for 93% of violent offenders, 95% of 
drug offenders, and 96% each for public-
order and property offenders.

During 2000, 4,344 defendants exercised
their right to a trial. A higher percentage 
of violent offenders went to trial than 
drug, property, and public-order offenders.  
Eight percent of violent offenders went to 
trial as compared with 5% of property and 
drug offenders, and 4% of public-order
offenders.

Of defendants who exercised their right 
to a trial, 3, 071 (74%) were convicted 
either by a jury or a bench trial.  The 
felony trial conviction rate was 82%, while 
the misdemeanor conviction rate was 51%. 
Among felony offenses, trial conviction
rates ranged from 80% for violent and
public-order defendants to 83% for drug
and property defendants.

Case processing times (table 4.3)

The data in table 4.3 cover the interval
from the time a case is filed in U.S. 
district court through sentencing for 
those convicted as well as the interval 
from case filing through disposition for 
those not convicted, or those whose cases 
are dismissed. Title I of the Speedy 
Trial Act of 1974, as amended, sets 
time requirements for processing criminal
cases in Federal courts.  Except for 
certain exclusions, indictment must 
occur within 30 days of arrest; defendants 
are guaranteed at least 30 days to prepare 
for trial; and the Government must be ready
for trial within 70 days. The Speedy Trial
Act does not specify an interval from trial
to sentencing,***Footnote 2: The Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984 specifies minimum 
intervals for the disclosure and objections
to the presentence report. (See rule 31, 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.) and 
the time limits set by the act exclude 
several enumerated periods of pretrial 
procedure such as time spent awaiting rulings 
on motions.***Footnote 3: 18 U.S.C. 3161 et.
Seq.***  Additionally, defendants may waive 
their rights within the Speedy Trial Act.  
As a result, the actual processing time for 
most defendants can be longer than the
statutory limits without violating the
provisions of the act.

Overall, the average time for processing
defendants was 9.1 months.  For felony
defendants, the overall processing time
average was 9.8 months; for those charged 
with misdemeanor crimes, the average 
processing time was 5.5 months. Defendants 
who pleaded guilty were processed, on 
average, 2.7 months quicker than defendants 
who went to trial. Overall, defendants 
whose cases were ultimately dismissed took 
longest to process (15.5 months), on average. 
Among major felony offense categories,
case processing times were similar to the
overall pattern, except when comparing
the time until dismissal to the time of 
trial. Defendants convicted of violent, 
property and public-order offenses took 
a greater amount of time for trial 
(12.7, 17 and 12.5 months respectively), 
on average, than for dismissal (12.2, 
16.4 and 12.5 months respectively).

Convictions by U.S. magistrates 
(table 4.4)

During 2000 U.S. magistrates disposed of
10,034 misdemeanor criminal defendants,
71% of whom were convicted. Public-order 
offenders comprised 60% of the defendants 
disposed by U.S. magistrates, with property 
offenders comprising another 26%. Drug 
offenses comprised a little over 10% of 
U.S. magistrates' cases.

Characteristics of convicted 
defendants (table 4.5)

Among defendants convicted, there were
almost 6 times as many men as women
(85% versus 15%); over 4 times as many
whites as blacks (77% versus 18%); and
11/2 times as many non-Hispanics as
Hispanics (60% versus 40%).  Most were
U.S. citizens (64%), had graduated high
school or completed some higher
education (54%), and had some criminal
history (58%).  Persons over the age of 
30 represented 55% of defendants.
Chapter notes

Tables 4.1-4.4 were derived from the
Administrative Office of U.S. Courts
(AOUSC) criminal master data files. 
Only records with cases filed in U.S.
district court or cases that terminated 
in U.S. district court during October 1,
1999, through September 30, 2000, were 
selected.  Offenses were classified
according to the most serious offense
charged.  In the case of multiple offenses, 
the offense carrying the most severe 
potential penalty was selected.

In this Compendium, carjacking offenses
are classified as robberies, based on title
and section of the U.S. Code. In compendia 
prior to the 1997 Compendium, they were 
classified as motor vehicle thefts, based 
on the AOUSC offense classifications.

Table 4.5 was created by matching the
AOUSC master data files with the U.S.
Sentencing Commission (USSC)monitoring 
system files and the Pretrial Services 
Agency (PSA) data files. These latter 
two data files contain information on
the characteristics of defendants.  The
USSC monitoring system files are limited
to records of defendants sentenced under
the Federal sentencing guidelines only. 
These include defendants convicted of
felonies or Class A misdemeanors. 
Excluded from the USSC data were
defendants convicted only of Class B 
or C misdemeanors or infractions, 
defendants whose offenses were committed 
before November 1, 1987, and juvenile 
offenders. Juveniles charged as adults 
are included in table 4.5. Some of the 
defendants excluded from the USSC data 
files were included in the PSA data. 
(See Chapter 3 Chapter notes for more 
information on the PSA data.)  Table 4.5 
indicates the number of records for which 
relevant data were available. Percentage 
distributions were based on records with 
known values of defendant characteristics 
and offenses.

A criminal record, as reported in table 4.5,
is limited to prior adult convictions.  For
some defendants in this table, it is further
limited to the portion that is relevant for
calculating sentences under the Federal
sentencing guidelines.  In general, this is
limited to sentences imposed within a
15-year period prior to the current offense
and offenses committed within the United
States.  For most defendants, the criminal
history used to calculate sentencing
guideline ranges includes their entire adult
criminal history.
 
Chapter 5

Sentencing

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000

Sentence types in criminal cases terminated,
by offense

Type and length of sentences imposed,
by offense

Sentences imposed on convicted offenders,
by offense of conviction and method of 
disposition 

Convicted offenders sentenced to 
incarceration, by offense and offender 
characteristics

Average incarceration sentence
lengths imposed, by offense and
offender characteristics

Median incarceration sentence lengths
imposed, by offense and offender 
characteristics

Chapter notes

Depending upon the type and severity of
the offense, convicted offenders may be
sentenced to incarceration, probation, a
fine, or a combination of sanctions such as
a split or mixed sentence (imprisonment as
well as a period of probation supervision).
(For a definition of mixed sentences, see
Glossary, p. 116.)  The Federal sentencing
guidelines require a term of supervised
release following any prison sentence of
more than 1 year. In addition, courts have
the discretion to impose supervised
release in any other case.

Except where otherwise indicated, tables
in this chapter are based on the most
serious offense of conviction.  They are
not directly comparable with tables in
earlier chapters that are based on the
most serious offense investigated or most
serious offense charged (see "Offense
classifications" in Methodology, p. 107).

Offenders convicted and sentences
imposed (table 5.1)

Of the 68,156 offenders sentenced during
2000, 50,451 (74%) were sentenced to
prison; 12,427 (18%) were sentenced to
probation; and 2,716 (4%) were ordered to
pay only a fine.  (Offenders given an
intermediate sanction such as intermittent
confinement or community confinement
that also included probation supervision
are counted among offenders given
probation.)  Of the 50,451 offenders
sentenced to prison, 49,070 (97%) were
convicted of felonies, and 82% of
convicted felons were sentenced to prison.
Felony drug and violent offenders were
more likely to receive prison sentences
(92% each) than were either property
(60%) or public-order (85%) offenders.

Among public-order offenders, persons
convicted of weapons (91%), immigration
offenses (91%), and escape (92%) were
almost as likely to receive prison
sentences as were violent and drug
offenders.

Among property offenders, persons convicted 
of arson or the use of explosives (85%) 
were the most likely to receive prison 
sentences.

Overall, 18% of convicted offenders were
sentenced to probation. The percentage of
misdemeanants sentenced to probation
(50%) was three times that of convicted
felons (13%). Among felons, persons
convicted of gambling violations were the
most likely to be given probation (89%)
followed by persons convicted of
communication (83%) and postal law
(78%) violations.

While less than 1% of all convicted felons
were ordered to only pay a fine, 26% of
the felons convicted of antitrust violations
and 29% of liquor violation convictions
were so ordered. Fines generally were
reserved for misdemeanor offenders, 28%
of whom received fines.

Average prison sentences imposed
(table 5.2)

For all offenders given prison terms, 
the average term of imprisonment imposed
was 56.7 months. Persons convicted of
felonies received an average prison term
of 58.0 months.

The average length of prison sentence
imposed varied among major felony
offense categories.  Property offenders 
received the shortest sentence,
on average, while violent offenders
received the longest (24.2 months
compared to 86.5 months). Drug offenders
received 75.5 months, on average, and
public-order offenders received 45.8
months. The average prison term for
public-order offenders was primarily
attributable to sentences imposed for
weapons offenders. The 3,834 weapons
offenders sentenced to prison comprised
23% of the 16,896 public-order offenders
sent to prison; weapons offenders
received an average prison term of 91.4
months, and public-order offenders other
than weapons offenders received an
average prison term of 32.5 months.

Relationship between sentence
imposed and mode of conviction
(table 5.3)

Offenders convicted by plea were less
likely to receive prison sentences than
those convicted at trial. Seventy-four
percent of the offenders convicted by 
guilty plea received some prison time, 
while 80% of the offenders convicted at 
trial received prison sentences.

For violent offenders, 92% of those
convicted by plea received prison
sentences, as did 97% of those convicted
at trial. For fraudulent property offenders,
60% of those convicted by plea received
prison sentences, compared to 86% of
those convicted at trial. And, for 
regulatory public-order offenders, 46% 
of those convicted by plea went to 
prison, but 83% of those convicted at 
trial did.

The average prison term imposed on
defendants convicted at trial was longer
than the term imposed on defendants
convicted by plea. Defendants convicted at
trial received 145.1 months, on average,
while those convicted by plea received an
average of 52.2 months.  Drug offenders 
convicted at trial received an average of 
189.3 months as compared to the 70.1 months 
for drug offenders convicted by a guilty 
plea. Violent offenders who went to trial 
received an average sentence of 159.7 
months as compared to the 80.9 months for 
those convicted by plea.

Characteristics of offenders 
sentenced to prison (tables 5.4-5.6)

The majority of persons convicted during
2000 were male (85%), white (77%),
non-Hispanic (60%), and U.S. citizens
(64%). (Percents were calculated from
numbers in table 5.4.)  The percentage
sentenced to prison was not uniform
across all categories of age, race, sex,
education, and ethnicity. Similarly, the
average sentences imposed were not
uniform across these categories.  However, 
conclusions about the effect that 
characteristics may have had on sentencing 
cannot be drawn from the aggregate patterns 
in the data. Such an assessment would 
require detailed information for each 
category showing the presence or absence 
of factors that are legally intended to 
affect sentencing, such as offense severity, 
weapon use, role in the offense, victim 
injury, dollar loss, and so forth.

One such study of the factors affecting
sentencing found that "nearly all of the
aggregate differences among sentences
for whites, blacks, and Hispanics during
1989-90 can be attributed to characteristics 
of offenses and offenders that current law 
and sentencing guidelines establish as 
legitimate considerations in sentencing 
decisions."***Douglas C. McDonald and
Kenneth E. Carlson, Sentencing in the
Federal Courts: Does Race Matter?  
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department
of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
December 1993 (NCJ 145328).***

Average sentences imposed were longest
for males (59.3 months), blacks (83.4
months), non-Hispanics (67.6 months),
and U.S. citizens (67.4 months). These
longer terms are due in large part because
these categories of offenders (males,
blacks, non-Hispanics, and U.S. citizens)
are more highly concentrated in the
offense types (not shown in any table) that
also are associated with longer average
sentences.  In general, within categories 
of offender characteristics, average prison 
terms were longer for violent and drug 
offenses than for property and regulatory 
public-order offenses. These two offense 
categories generally are considered to be 
more serious under the Federal sentencing 
guidelines than are property and regulatory 
public-order offenses. As a result, for 
aggregate tables like the ones presented in 
this chapter, persons with a certain 
characteristic may appear to receive more 
severe sentences on average. The primary 
reason for the longer averages is the larger 
number of serious offenses that made up the 
average sentences.

Chapter notes

Tables 5.1-5.3 were derived from the AOUSC 
criminal master data files.  Only records 
of defendants sentenced during October 1, 
1999, through September 30, 2000, were 
selected.  Offenses shown in these tables 
-- offenses of conviction -- are based on 
the longest actual sentence imposed.

Tables 5.4-5.6 were created from AOUSC
criminal master data files, supplemented
with linked data on offender characteristics
from two sources: the United States
Sentencing Commission (USSC)monitoring 
system files (which are limited to records 
of defendants sentenced under the Federal 
sentencing guidelines); and the Pretrial 
Services Information Act System database, 
maintained by the Pretrial Services Agency 
(PSA). These two supplemental data files 
contain information on the characteristics 
of defendants.  Table 5.4 indicates the
number of records for which relevant data
were available.  Percentage distributions
were based on records with known values
of defendant characteristics and offenses. 
Means and medians in tables 5.5 and 5.6
were based on the number of records
shown in table 5.4.

Criminal record, as reported in tables
5.4-5.6, is limited to prior adult 
convictions. For some defendants in these 
tables, it is further limited to the 
portion of their criminal record that is 
relevant for calculating sentences under 
the Federal sentencing guidelines.  In 
general, this is limited to sentences 
imposed within 15 years of the current 
offense and sentences for offenses 
committed within the United States.  For 
most defendants, the criminal history 
used to calculate sentencing guideline 
ranges is the same as their adult criminal 
history.

Chapter 6

Appeals

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1999 -- September 30, 2000

Criminal appeals filed, by type of 
criminal case and offense

Criminal appeals filed and criminal
appeals terminated, by offense

Criminal appeals terminated, by type 
of criminal case and offense

Disposition of criminal appeals 
terminated on the merits, by offense

Criminal appeals cases terminated 
on the merits, by nature of offense

Chapter notes

Prior to implementation of the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984, only criminal
convictions could be appealed.  However,
the Sentencing Reform Act provided for
the appellate review of sentences imposed
given that the sentence was (1) imposed in
violation of the law; (2) imposed as the
result of an incorrect sentencing guideline
application; (3) outside the recommended
guideline sentencing range; or (4) imposed
for an offense for which no sentencing
guideline exists and is plainly
unreasonable.  Both the defendant and the
Government have the right to appeal an
imposed sentence.***18 U.S.C. sec. 3742***

Appeals filed (tables 6.1 and 6.2)

During 2000 the U.S. Court of Appeals
received 9,162 criminal appeals. Of all
appeals, 4% were filed by the Government
(not shown in a table).

Forty-nine percent of appeals filed in 
2000 challenged both the conviction and 
the sentence imposed. About twice as many
appeals challenged only the sentence
imposed as those that challenged only 
the conviction (24% versus 11%). Fifteen
percent of appeals filed were appeals of
convictions for crimes committed before
1987, when the sentencing guidelines took
effect.

The distribution of appeals by type of
appeal filed (sentence, conviction, or 
both)was relatively constant across the 
major offense categories underlying the 
appeal. However, 63% of appeals filed for
immigration offenses appealed both the
sentence and the conviction, compared to
49% for all criminal categories. 

Nearly half of all appeals filed (for 
which the offense is known) were for 
drug convictions (44%). Appeals for
public-order convictions comprised 33% 
of all appeals filed, property offenses
comprised 17%, and the remaining 6% of
appeals filed were for violent offenses.

Appeals terminated (tables 6.2-6.5)

A total of 10,580 appeals terminated
during 2000.  Of these, 48% were appeals
of both the sentence and conviction, 25%
were appeals of the sentence only, and
14% were appeals of the conviction only. 
Fifteen percent were appeals of
convictions for offenses sentenced under
laws in effect prior to the sentencing
guidelines.

In nearly half of all appeals terminated 
in 2000 (for which the offense is known),
drug offense convictions underlie the
appeal (46%); the underlying offense in
30% of the appeals was a public-order
offense; 18% were property offense
appeals; and 6% were appeals for violent
offense convictions.  For 35% of public-
order appeals, the underlying offense of 
conviction was for weapons. Robbery 
offenses composed 51% and murder composed 
18% of the underlying offenses for appeals 
of a violent conviction.  Sixty-one percent 
of property offense appeals were for fraud 
convictions.

Of the 10,580 appeals terminated during
2000, 76% were terminated on the merits,
while the remainder were terminated on
procedural grounds.  For appeals based
on a conviction, 76% of drug offenses and
78% of public-order offenses were
terminated on the merits.  Also terminated
on the merits were 81% of appeals based
on a violent conviction and 72% of appeals
based on a property conviction.  Within
these major offense categories, 82% of
appeals based on murder convictions
were terminated on the merits, as were
81% of weapons offenses, and 79% of
robbery offenses.

In 78% of appeals terminated on the
merits, the district court ruling was
affirmed. In another 4% it was partially
affirmed.  Among appeals terminated on
merits, 82% of all drug offense appeals
were affirmed, as were 81% of violent
offense appeals and 76% of property
appeals.  Seventy-four percent of
public-order offense appeals were
affirmed.

District court decisions were reversed 
or remanded back to the court in 9% of 
the cases. Property offenses and public-
order offenses had the highest rate of 
reversal or being remanded back to the 
court(10%). Nine percent of violent 
offense appeals were reversed or remanded, 
as were 7% of drug offense appeals. 

Overall, appeals were dismissed in 8% 
of cases. Among major offense categories,
the highest dismissal rate was for
public-order appeals (11%), with 21% 
of immigration appeals dismissed.

Chapter notes

Tables in chapter 6 were created from 
the AOUSC appeals database. Records of
appeals filed or terminated during October
1, 1999, through September 30, 2000,
were selected.  Data include records of
9,162 criminal appeals filed during fiscal
year 2000 and 10,580 appeals terminated
during the same period.

The unit of analysis in the appeals data 
is a single case.  Most records in the 
appeals data report on a single appellant.  
Appeals were classified into the offense 
categories that represent the underlying 
offense of conviction. Offenses represent 
the statutory offense charged against a
defendant in a criminal appeal. Offenses
were classified by the AOUSC into their
four-digit offense codes. These were then
aggregated into the offense categories
shown in the tables.

Chapter 7

Corrections

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1999 - September 30, 2000

Federal offenders under supervision, by
offense

Characteristics of Federal offenders
under supervision, by offense

Outcomes of probation supervision, 
by offense

Characteristics of offenders
terminating probation supervision

Outcomes of supervised release, 
by offense

Characteristics of offenders
terminating supervised release

Outcomes of parole, by offense

Characteristics of offenders 
terminating parole

Admissions and releases of Federal
prisoners, by offense

Characteristics of Federal prison population,
by major offense category

Number of first releases from Federal prison,
by release method and sentence length

Average time to first release and percent
of sentence served, for prisoners released
by standard methods

Mean time served to first release, by length
of sentence imposed, offense, and type of case,
for prisoners released by standard methods

Percent of sentence served to first release, by
length of sentence imposed, offense, and type
of case, for prisoners released by standard
methods

Characteristics of first releases from
prison, by offense, all releases

Mean time served to first release from
Federal prison for prisoners released by
standard methods, by offense and offender
characteristics

Chapter notes

Federal offenders under 
supervision (tables 7.1 and 7.2)

As of the end of fiscal year 2000,there
were 99,264 offenders under active
Federal supervision, of which most (90%)
were felons.  Sixty-nine percent of these
offenders received one of two forms of
post-incarceration supervision:  supervised
release (63,800) or parole (4,527).  The
remainder (30,937) were under probation
supervision.  Most of the probationer
population had been convicted of either 
a property felony (38%) or some type of
misdemeanor offense (32%).  Fifty-three
percent of offenders under supervised
release and nearly 50% of parolees had
been convicted of a drug offense.

Among the 99,264 offenders under active
Federal supervision at the end of fiscal
year 2000, 79% were male; 64% were
white; 83% were of non-Hispanic origin;
38% were over age 40 (compared to 30%
who were between 31-40 years of age and
31% who were 30 or younger); 36% had a
high school diploma only (compared to
32% who had at least some college and
32% who had less than a high school
diploma); and 64% had no known drug
history.  

Outcomes of offenders completing
supervision (tables 7.3, 7.5, and 
7.7)

Probation (table 7.3) -- During 2000,
15,186 offenders completed one or more
terms of active probation.  Overall, 80% 
of offenders successfully completed their
term of probation, another 18% violated
their conditions of probation, and the
remaining 2% were administrative closures.  
Of offenders terminating probation, 6% 
committed a new crime. Most committed 
technical violations, including drug use 
(3%)or absconding (2%).

Offenders convicted of violent offenses
were less likely than others to successfully
complete a term of probation without a
violation.  During 2000, 36% of probationers 
convicted of violent offenses violated their 
conditions of probation, as did 18% of drug, 
15% of property, and 10% of public-order 
offenders.  Violent offenders were also more 
likely to commit new crimes (14%) than were 
probationers convicted of drug (7%), property 
(5%), and public-order (4%)offenses.

Supervised release (table 7.5)-- During
2000, 22,972 offenders completed terms
of supervised release.  Overall, 64% of
them successfully completed their term of
supervised release; 21% committed technical 
violations, such as drug use (9%)or 
absconding (5%); and almost 13% of these 
offenders violated their probation
supervision by committing a new crime. 
The remaining 2% had their supervision
administratively terminated.

Violent offenders were less likely than
others to complete a term of supervised
release without a violation.  Fifty-six
percent of violent offenders violated
conditions of supervised release, while
36% of public-order, 32% of drug, and
29% of property offenders violated
supervised release.  Violent offenders
were also more likely to commit new
crimes (20%) than offenders convicted 
of public-order (16%), drug(12%), or
property (10%) offenses.

Parole (table 7.7)-- During 2000, 1,985
offenders completed terms of parole. 
Overall, 55% of these offenders successfully 
completed their term of parole.  During 2000, 
14% of these offenders violated their 
supervision by committing a new crime; 26% 
committed technical violations, such as drug 
use (12%) or absconding (6%); and 5% completed 
their parole term through an administrative 
case closure.

Offenders convicted of violent offenses
were less likely than others to complete a
term of parole without a violation.  Sixty
percent of violent offenders violated
conditions of parole, while 36% of public-
order, 30% of drug, and 28% of property 
offenders violated parole.  Violent
offenders were also more likely to commit
new crimes (21%) than offenders convicted 
of drug (12%), property (11%), or public-
order (10%) offenses.

Characteristics of offenders completing
supervision (tables 7.4, 7.6, and 7.8)

Probation (table 7.4)-- Among offenders
who completed a term of probation, 73%
were male; 68% were white and 86% were
of non-Hispanic origin; 33% were less 
than age 31 (compared to 21% over age 40);
25% had less than a high school diploma
(compared to 38% whose highest education 
was a high school diploma and 37% who 
had at least some college education); 
and 78% had no known drug history.

Younger offenders, those with a history of
drug abuse, and those with a lower
educational background had higher probabilities 
of violating the conditions of probation.  
Offenders ages 16 to 20 were more likely (37%) 
to violate conditions of supervision than 
probationers in other age groups -- 25% of 
those ages 21 to 30 and 13% of those over age 
30. 

Probationers with a history of drug abuse
were 8 times more likely to violate
probation for drug use than offenders who
were not drug abusers.  Probationers with
known histories of drug abuse were also
more likely to violate supervision for other
reasons (fugitive status or new crimes)
than were other probationers.

Probationers with lower levels of education
were more likely to violate the conditions
of probation than those with higher levels
of education.  Those who did not graduate
high school had a 25% violation rate,
those whose highest education was a high
school diploma had a 18% violation rate,
those with some college had a 13%
violation rate, and those with a college
degree had only a 6% violation rate.

Supervised release (table 7.6)-- Among
those who completed a term of supervised
release, 84% were male; 64% were white;
81% were of non-Hispanic origin; 25%
were less than age 31 (41% were over
age 40);  38% had only some high school
(35% whose highest education was a high
school diploma and 27% had at least
some college); and 55% had no known
drug history.

Younger offenders, those with a history 
of drug abuse, and those with a lower
educational background had higher
probabilities of violating the conditions 
of supervised release.  Offenders under age
30 were more likely to violate conditions 
of supervision than offenders in other age
groups -- 52% of those under age 31 violated 
a condition of their supervision compared to 
21% of those over age 40.

Releasees with a history of drug abuse
were almost 4 times more likely to
terminate their supervision for technical
violations of drug use as were releasees
who were not drug abusers.

Releasees with known histories of drug abuse 
were also more likely to violate supervision 
with technical violations or new crimes.

Similarly, releasees with lower levels 
of education were more likely to violate
conditions of supervised release than
those with higher levels of education. 
Those who did not graduate from high
school had a 43% violation rate, those
whose highest education was a high
school diploma had a 34% violation rate,
those with some college had a 23%
violation rate, and those with a college
degree had a 11% violation rate.

Parole (table 7.8)-- Among those who
completed a term of parole, 96% were
male; 62% were white; 87% were of
non-Hispanic origin; 83% were over age
40; 46% had only some high school (34%
whose highest education was a high
school diploma and 16% had at least
some college); and 47% had no known
drug history.

Offenders with a history of drug abuse and
those with a lower educational background
had higher probabilities of violating the
conditions of parole.  Releasees with a
history of drug abuse were 3 times more
likely to terminate their supervision for
technical violations of drug use than were
releasees who were not drug abusers. 
Releasees with known histories of drug
abuse were also more likely to violate
supervision with technical violations or
new crimes.

Releasees with lower levels of education
were usually more likely to violate
conditions of parole than those with higher
levels of education.  Those whose highest
education was a high school diploma had
a 41% violation rate, those who did not
graduate from high school had a 44%
violation rate, those with some college 
had a 30% violation rate, and those with 
a college degree had a 15% violation rate.

Admissions, releases, and standing
population of Federal prisoners 
(table 7.9)

The Federal prison population grew by
9,042 persons during fiscal year 2000,
increasing from 120,287 sentenced
prisoners to 129,329.*** Footnote 1: Tables
7.9-7.16 exclude prisoners sentenced by
a District of Columbia Superior Court judge
for violations of the DC Criminal Code.***
The greatest growth was among drug and 
public-order offenders, particularly 
immigration and weapons offenses. In 2000 
the number of drug offenders in prison grew 
by 4,389 and the number of immigration 
offenders increased by 3,008.

Federal prisoners: First releases and
time served (tables 7.11-7.14)

During 2000, 40,727 prisoners were released 
from Federal prison for the first time after 
serving a sentence imposed by a U.S. district 
court.***Footnote 2: Tables 7.11-7.16 include
only prisoners first released by the BOP during
2000.***  Of these, 36,613 were released by 
standard means.  These standard releases served 
an average of 28.9 months in prison -- 91% of 
the sentence imposed, on average.***Footnote 
3: Average time to first release is the number
of months in Bureau of Prisons facilities 
minus credits for time spent in jail prior to 
final disposition or sentencing.  Percent of
sentence served is the average percentage of
each individual prisoner's percent of total
sentence obligation served until first 
release.***  

The remaining 4,108 first releases were
released by extraordinary means:  2,881
were released early due to participation 
in a drug treatment program; 346 were
deported; and 881 were released for other
reasons -- including commutation, death or
completion of an intensive confinement
program.  Drug offenders made up the
majority of those released by extraordinary
means (87%).

Time served until first release varied by
offense:  Violent offenders served an
average of 53.8 months; drug offenders
served an average of 41.1 months;
public-order offenders served an average
of 19.9 months; and property offenders
served an average of 16.2 months.  During
2000 the average time to first release for
public-order offenders was influenced
heavily by the relatively short time served
by immigration offenders.  Immigration
offenders composed 65% of all released
public-order offenders and, on average,
served 13.3 months until first release. 
This was nearly 7 months fewer than the
average time served for all public-order
offenders (19.9 months).  Exclusive of
immigration offenders, public-order
offenders served an average of 32.3 months 
until first release (not shown in a table).

While violent and drug offenders served
more time before first release, property
and public-order offenders served more of
their sentences than violent and drug
offenders.

Old law offenders -- those who committed
crimes before implementation of Federal
Sentencing Guidelines in November 1987
-- that were released in 2000 are not
shown separately in any table.  Only 1%,
or 455, of released offenders were old 
law offenders. New law offenders released
during 2000 served, on average, 27.9 months 
in prison (92% of the sentence imposed).  
Since the Guidelines became effective as of 
November 1987, new law offenders sentenced 
to terms of imprisonment greater than 177 
months could not have been released by standard 
means as of the end of fiscal year 2000.
*** Footnote 4: The Federal Sentencing 
Guidelines allow a prisoner up to 54 days per 
year for good behavior, so a prisoner sentenced 
to 177 months in prison in November 1987 could 
have served 154 months of this or her sentence 
and been released in 2000.***  They could have 
been released for extraordinary reasons such 
as death, commutation, or treaty transfer.
***Footnote 5: Prisoners released for
extraordinary reasons have been excluded from
all time served and percent of sentence served
calculations.***

Characteristics of Federal prisoners
(tables 7.10, 7.15, and 7.16)

Standing population (table 7.10) -- Of
prisoners in Federal prison at the end of
2000, 93% were male, 58% were white, 39% 
were black, 31% were Hispanic, and 72% were 
U.S. citizens.  Fifty-four percent of the 
yearend population were 31 years of age or 
older.  This portrait of the Federal prison 
population was similar across offenses, 
except for the ethnicity and citizenship of 
violent and property offenders.  More than 
92% of these offenders were non-Hispanic and 
U.S. citizens.

Prisoners released (table 7.15) -- Of
prisoners released during 2000, 88% were
male, 73% were white, 24% were black,
44% were Hispanic, and 58% were U.S.
citizens.  Fifty-four percent were 31 years
of age or older.  These patterns were most
similar for those released for drug offenses, 
and least similar for offenders released for 
violent offenses. Ninety-two percent of 
released violent offenders were male, 49% 
were white, 24% were black, 8% were 
Hispanic and 95% were U.S. citizens.

Time served to first release(table 
7.16)-- Of prisoners released by standard
methods, males served more time than
females (30.0 months versus 20.2 months); 
blacks served more time than whites (40.
4 months versus 25.1 months); and non-
Hispanics served more time than Hispanics 
(33.8 months versus 23.0 months). Older 
persons served more time than younger 
(until over age 40), and U.S. citizens 
served more time than noncitizens. However, 
across offenses, the overall pattern does 
not apply. For example, blacks served more 
time on average than whites, but among 
property offenders released from prison, 
whites served more time than blacks. White
offenders served an average of 21.0 months 
for non-fraudulent property offenses compared 
to 16.4 months by black offenders. Among 
violent offenders, Hispanics and non-Hispanics 
both served about 54 months in prison before 
being released.

Glossary

Acquittal -- legal judgment that a 
criminal defendant has not been proven 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the 
charges against him.

Affirmed -- in the appellate courts, the
decree or order is declared valid and 
will stand as rendered in the lower court.

Agriculture violations -- violations of 
the Federal statutes on agriculture and
conservation:  for example, violations of
the Agricultural Acts, Insecticide Act, 
and the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921;
also violations of laws concerning plant
quarantine and the handling of animals
pertaining to research (7 U.S.C., except
sections on food stamps (fraud); also 16
U.S.C. sections relating generally to
violations in operating public parks, such
as trespassing for hunting, shooting, and
fishing). 

Antitrust violations -- offenses relating 
to Federal antitrust statutes, which aim 
to protect trade and commerce from unlawful
restraints, price fixing, monopolies (for
example, 15 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1, 3, 8, 20,
and 70(i)), and discrimination in pricing 
or in furnishing services or facilities 
(15 U.S.C. sec.sec. 13(c) and 13(e)). 

Appeal -- a review by a higher court of 
a judgment or decision of a lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of -- an intermediate
Federal court, inferior to the U.S. Supreme
Court, but higher than the U.S. district
court.  The function of the U.S. court of
appeals is to review the final decisions 
of the district courts, if challenged.  
There are 13 courts of appeal in the Federal 
system representing the 12 judicial circuits 
and the Federal circuit (28 U.S.C. sec. 41).

Appellant -- the party which takes an appeal 
from 1 court or jurisdiction to another; 
opposite of appellee. 

Appellee -- the party against whom the appeal 
is taken; opposite of appellant.
Arson -- willfully or maliciously setting, 
or attempting to set, fire to any property
within the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States as defined
in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7 (18 U.S.C. sec. 81; and
49A U.S.C. sec.sec. 1804 and 1809). (See 
also, "Explosives.")

Assault -- intentionally inflicting or
attempting or threatening to inflict bodily
injury to another person.  Applies to anyone 
within the special maritime and territorial 
jurisdiction of the United States as defined 
in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7, or to any Government 
official, foreign official, official guest, 
internationally protected person, or any 
officer or employee of the United States 
designated in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1114 (for 
example, 16 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1857(e)and 1859; 
18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 111(a), 112(b), 113(c)(e), 
114, 115(c), 351(d)(e), 372, 373, 1502, 1751
(c), 1959, 2118(c), and 2231(a); 21 U.S.C. 
sec.sec. 461(c), 675(b), and 1041(c); 26 
U.S.C. sec.sec. 7212(a)(b); 29 U.S.C. sec. 
1141;46 U.S.C. sec. 701; and 49A U.S.C. sec.
1472(k)); also certain violations of the 
Fair Housing Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. sec.sec.
3610 and 3631).

Bail -- the sum of money promised as a
condition of release, to be paid if a
released defendant defaults (18 U.S.C.
sec. 3142(c)).

Bribery -- offering or promising anything of
value with intent to unlawfully influence a
public official in the discharge of official
duties.  Applies generally to bank employees, 
officers or employees of the U.S. Government, 
witnesses, or any common carrier. Includes 
soliciting or receiving anything of value in
consideration of aiding a person to obtain
employment in the U.S. Government. Also, 
receiving or soliciting any remuneration, 
directly or indirectly, in cash or any kind 
in return for purchasing, ordering, leasing, 
or recommending to purchase any good, service, 
or facility (18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 201(a),203(a)
(b), 204, 207(a)(c), 208, 210, 211, 213, 215, 
and 663; 21 U.S.C. sec. 622; 46 U.S.C. sec.
239(i); and 49 U.S.C. sec.sec. 104, 917(b),
and 11904(b)). 

Burglary -- breaking and entering into
another's property with intent to steal
within the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States, as 
defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7. Includes 
breaking and entering into any official 
bank, credit union, savings and loan 
institution, post office, vessel or 
steamboat assigned to the use of mail 
service, or personal property of the 
United States; or breaking the seal or 
lock of any carrier facility containing 
interstate or foreign shipments of freight 
or express (18 U.S.C. sec.sec. sec. 2111, 
2113(a), and 2115-17).

Career offender -- defendants are counted 
as career offenders if they are at least 
18 years old at the time of the instant
offense, if the instant offense of 
conviction is a felony -- that is either a 
crime of violence or a drug crime; and if 
they have at least two prior felony convictions 
of either a crime of violence or a drug crime. 

Case -- in this Compendium, a judicial
proceeding for the determination of a
controversy between parties wherein rights 
are enforced or protected, or wrongs are 
prevented or redressed; any proceeding 
judicial in its nature.

Civil rights -- violations of civil liberties
such as the personal, natural rights guaranteed 
and protected by the Constitution.  Includes 
the Civil Rights Acts, such as those enacted 
after the Civil War, and more recently in 1957 
and 1964.

Collateral bond -- an agreement made by
a defendant as a condition of his or her
pretrial release that requires the defendant
to post property valued at the full bail
amount as an assurance of his or her
intention to appear at trial.

Communication -- violations covering
areas of communication such as the
Communications Act of 1934 (including
wire tapping and wire interception). A
communication is ordinarily considered to
be a deliberate interchange of thoughts or
opinions between two or more persons.
Community confinement -- a form of
commitment either as a substitute for
Federal imprisonment or as a condition 
of probation in a community treatment 
center, halfway house, restitution 
center, mental health facility, alcohol 
or drug rehabilitation center, or other 
community facility; and participation in 
gainful employment, employment search 
efforts, community service, vocational 
training, treatment, educational programs, 
or similar facility-approved programs 
during non-residential hours. Under the 
Federal sentencing guidelines, community
confinement may be a substitute for
imprisonment on a day-to-day basis for
defendants with a guideline maximum of
less than 16 months of imprisonment (see
also, U.S.S.G. sec. 5C1.1(e)). 

Complaint -- a written statement of the
essential facts constituting the offense
charged, with an offer to prove the fact, 
so that a prosecution may be instituted. 
The complaint can be "taken out" by the 
victim, the police officer, the district 
attorney, or other interested party. 

Concurrent sentence -- a sentence imposed 
which is to be served at the same time as 
another sentence imposed earlier or during 
the same proceeding (18 U.S.C. sec. 3584). 
(See also, "Consecutive sentence.") 

Conditional release -- in this Compendium, 
at the pretrial stage, a conditional release 
is release from detention contingent on any 
combination of restrictions that are deemed 
necessary to guarantee the defendant's 
appearance at trial or the safety of the 
community (see text in Chapter 2 of this 
Compendium.)

Consecutive sentence -- a sentence imposed 
that will follow another sentence imposed 
earlier or during the same proceeding; 
opposite of concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy -- an agreement by two or more 
persons to commit or to effect the commission 
of an unlawful act or to use unlawful means 
to accomplish an act that is not in itself 
unlawful; also any overt act in furtherance 
of the agreement. A person charged with 
conspiracy is classified under the 
substantive offense alleged.

Continuing criminal enterprise -- a felony 
committed as part of a continuing series 
of violations, which is undertaken by a 
person in concert with five or more other
persons with respect to whom such person
occupies a position of organizer, a 
supervisory position, or any other position
of management, and from which such person 
obtains substantial income or resources 
(21 U.S.C. sec. 848(c)).

Conviction -- the result of a criminal 
trial which ends in a judgment that the
defendant is guilty.  The final judgment 
on a verdict or finding of guilty, a plea 
of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere, 
but does not include a final judgment 
which has been expunged by pardon, reversed,
set aside, or otherwise rendered invalid.

Corporate surety -- in this Compendium,a 
surety; one who has entered into a bond
to give surety for another; for example,
bail bondsman.  As a condition of his or 
her release, the defendant enters into an
agreement that requires a third party such
as a bail bondsman to promise to pay the
full bail amount in the event that the
defendant fails to appear. (See also,
"Surety bond.")

Counterfeiting -- falsely making, forging,
or altering obligations with a view to
deceive or defraud, by passing the copy or
thing forged for that which is original or
genuine.  Applies to obligation or security
of the United States, foreign obligation or
security, coin or bar stamped at any mint
in the United States, money order issued
by the Postal Service, domestic or foreign
stamp, or seal of any department or agency 
of the United States.  Includes passing, 
selling, attempting to pass or sell, or 
bringing into the United States any of the 
above falsely made articles. Also, making, 
selling, or possessing any plates or stones 
(or any other thing or instrument)used for 
printing counterfeit obligations or 
securities of the United States, foreign
obligations or securities, Government
transportation requests, or postal 
stamp; or knowingly and intentionally 
trafficking in falsified labels affixed 
to phonorecords, motion pictures, or 
audio visual works (for example, 18 U.S.C. 
sec.sec. 471, 473, 477, 479, 481, 485, 
487, 501, 507, 509, 513(b), 2318, and 
2320).

Courts -- See "Appeals, U.S. Court of"
and "District court, U.S."  Pursuant to
Article III of the Constitution, judicial 
power is vested in the following Federal 
Courts: The U.S. Supreme Court, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the District of 
Columbia, and the U.S. district court for 
the District of Columbia.

Criminal career -- the longitudinal
sequence of crimes committed by an
individual offender. 

Criminal history category -- under the
Federal sentencing guidelines, a
quantification of the defendant's prior
criminal record and the defendant's
propensity to recidivate.  Guideline
criminal history categories range from
Category I (primarily first-time 
offenders) to Category VI (career 
criminals).

Custom laws -- violations regarding taxes
which are payable upon goods and merchandise 
imported or exported. Includes the duties, 
toll, tribute, or tariff payable upon 
merchandise exported or imported.

Deadly or dangerous weapon -- an instrument 
capable of inflicting death or serious 
bodily injury. 

Declination -- the decision by a prosecutor 
not to file a case in a matter received for 
investigation. In this Compendium, immediate 
declinations (i.e., where less than 1 hour 
of time is spent on a case)are excluded.

Defendant -- the party against whom relief
or recovery is sought in an action or suit,
or the accused in a criminal case.

Departure -- under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, the term used to describe a
sentence imposed outside the applicable
guideline sentencing range.  A court may
depart when it finds an aggravating or
mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a
degree, not adequately taken into
consideration by the Sentencing Commission 
in formulating the guidelines that should 
result in a sentence different from that 
described (18 U.S.C. sec. 3553(b); U.S.S.G. 
sec. 5K2.0). (See also, "Substantial 
assistance.") 

Deposit bond -- an agreement made by a
defendant as a condition of his or her
release that requires the defendant to 
post a fraction of the bail before he or 
she is released.

Detention -- the legally authorized
confinement of persons after arrest,
whether before or during prosecution. 
Only those persons held 2 or more days
are classified as detained in this
Compendium.

Dismissal -- termination of a case before
trial or other final judgment (including 
nolle prosequi and deferred prosecution).

Disposition -- the decision made on a
case brought before a criminal court.

Distribution -- delivery (other than by
administering or dispensing) of a
controlled substance (21 U.S.C. sec.
802(6)). The term "controlled substance"
means any drug or other substance, or
immediate precursor, included in schedule
I, II, III, IV, or V of part B of 
subchapter I of Chapter 13 (title 21).  
The term does not include distilled spirits, 
wine, malt beverages, or tobacco, as those 
terms are defined or used in subtitle E of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

District court, U.S. -- trial courts with
general Federal jurisdiction over cases
involving Federal laws or offenses and
actions between citizens of different
States.

District of Columbia -- the jurisdiction 
of the U.S. district court for the 
District of Columbia.  This Compendium 
includes Federal offenses prosecuted in 
U.S. district courts, and except for 
tables based on data from the Bureau of 
Prisons, excludes violations of the District 
of Columbia Code and cases prosecuted in
the District of Columbia Superior Court. 
 
Drug offenses -- offenses under a Federal 
or State laws prohibiting the manufacture, 
import, export, distribution, or dispensing 
of a controlled substance (or counterfeit 
substance), or the possession of a controlled 
substance (or a counterfeit substance) 
with intent to manufacture, import, export, 
distribute, or dispense. Also using any 
communication facilities which causes or 
facilitates a felony under title 21, or 
furnishing of fraudulent or false information 
concerning prescriptions as well as any other 
unspecified drug-related offense. (See also, 
"Distribution," "Possession," and 
"Trafficking.")

Embezzlement -- the fraudulent appropriation 
of property by a person to whom such property 
has been lawfully entrusted. Includes offenses 
committed by bank officers or employees; 
officers or employees of the Postal Service; 
officers of lending, credit, or insurance 
institutions; any officer or employee of a 
corporation or association engaged in commerce 
as a common carrier; court officers of the U.S.
courts; or officers or employees of the United 
States.  Also, stealing from employment and 
training funds, programs receiving Federal 
funds, and Indian tribal organizations; or 
selling, conveying, or disposing of any money, 
property, records, or thing of value to the 
United States or any department thereof without 
authority (for example, 15 U.S.C. sec. 645(c); 
18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 153, 334, 642-57, 665(a)(b), 
666(b), 1163, 1709, 1711, 1956, and 1957; 25 
U.S.C. sec. 450(d); 29 U.S.C. sec. 502(b); and 
42 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1760, 2971, and 3220(b)).

Escape -- departing or attempting to depart 
from the custody of a correctional institution; 
a judicial, correctional, or law enforcement 
officer; or a hospital where one is committed 
for drug abuse and drug dependency problems.  
Knowingly advising, aiding, assisting, 
or procuring the escape or attempted 
escape of any person from a correctional 
facility, an officer, or the above-
mentioned hospital as well as concealing 
an escapee.  Providing or attempting to 
provide to an inmate in prison a prohibited 
object; or making, possessing, obtaining, 
or attempting to make or obtain a prohibited 
object(as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1791
(d)(1)(A)). Instigating, assisting, 
attempting to cause, or causing any mutiny 
or riot at any Federal penal, detention, 
or correctional facility, or conveying into 
any of these institutions any dangerous
instrumentalities (for example, 18 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 751(a)(b), 752(a), 753, 755-56,
1071, 1073, 1791(a)(c), (d)(1)(A), 1792,
3146(a)(b)(d), 3147 and 3615; 28 U.S.C.
sec. 1826; 42 U.S.C. sec.sec. 261 and
3425; and 50 U.S.C sec. 823).

Explosives -- violations of Federal law
involving importation, manufacture,
distribution, and storage of explosive
material.  Includes unlawful receipt,
possession or transportation of explosives
without a license (18 U.S.C. sec. 842(a)),
where prohibited by law (18 U.S.C. sec.
842(c), or using explosives during
commission of a felony (18 U.S.C. sec.
844(h)).  Also includes violations relating
to dealing in stolen explosives (18 U.S.C.
sec. 842(h)), using mail or other form of
communication to threaten an individual
with explosives (18 U.S.C. sec. 844(e),
and possessing explosive materials at an
airport (18 U.S.C. sec. 844(g), and 49A
U.S.C. sec.sec. 1804 and 1809).  (See
also, "Arson" and 18 U.S.C. sec.sec.
842(e)(g)(i)(k); and sec. 844(b).)  

Failure to appear -- willful absence from
any court appointment.

Felony -- a criminal offense punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding 
1 year. According to 18 U.S.C. sec. 3559, 
felonies are classified into 5 grades based 
on maximum terms of imprisonment:  Class A 
felony, if the maximum term is life im-
prisonment, or if the maximum penalty is 
death; Class B, if 25 years or more; Class 
C, if less than 25 years, but 10 years or 
more; Class D, if less than 10 years, but 
five or more years; and Class E, if less 
than 5 years, but more than 1.  
 
Filing -- the initiation of a criminal 
case in U.S. district court by formal 
submission to the court of a charging 
document alleging that one or more named 
persons have committed one or more 
specified offenses. In this Compendium, 
each defendant in a case is counted 
separately, and only the most serious 
alleged offense is considered.

Financial conditions -- monetary conditions 
upon which release of a defendant before 
trial is contingent. Includes deposit bond, 
surety bond, and collateral bond. (See also, 
"Specific definitions.")

First release -- in this Compendium, prisoners 
who are released from the Bureau of Prisons 
for the first time after their commitment by 
a U.S. district court(i.e., excludes offenders 
who are returned to prison after their first 
release, such as probation, parole, etc.).

Food and drug violations -- violations of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
such as regulations for clean and sanitary
movement of animals (21 U.S.C. sec. 134(b)), 
adulteration or misbranding of any food or 
drug (21 U.S.C. sec. 331(a)), failure to 
transmit information about prescription 
drugs (21 U.S.C. sec. 331(o)), and intent 
to defraud and distribute adulterated 
material (21 U.S.C. sec. 676). (See also, 
18 U.S.C. sec. 1365(b); 21 U.S.C. sec.sec. 
17, 22, 63, 115, 122, 126, 134(d), 142, 
144, 151, 153, 155, 158, 201, 205, 209, 
210, 212, 331(b)-(g), 331(i)-(n)(p)(t), 
333(a), 458(a), 459, 460(a)-(d), 461(a), 
463, 466, 610(a)(c), 611(a), 620, 642, 1037, 
1041(a), and 1175.)

Forgery -- falsely making or materially
altering a document with the intent to
defraud.  Includes such falsification with
intent to pass off as genuine any of the
following: U.S. Postal Service money order; 
postmarking stamp or impression; obligation 
or security of the United States; foreign 
obligation, security, or bank note;
contractors' bond, bid, or public record;
deed; power of attorney; letters patent;
seal of a court or any department or
agency of the U.S. Government; the
signature of a judge or court officer; 
ships' papers; documents on entry of 
vessels; customs matters; coin or bar; 
and so forth. Also includes making, 
possessing, selling, or printing plates 
or stones for counterfeiting obligations 
or securities, and detaching, altering, 
or defacing any official, device, mark or 
certificate (for example, 18 U.S.C. sec.
sec. 483, 493, 495, 497, 503, 505, 510(a)
(b), and 511; 19 U.S.C. sec. 1436; and 21 
U.S.C. sec.sec. 458(b)(c)). 

Fraud -- unlawfully depriving a person of
his or her property or legal rights through
intentional misrepresentation of fact or
deceit other than forgery or counterfeiting. 
Includes violations of statutes pertaining to
lending and credit institutions, the Postal
Service, interstate wire, radio, television,
computer, credit card, veterans benefits,
allotments, bankruptcy, marketing agreements, 
commodity credit, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, railroad retirement, unemployment, 
Social Security, food stamp, false personation,
citizenship, passports, conspiracy, and
claims and statements, excluding tax fraud.  
The category excludes fraud involving tax 
violations that are shown in a separate 
category under "Public-order, other offenses."  
(See also, specific offenses in this glossary 
for citations.)

Fraudulent property offenses -- see
"Property offenses, fraudulent."

Gambling -- the Federal offense of
transporting, manufacturing, selling,
possessing, or using any gambling device
in the District of Columbia or any
possession of the United States or 
within Indian country or the special 
maritime and territorial jurisdiction 
of the United States as defined in 18 
U.S.C. sec. 7.  Includes transporting 
gambling devices in the jurisdiction 
of the United States (except under 
authority of the Federal Trade 
Commission or any State that has a 
law providing for their exemption from 
these provisions), transmitting wagering
information in interstate or foreign
commerce, interstate transporting of
wagering paraphernalia, importing or
transporting lottery tickets, or mailing
lottery tickets or related matter (for
example, 15 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1173 and
1175; and 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1082(a),
1084, 1302, 1956, and 1962).

Good-time -- time credited toward early
release to an offender for good behavior 
in imprisonment. Under the 1984
Sentencing Reform Act, two classes of
prisoners are ineligible to receive
good-time credits:  (1) misdemeanants
serving a term of imprisonment of 1 year
or less; and (2) felons serving life
sentences.  All other Federal prisoners
receive a flat allocation of 54 days 
per year of sentence served; credit for 
a partial year remaining at the end of 
the sentence is prorated.  The annual 
allotment does not change according to 
the length of time a Federal inmate 
already has spent in prison (18 U.S.C. 
sec. 3624(b)).

Guideline sentencing range -- under the
Federal sentencing guidelines, the range
of imprisonment corresponding to the
applicable guideline offense level and
criminal history category.  The guideline
offense level incorporates any minimum
terms of imprisonment required by statute
as well as the statutory maximum term of
imprisonment, where applicable.

Guilty plea -- a plea in response to 
formal charges admitting that the defendant
committed offenses as charged. In this
Compendium, this category also includes
pleas of nolo contendere.

Hispanic -- ethnic category based on
classification by reporting agency. 
Hispanic persons may be of any race.

Home detention -- a form of confinement
and supervision either as a substitute for
imprisonment or as a condition of
probation that restricts the defendant 
to his place of residence continuously 
(except for authorized absences) and 
enforced by appropriate means of 
surveillance by the probation office.  
Under the Federal sentencing guidelines, 
home detention may be a substitute for 
imprisonment on a day to day basis for 
defendants with a guideline maximum 
sentence of less than 16 months imprisonment. 
(See also, U.S.S.G. sec. 5C1.1.)

Homicide -- see "Murder."

Immigration offenses -- offenses
involving illegal entrance into the 
United States, illegally reentering 
after being deported, willfully failing 
to deport when so ordered, willfully 
remaining beyond days allowed on 
conditional permit, or falsely representing 
oneself to be a citizen of the United States.  
Includes violations relating to provisions 
for special agricultural workers and to 
those relating to limitations on immigrant 
status (such as employment).  Also includes 
bringing in or harboring any aliens not 
duly admitted by an immigration officer 
(for example, 8 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1160, 
1252(d), 1255, 1282(a), 1286, 1324-25, 
and 1326(a)). 

Incarceration -- any sentence of confinement, 
including prison, jail, and other residential 
placements.

Indeterminate sentence -- a prison sentence 
whose maximum or minimum term is not 
specifically established at the time of 
sentencing (18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 4205(b)(1)
(2)).

Indictment -- the formal charging of the
defendant with a particular crime by a
grand jury.  In the Federal system, a
defendant may waive indictment and be
proceeded against through an information. 
(See also,  Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(b).)

Information -- the formal accusation
charging the defendant with a particular
crime but brought by the U.S. Attorney
rather than by the grand jury.
Infraction -- an offense for which the
maximum term of imprisonment is 5 days
or less, or where no imprisonment is
authorized, according to 18 U.S.C.3559.

Instant offense -- the offense of conviction, 
and all relevant conduct under U.S.S.G sec. 
1B1.3.  
 
Intermittent confinement -- a form of
commitment, in a prison or jail, either 
as a substitute for imprisonment or as a
condition of probation.  Under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, intermittent
confinement may be a substitute for
imprisonment (each 24 hours of intermittent 
confinement is credited as 1 day of 
incarceration) for defendants with a
guideline maximum of less than 16 months
imprisonment. (See also, U.S.S.G. sec.
5C1.1.)

Jurisdictional offenses -- acts that are
Federal crimes because of the place in
which they occur (such as on an aircraft,
on Federal land or property) and for
certain crimes on Indian reservations or 
at sea, but which cannot be classified in 
a more specific substantive category.

Juvenile -- a person who has not attained
the age of 18 years; or for the purposes 
of a juvenile delinquency hearing, a person
who has not attained the age of 21 years
(18 U.S.C. sec. 5031). 

Juvenile delinquency -- a violation of
Federal law committed by a person prior to
the age of 18 years which would have
been a crime if committed by an adult(18
U.S.C. sec. 5031).

Kidnaping -- unlawfully seizing any
person as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1201
for ransom or reward, except in the case 
of a minor by a parent. Includes receiving,
possessing, or disposing of any money or
other property that has been delivered as
ransom or reward in connection with a
kidnaping as well as conspiring to kidnap. 
Also, includes kidnaping or attempting to
kidnap any Government official, the
President of the United States, the
President-elect, the Vice President, any
foreign official, any official guest, or 
any internationally protected person. (See
also, 18 U.S.C. sec. 351(b); and hostage
taking as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1203.)

Labor law violations -- violations of, for
example, the Fair Labor Standards Act of
1938 and the Taft-Hartley Act, which
govern a broad spectrum of activities
relating to labor-management relations 
(for example, 29 U.S.C. sec. sec. 186(a),
461(a), 463, 1021(b), 1022, 1023(b)(d),
1024(a)(c), 1027, 1111(a)(b), 1112(c),
1811, 1816, 1821 and 1851). 

Larceny -- the act of taking and carrying
away any personal property of another
with intent to steal or convert it to one's
own use or gain.  Includes stealing,
possessing or illegally selling or disposing
of anything of value to the United States 
or any of its departments or agencies; or
stealing from a bank, the Postal Service,
or any interstate or foreign shipments by
carrier.  Also encompasses receiving or
possessing stolen property or pirate
property; and stealing or obtaining by
fraud any funds, assets, or that belong 
to, or are entrusted to, the custody of an
Indian tribal organization (for example, 
18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 641, 659, 661-62, 667,
1168(a), 1704, 1707, and 2113(b)). (This
offense category excludes the transportation 
of stolen property.)

Liquor violations -- violations of Internal
Revenue Service laws on liquor, as well as
violations of liquor laws not cited under
these laws, such as dispensing or
unlawfully possessing intoxicants in Indian
country; transporting intoxicating liquors
into any State, territory, district, or
possession where sale is prohibited;
shipping packages containing unmarked
and unlabeled intoxicants; shipping liquor
by C.O.D.; knowingly delivering a liquor
shipment to someone other than to whom
it has been consigned; and violating in any
way the Federal Alcohol Administration Act
(for example, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1154,
1156, 1263 and 1265; 26 U.S.C. sec.sec.
5113, 5171(c), 5179, 5214, 5222, 5291,
5301(b), 5601, 5603(a), 5604, 5606,
5608(a), 5661(a), 5662, 5672, 5681(a)(c),
5683, 5685(b) and 5687; and 27 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 203, 205(f), 206(b) and 208(a)). 

Magistrates (U.S.) (Federal) -- judicial
officers appointed by judges of Federal
district courts having many but not all 
of the powers of a judge. Magistrates are
designated to hear a wide variety of
motions and other pretrial matters in both
criminal and civil cases.  With consent of
the parties, they may conduct civil or
misdemeanor criminal trials.  Magistrates,
however, may not preside over felony trials
or over jury selection in felony cases.

Mailing or transportation of obscene
materials -- a violation of Federal law
relating to knowingly using the mail for
mailing obscene or crime-inciting matter,
as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1461 and 39
U.S.C. sec. 3001(e).  Also includes
transporting for sale or distribution,
importing, or transporting any obscene
matter in interstate or foreign commerce. 
(See also, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1462-63.)

Major offense (while on conditional
release) -- allegation, arrest, or con-
viction of a crime for which the minimum 
sentence is incarceration for over 90 
days or greater than 1 year on probation.  
(See also, PACTS Statistical Reporting Guide,
Version 1.0, Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts.) 

Mandatory sentences -- a sentence that
includes a minimum term of imprisonment
that the sentencing court is statutorily
required to impose barring the government's 
motion of substantial assistance.  See, 
for example, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 841 and 
960, which provide for mandatory sentences 
ranging from 5 years imprisonment to life 
imprisonment depending on the quantity of 
drugs involved. 

Mandatory sentencing enhancement --
a form of mandatory sentence in which the
minimum term of imprisonment is to be
imposed consecutive to any other term of
imprisonment imposed.  See, for example,
18 U.S.C. sec. 924(c), which provides for 
a 5-year to lifetime enhancement for the 
use of a firearm during the commission of 
a crime; 18 U.S.C. sec. 844(h), which
provides for a 5-year enhancement for use
of firearms or explosives during the
commission of a crime; and 18 U.S.C. sec.
929 which provides for a 5-year enhancement 
for the use of armor-piercing ammunition 
during the commission of a crime.

Mandatory release -- the release of an
inmate from prison after confinement for 
a time period equal to his or her full
sentence minus statutory good-time, if
any.  Federal prisoners released on
mandatory release may still be subject 
to a period of post-release community
supervision.

Matter -- in this Compendium, a potential
case under review by a U.S. attorney on
which more than 1 hour is expended.

Matters concluded -- in this Compendium, 
matters about which a final decision has 
been reached by a U.S. attorney. Specifically 
includes matters filed as cases, matters 
declined after investigation, matters 
referred for disposition by U.S. magistrates, 
and matters otherwise terminated without
reaching court.

Migratory birds offenses -- violations of
acts relating to birds which move from one
place to another in season.  Includes
taking, killing, or possessing migratory
birds, or any part, nest, or egg thereof, 
in violation of Federal regulations or the
transportation laws of the State, territory,
or district from which the bird was taken. 
Also, misuse or non-use of a migratory-bird 
hunting and conservation stamp (for example, 
16 U.S.C. sec.sec. 690(g), 701, 703, 704-6, 
707(b), 708, 711, and 718(a)(e)(g)). 

Minor offense (while on conditional
release) -- conviction of a crime for which
the maximum sentence is incarceration for
90 days or less, probation of 1 year or
less, or a fine of $500 or less.  (See also,
PACTS Statistical Reporting Guide, Version 
1.0, Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.) 
Misdemeanor -- a criminal offense
punishable by a jail term not exceeding 1
year and any offense specifically defined
as a misdemeanor by the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts for the purposes
of data collection.  According to 18 U.S.C.
sec. 3559, misdemeanors are classified in
3 letter grades, based on the maximum
terms of imprisonment:  Class A, if 1 year
or less, but more than 6 months; Class B,
if 6 months or less, but more than 30 days;
and Class C, 30 days or less, but more
than 5 days.  (This category includes
offenses previously called minor offenses
that were reclassified under the Federal
Magistrate Act of 1979.)

Mixed sentence -- a sentence requiring
the convicted offender to serve a term 
of imprisonment, followed by a term of
probation. Unless otherwise noted,
offenders receiving mixed sentences are
included in both incarceration and
probation categories. 

Most serious offense -- in this Compendium, 
the offense with the greatest potential 
sentence; or with respect to tables describing 
Federal prisoners, the offense with the 
greatest imposed sentence (for example, prison
data in Chapter 6).

Motor carrier violations -- violations of
the Federal statutes  relating to the Motor
Carrier Act, which regulates (routes, rates)
of motor carriers of freight and passengers
in interstate commerce.  The Act is
administered by the Interstate Commerce
Commission (for example, 15 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 1984, 1986, 1988 and 1990; 49
U.S.C. sec.sec. 117(a), 301(f), 303(f),
322(a)(d), 411, 526, 917(f), 1021(b)(f),
11703, 11903(a), 11904, 11907, 11909(a),
11909(c), 11910, 11913, and 11914; and
49A U.S.C. sec. 120).

Motor vehicle theft -- interstate or foreign
transporting, receiving, concealing,
storing, bartering, selling, or disposing 
of any stolen motor vehicle or aircraft(for
example, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 2119, 2313,
and 2322; and 49A U.S.C. sec. 1472(i)).

Murder -- the unlawful killing of a human
being with malice aforethought, either
express or implied.  Nonnegligent
manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a
human being without malice.  This offense
covers committing or attempting to commit
murder (first or second degree) or
voluntary manslaughter within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States (18 U.S.C. sec. 7).  Includes
killing or attempting to kill any Government
official, the President of the United States,
the President-elect, the Vice President,
any officers and employees of the United
States, any foreign officials, any official
guests, or any internationally protected
persons.  As applied to the owner or
charterer of any steamboat or vessel,
knowingly and willfully causing or allowing
fraud, neglect, misconduct, or violation of
any law resulting in loss of life (18 U.S.C.
secsec. 113(a), 115(a), 1111-13, 1115,
1117, 1512(a)(1), 1751(a), and 2332(b)).

National defense violations -- violations
of the national defense laws on the Military
Selective Service Act, the Defense
Production Act of 1950, the Economic
Stabilization Act of 1970 (which includes
prices, rents, and wages), the Subversive
Activities Control Act, alien registration,
treason (including espionage, sabotage,
sedition, and the Smith Act of 1940); also
violations relating to energy facilities,
curfew and restricted areas, exportation of
war materials, trading with an enemy,
illegal use of uniform and any other
violations of the Federal statutes
concerning national defense (for example,
8 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1304(e) and 1306(b)(d);
10 U.S.C. sec.sec. 976 and 2408; 18
U.S.C. se.sec. 703, 705, 711, 713, 792,
794, 797, 799, 953, 961, 965, 967, 970,
1366(a), 1382, 2152, 2153(b), 2154(b),
2155(b), 2156(b), 2382, 2384, 2386,
2388(a)(c), and 2390; 22 U.S.C. sec.sec.
253, 286, 447, 447(c), 450, 455, 612,
614(b)(f), 617, 1178(c), 1182, 1199,
1978(c), 2778(b), 4198, 4202 and 5113(c);
42 U.S.C. sec.sec. 2274(b), 2276, 2278(b)
and 2384(b); and 50A U.S.C. sec.sec. 2,
3(a)(c), 16, 167, 210, 322, 324, 326, 328,
421(a)(c), 462, 468(b), 643(a), 781,
783(b)(d), 789, 794, 797, 851, 1152, 1705,
1436(e), 1809(c), 2062, 2071(b), 2073,
2405(a)(b), and 2410(b)).

Negligent manslaughter -- causing the
death of another, within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of 
the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. 
sec. 7, by wanton or reckless disregard 
for human life. Also negligent manslaughter
of any Government official, the President
of the United States, the President-elect,
the Vice President, any officers and
employees of the United States, any
foreign officials, any official guests, 
or any internationally protected persons.  
This offense category also includes
misconduct, negligence, or inattention to
duties by ship officers on a steamboat or
vessel resulting in death to any person (18
U.S.C. sec.1112).

New law -- In this Compendium defendants 
convicted and sentenced pursuant to the 
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. (See also 
"Old law.")

Nolo contendere -- defendant's plea in a
criminal case indicating that he or she 
will not contest charges, but not admitting 
or denying guilt.

Non-citizen -- a person who is without
U.S. citizenship, including legal aliens 
(for example, resident aliens, tourists, 
and refugees/asylees) and illegal aliens.

Nonviolent sex offenses -- transporting,
coercing, or enticing any individual
(including minors) to go from one place 
to another in interstate or foreign 
commerce, in the District of Columbia, 
or in any territory or possession of the 
United States with the intent and purpose 
to engage in prostitution, or any sexual 
activity for which any person can be 
charged with a criminal offense (8 U.S.C. 
sec. 1328 and 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1460, 
1466, 2251-52, 2257, 2421 and 2423).

Not convicted -- acquittal by bench or jury
trial, mistrial, and dismissal (including nolle
prosequi and deferred prosecution).
Not guilty -- plea entered by the accused
to a criminal charge.  If the defendant
refuses to plead, the court will enter a 
plea of not guilty.  Also the form of a
verdict in a criminal trial where the jury 
acquits the defendant.

Offense -- violation of U.S. criminal law. 
In this Compendium, where more than 1
offense is charged, the offense with the
greatest potential penalty is reported.

Offense level -- under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, a quantification 
of the relative seriousness of the offense 
of conviction and any offense-specific
aggravating or mitigating factors. 
Guideline offense levels range from level 
1(the least serious offense) to level 
43(the most serious offense).

Old law -- in this Compendium, defendants 
convicted and sentenced pursuant to laws 
applicable before the Sentencing Reform Act 
of 1984.(See also,"New law.")

Parole -- period of supervision after
release from custody before the expiration
of sentence.  The U.S. Parole Commission
is empowered to grant, modify or revoke
the parole of all Federal offenders. 
Pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, parole was abolished and defendants 
are required to serve the imposed sentence 
(less 54 days per year good-time for sen-
tences greater than 1 year, but not life 
imprisonment), followed by a term of 
supervised release. Because of the number 
of Federal inmates sentenced under pre-
Sentencing Reform provisions, parole is 
being phased out.

Perjury -- a false material declaration
under oath in any proceeding before or
ancillary to any court or grand jury of the
United States.  Includes knowingly or
willfully giving false evidence or swearing
to false statements under oath or by any
means procuring or instigating any person
to commit perjury.  This offense also
includes any officers and employees of the
Government listed under 13 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 21-25 who willfully or knowingly
furnish, or cause to be furnished, any false
information or statement (for example, 2
U.S.C. sec. 192; 13 U.S.C. sec. 213; 15
U.S.C. sec. 2614; 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 401,
402, 1504, 1506, 1508, 1510, 1512(b),
1513, and 1622; 28 U.S.C. sec. 1866(g);
42 U.S.C. sec. 5411; 43 U.S.C. sec. 104;
and 49A U.S.C. sec.sec. 1472 (m)(o)).

Personal recognizance -- pretrial release
condition in which the defendant promises
to appear at trial and no financial
conditions are required to be met.

Petty offense -- a Class B misdemeanor,
a Class C misdemeanor, or an infraction
with fines as specified in 18 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 3571.  (See also, "Misdemeanor"
and "Infraction.")

Plea bargaining -- practice whereby a
defendant in a criminal proceeding agrees
to plead guilty to a charge in exchange for
the prosecution's cooperation in securing a
more lenient sentence or some other
mitigation.

Pornographic -- that which is of or
pertaining to obscene literature; obscene,
licentious.  Material is pornographic or
obscene if the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, would 
find that the work taken as a whole
appeals to the prurient interest; and if it
depicts in a patently offensive way sexual
conduct; and if the work taken as a whole
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, 
or scientific value. (See Milla v. California,
113 U.S. 15 (1973).)

Possession -- offense involving the
possession of a controlled substance,
acquiring a controlled substance by
misrepresentation or fraud, attempting 
or conspiring to possess, or simple
possession of a controlled substance in
schedules I-V (as defined by 21 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 812).  Includes possession of a
controlled substance in schedule I or II, 
or a narcotic drug in schedule III or IV 
on board a vessel of the United States or
vessels within custom waters of the United
States, or by any citizen of the United
States on board a vessel.  Also,
possessing any punch, die, plate, stone, or
any other thing designed to reproduce the
label upon any drug or container is an
offense under this category.  Distributing a
small amount of marijuana for no
remuneration is treated as simple
possession and, therefore, is included in
this offense category (for example, 21
U.S.C. sec.sec. 829 (a)(b)(c),
841(a)(b)(d)(g), 842(a)(c), 843(a), 844(a),
846, 955, and 962).

Postal laws -- offenses relating to the
mail; pertaining to the post office.

Presentence Investigation Report (PSR)
-- following a presentence investigation, 
a report to the court prepared by the
probation officer before the imposition 
of sentence, as required by law; unless 
the court finds that there is information 
in the record sufficient to enable the 
meaningful exercise of sentencing authority 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. sec. 3553, and the 
court explains this finding on the record.

Presentment -- an accusation initiated by
the grand jury itself, and in effect, an
instruction that an indictment be drawn.
Pretrial diversion -- an agreement to
defer (and possibly drop) prosecution
conditioned on the defendant's good
behavior and/or participation in programs 
(such as job training, counseling, education) 
during a stated period.

Pretrial release -- the release of a
defendant from custody, for all or part 
of the time, before or during prosecution. 
The defendant may be released either on
personal recognizance or unsecured bond
or on financial conditions. The category
includes defendants released within 2
days after arrest and defendants who were
initially detained but subsequently
released after raising bail or having
release conditions changed at a
subsequent hearing.

Probation -- sentence imposed for commission 
of a crime whereby the convicted criminal 
offender is released into the community under 
the supervision of a probation officer in 
lieu of incarceration. An act of clemency 
available only to those found eligible by 
the court, probation offers a chance for 
reform and rehabilitation for the defendant.  
For this purpose, the defendant must agree 
to specified standards of conduct; violation 
of such standards subjects his liberty to
revocation.  
 
Property offenses, fraudulent -- property
offenses involving the elements of deceit
or intentional misrepresentation. 
Specifically includes embezzlement, fraud
(excluding tax fraud), forgery, and
counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraudulent --
violent offenses against property: 
burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft,
arson, transportation of stolen property,
and other property offenses (destruction of
property and trespassing).  These offenses
are termed "non-fraudulent" only for the
purpose of distinguishing them from the
category "Property offenses, fraudulent,"
above.

Property offenses, other -- offenses that
involve the destruction of property moving
in interstate or foreign commerce in the
possession of a common or contract
carrier.  Includes the malicious destruction
of Government property, or injury to U.S.
postal property such as mailboxes or
mailbags.  Trespassing on timber and
Government lands is also included in this
category of offenses (for example, 2
U.S.C. sec. 167(c)(g); 15 U.S.C. sec.
1281; 16 U.S.C. sec.sec. 3, 45(d), 114,
121, 123, 152, 430(q), 433, 470, 478, 481,
551, and 605; 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 1164,
1361-62, 1364, 1852, 1854, 1856, 1858,
1860, 1863, 1864(c), and 2071(b); 40
U.S.C. sec.sec. 193 (h)(q)(r)(s); 43 U.S.C.
sec. 316; and 47 U.S.C. sec.sec. 13 and
22). 

Public-order offenses, non-regulatory --
offenses concerning weapons; immigration; 
tax law violations (tax fraud); bribery; 
perjury; national defense; escape; racketeering 
and extortion; gambling; liquor; mailing or 
transporting of obscene materials; traffic; 
migratory birds; conspiracy, aiding and 
abetting, and jurisdictional offenses; and 
"other public-order offenses." These offenses
are termed "non-regulatory" only for the
purpose of distinguishing them from the
category "Public-order offenses, regulatory" 
below.

Public-order offenses, other -- violations
of laws pertaining to bigamy, disorderly
conduct on the U.S. Capitol grounds, civil
disorder, and travel to incite to riot (for
example, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 228, 231,
1367, and 1385; 40 U.S.C. sec.sec. 193(b)
(d)(g)(o)(p); and 47 U.S.C. sec.sec.
223(a)(b)).  Included in "Public-order
offenses, non-regulatory."

Public-order offenses, regulatory --
violations of regulatory laws and regulations 
in agriculture, antitrust, labor law, food and 
drug, motor carrier, and other regulatory 
offenses that are not specifically listed in 
the category "Public-order offenses, non-
regulatory."  

Racketeering and extortion   racketeering is 
demanding, soliciting, or receiving anything 
of value from the owner, proprietor or other 
person having a financial interest in a business, 
by means of a threat or promise, either express 
or implied.  Extortion is the obtaining of
money or property from another, without
his consent, induced by the wrongful use
of force or fear.  This offense code covers
using interstate or foreign commerce or
any facility in interstate or foreign
commerce to aid racketeering enterprises
such as arson, bribery, gambling, liquor,
narcotics, prostitution, and extortionate
credit transactions; obtaining property or
money from another, with his or her
consent induced by actual or threatened
force; violence, blackmail, or committing
unlawful interference with employment or
business; transmitting by interstate
commerce or through the mail any threat
to injure the property, the person, or the
reputation of the addressee or of another;
or kidnaping any person with intent to
extort.  Applies to officers or employees of
the United States, or anyone representing
himself or herself as such (for example, 18
U.S.C. sec.sec. 831, 872, 874, 875(b)(d),
877, 878(b), 892, 894, 1365(d), 1952-53,
1955-60, 1962-63). 

Release

Extraordinary release -- unusual methods of 
prisoners exiting prison, such as death, 
commutation, and transfer to another facility.

Standard release -- the usual way prisoners 
exit prison, including full-term sentence 
expirations, expirations with good time, 
mandatory releases, and releases to parole.

Remand -- to send back. The act of an
appellate court in sending a case back to
the lower court for further action.

Remove -- transfer from Federal court
(usually to a State court).

Restitution -- the action of restoring or
giving back something to its proper owner,
or making reparations to one for loss or
injury previously inflicted.

Reversal -- the act of an appellate court
annulling a judgment of a lower court
because of an error.

Revocation -- termination of a probation,
parole, or mandatory release order
because of either a rule violation or a new
offense, and forcing the offender to begin
or continue serving his or her sentence.

Robbery -- taking anything of value from
the person or presence of another by force
or by intimidation, within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States (18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 7). 
Includes robbery of bank property, U.S.
postal property, or personal property of the
United States.  Also, assaulting or putting
the life of any person in jeopardy by the
use of a dangerous weapon while
committing or attempting to commit such
robbery (for example, 18 U.S.C. sec.sec.
1661, 1991, 2112, 2113(c) (d), 2114,
2116, and 2118(a)). 

Rule 20 transfer -- upon petition by a
defendant, a transfer of proceedings to 
the district in which the defendant is 
arrested, when the defendant is arrested, 
held, or present in a district other than 
that in which an indictment or information 
is pending against him. In this case, the 
defendant may state in writing a wish to 
plead guilty or nolo contendere, to waive 
trial in the district in which the indictment 
or information is pending, and to consent to
the disposition of the case in the district 
in which the defendant was arrested (Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 20).

Rule 40 transfer -- upon petition by the
U.S. attorney, commitment to another
district; transfer proceedings of a
defendant arrested in a district for an
alleged offense committed in the another
district (Fed. R. Crim. P. 40).

Sentence -- sanction imposed on a
convicted offender. For sentences to
incarceration, the maximum time the
offender may be held in custody is
reported. (See also, "Split sentence,"
"Mixed sentence," "Indeterminate
sentence," and "Mandatory sentence.")

Sentencing Guidelines (Federal) --
guidelines established by the United
States Sentencing Commission to be
followed by the Federal courts in the
sentencing of those convicted of Federal
offenses.  Established pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, the
sentencing guidelines prescribe a range of
sentences for each class of convicted
persons as determined by categories of
offense behavior and offender characteristics.

Sexual abuse -- rape, assault with intent
to commit rape, and carnal knowledge of a
female under 16 who is not one's wife,
within the territorial and special maritime
jurisdictions of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7 (for example,
22D U.S.C. sec. 2801).  Also includes
cases of sexual abuse, including of a
minor (18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 2241(a) (c),
2242(2)(B), and 2243) and in Federal
prisons (18 U.S.C. sec. 2244(a)).
Shock incarceration -- an intense
confinement program, consisting of a
highly regimented schedule that provides
the strict discipline, physical training, 
hard labor, drill, and ceremony 
characteristic of military basic training. 

Special maritime and territorial 
jurisdiction -- areas of Federal jurisdiction
outside the jurisdiction of any State,
including (1) the high seas, Great Lakes,
and connecting waterways; (2) Federal
lands; and (3) U.S.-owned aircraft in 
flight over the high seas (18 U.S.C. sec. 
7).

Split sentence --  See, "Mixed sentence."

Stale -- the case/matter is too old to
support successful prosecution.

Substantial assistance -- a form of
cooperation with the government in which
the defendant provides the government
with information, testimony, or other
assistance relating to the criminal 
activities of other persons in exchange 
for a sentence reduction.  Substantial
assistance provides the only mechanism
for judges to impose a sentence below an
applicable mandatory sentence (U.S.S.G.
5K1.1 as codified at 18 U.S.C. sec.
3553(e)).

Supervised release -- under the Sentencing 
Reform Act of 1984, a form of post-
imprisonment supervision to be imposed by 
the court as a part of the sentence of 
imprisonment at the time of initial sentencing.  
Unlike parole, a term of supervised release 
does not replace a portion of the sentence 
of imprisonment, but rather is an order of 
supervision in addition to any term of 
imprisonment imposed by the court (compare 
also with probation).

Surety bond -- an agreement by the defendant 
as a condition of his or her release that 
requires a third party (usually a bail bondsman) 
to promise to pay the full bail amount in the 
event that the defendant fails to appear.

Suspect -- a person who is under investigation 
or interrogation as a likely perpetrator 
of a specific criminal offense.

Tax law violations -- tax fraud offenses
such as income tax evasion and fraud;
counterfeiting any stamps with intent to
defraud the collection or payment of tax;
willfully failing to collect or pay tax; 
failure to obey summons to produce any papers
concerning taxes; failing to furnish receipts
for employees of tax withheld; failing to
furnish information relating to certain
trusts, annuity, and bond purchase plans;
putting fraudulent or false statements on
tax returns; and not obtaining a license for
a business that makes a profit from foreign
items.  Also included in this offense
category are violations of excise and
wagering tax laws and any other laws
listed below from the Internal Revenue
Service Code (for example, 26 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 3402, 4412, 5751, 5762(a1),
6047(a)(c), 6331, 6420(e2), 6674, 7121,
7201, 7203(c), 7204, 7206(a)(c),
7208(a)(c), 7210, 7213(b), (d), 7214(b),
7216, 7232, 7513, 7602, and 7604(b)). 

Technical violation -- failure to comply
with any of the conditions of pretrial
release, probation, or parole, excluding
alleged new criminal activity. May result 
in revocation of release status. Examples 
of conditions that may be imposed and then
violated include remaining within a
specified jurisdiction or appearing at
specified intervals for drug tests.

Termination -- at the pretrial services
stage:  execution of sentence, acquittal,
dismissal, diversion, or fugitive status; 
in the U.S. district court:  conviction,
acquittal, or dismissal; and at probation 
or supervised release:  the removal of a
person from supervision either for successful 
completion of the term of supervision or as 
the result of a revocation. 

Threats against the President   knowingly and 
willfully depositing in the mail, at any post 
office, or by any letter carrier a letter, 
paper, writing, print, missive, or document 
containing any threat to take the life of or 
to inflict bodily harm upon the President, 
Vice President, or any other officer in order 
of succession to the Presidency.  Knowingly 
and willfully making such threats in any way 
to the above-named people (18 U.S.C. sec. 871).

Traffic offenses -- driving while intoxicated, 
or any moving or parking violations on Federal 
lands (for example, 40 U.S.C. sec. 212(b)).

Trafficking -- knowingly and intentionally
importing or exporting any controlled
substance in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V 
(as defined by 21 U.S.C. sec.sec. 812). 
Includes manufacturing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, or possessing with
intent to manufacture, distribute, or sell 
a controlled substance or a counterfeit
substance; exporting any controlled
substance in schedules I-V; manufacturing
or distributing a controlled substance in
schedule I or II for purposes of unlawful
importation; or making or distributing any
punch, die, plate, stone, or any other thing
designed to reproduce the label upon any
drug or container, or removing or
obliterating the label or symbol of any 
drug or container.  Also includes knowingly
opening, maintaining or managing any
place for the purpose of manufacturing,
distributing, or using any controlled
substance (for example, 19 U.S.C. sec.
1590; 21 U.S.C. sec.sec. 333(e), 825(a)-(d), 
830(a), 841(a)-(b) (d)(e)(g), 842(a), 843
(a)(b), 845, 846, 848, 854, 856, 858, 859(
a)(b), 860(a), 861(c)(f), 952(a)(b), 953(a)
(e), 957, 959, 960(a)(b)(d), 961, 962, and 
963; and 46A U.S.C. sec.sec. 1903(g) and (j)).

Transportation -- violations of the Federal
statutes relating to the Motor Carrier Act,
which regulates (routes, rates) motor
carriers of freight and passengers in
interstate commerce.

Transportation of stolen property --
transporting, selling, or receiving stolen
goods, stolen securities, stolen moneys,
stolen cattle, fraudulent State tax stamps,
or articles used in counterfeiting, if the
above articles or goods involve or
constitute interstate or foreign commerce
(18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 2315, 2317). 

Trial conviction -- conviction by judge or
jury after trial.

True bill -- an indictment.

United States -- includes the outlying
territories (Guam, Puerto Rico, Northern
Marianas Islands, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands) and the territory occupied by the
50 States and the District of Columbia.

U.S. attorneys -- all United States
attorneys.  Prosecutorial data in this
Compendium come from the Central
System and Central Charge Files of the
Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys.

Unsecured bond -- an agreement by the
defendant as a condition of his or her
release in which the defendant agrees to
pay full bond amount in the event of
nonappearance at trial, but is not required
to post security as a condition to release.

Violation (of pretrial release, probation,
or parole) -- allegation of a new crime or 
a technical violation while on pretrial
release, probation, or parole.

Violent offenses -- threatening, attempting, 
or actually using physical force against a 
person. Includes murder, negligent manslaughter, 
assault, robbery, sexual abuse, kidnaping, and 
threats against the President. (See also, 
specific offenses for citations.)

Weapons violations -- violations of any of
the provisions of 18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 922
and 923 concerning the manufacturing,
importing, possessing, receiving, and
licensing of firearms and ammunition. 
Includes manufacturing, selling,
possessing, or transporting (within any
territory or possession of the United
States, within Indian country, or within the
special maritime and territorial jurisdiction
of the United States) (18 U.S.C. sec.sec.
7) any switchblade knife; or making,
receiving, possessing, or transporting a
firearm not registered in the National
Firearms Registration Transfer Record. 
Also, engaging in importing, manufacturing, 
or dealing in firearms if not registered with 
the secretary in the Internal Revenue Service 
District in which the business is conducted or 
not having paid a special occupational tax. In 
addition, this code covers cases where in a 
crime of violence or drug trafficking enhanced
punishment is handed down when committed with a 
deadly weapon (for example, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1242; 
18 U.S.C. sec.sec. 922(a)(c)(e) (g)(i)(k)(m)(n)
(q), 923, 924(a)(c)(f)(h) and 930; 26 U.S.C.
sec.sec. 5801, 5811, 5821, 5841, 5843, 5851, and 
5861(b)(d)(h)(j)(l); 40 U.S.C. sec. 193f(a); and 
49A U.S.C. sec. 1472(q)).

End of file
08/15/02 ih
     