U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Compendium of Federal 
Justice Statistics, 1999


April 2001, NCJ 186179


---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cfjs99.htm 

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojb.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cfjs
-----------------------------------------------------------

This Bureau of Justice Statistics Report was
prepared by the Urban Institute under the
supervision of Steven K. Smith and John Scalia, 
Jr.,of the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS).  This report was prepared under BJS
grant number 98-BJ-CX-K 015. Principal
staff at the Urban Institute were Laura
Winterfield, William J. Sabol, William
Adams,  Avi Bhati, Barbara Parthasarathy, 
Jake Rosenfeld, and Yan Yuan. Layout and
design were by David Williams. Tom Hester
and Ellen Goldberg of BJS provided editorial 
review.  

This report is made possible through the 
cooperation of the following Federal agencies 
and their staffs:  The United States Marshals
Service (USMS), the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), the Administrative 
Office of the United States Courts
(AOUSC), the Executive Office for U.S.
Attorneys (EOUSA), and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP).  The staff who
provided expert advice about the source
records include: Joe Briggs (USMS);
Steven Schlesinger and Catherine Whitaker
(AOUSC); Siobhan Sperin and Barbara Tone
(EOUSA); and Gerald Gaes and Nancy Miller
(BOP). 

The contents of this document do not necessarily 
reflect the views or policies of the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics or the U.S. Department of 
Justice.  

BJS authorizes any person to reproduce, publish, 
translate, or otherwise use all or any part of 
the material in this publication; citation to 
source, however, is appreciated.

An electronic version of this report and the
data underlying graphics may be found on
the BJS Internet Home Page (http://www.
ojp.usdoj.go v/bjs/).  The BJS-sponso red 
Federal Justice Statistics Resource
Center (FJSRC) Internet Home Page (http://fjsrc. 
urban.org) provides online access to the Federal
Justice database.  Users may download data from
the Federal Justice database for independent 
analysis or use the online query system to
quickly obtain customized statistics.

To order additional copies of this report
or CD-ROMs containing the Federal Justice
database, call the BJS Clearinghouse at
1-800-732-3277.

Contents

Highlights
Arrest
Prosecution
Pretrial release
Adjudication
Sentencing
Appeals
Corrections

Introduction
Organization of the Compendium
Modifications in the 1999 Compendium
Notes to reader

System overview

Chapter 1.  Arrests for Federal 
offenses

Arrests by offense categories
Arrests by law enforcement agencies
Arrests across demographic groups
Arrests by Drug Enforcement
Administration agents

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 2.  Prosecution

U.S. attorneys' decisions
Suspects in matters received
Suspects in matters concluded

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 3.  Pretrial release

Types of pretrial release
Factors relating to release or detention
Pretrial outcomes by offense categories
Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups
Length of pretrial detention

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 4.  Adjudication

Defendants in cases filed
Defendants in cases terminated
Case processing times
Convictions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted defendants

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 5.  Sentencing

Offenders convicted and sentences 
imposed
Average prison sentences imposed
Relationship between sentence imposed 
and mode of conviction
Characteristics of offenders sentenced
to prison

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 6.  Appeals

Appeals filed
Appeals terminated

Tables

Chapter notes

Chapter 7.  Corrections

Federal offenders under supervision
Outcomes of offenders completing 
supervision
Characteristics of offenders completing
supervision
Admissions, releases, and standing 
population of Federal prisoners
Federal prisoners: First releases and 
time served
Characteristics of Federal prisoners

Tables

Chapter notes

Methodology

The Federal justice database
Table construction and interpretation
Offense classifications
Source agencies for Compendium data 
tables

Glossary

Tables

Chapter 1.  Arrests for Federal 
offenses

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Arrests for Federal offenses, by 
offense
Arrests for Federal offenses and 
booked by USMS, by Federal law 
enforcement agency
Characteristics of Federal arrestees
Characteristics of suspects arrested 
by Drug Enforcement Administration 
agents, by type of drug
Characteristics of suspects arrested 
by Drug Enforcement Administration agents, 
by weapon use at time of arrest

Chapter 2.  Prosecution

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Suspects in matters received by 
U.S. attorneys, by offense
Disposition of suspects in matters 
concluded, by offense
Suspects in matters concluded and 
declined, by investigating agency
Basis for declination of prosecution 
by U.S. attorneys
Disposition of matters declined
for prosecution by U.S. attorneys, 
by offense
Mean and median processing times 
from receipt to filing or declination, 
by offense

Chapter 3.  Pretrial release

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Type of pretrial release, by offense
Type of pretrial release,
by defendant characteristics
Form of pretrial detention,
by offense
Form of pretrial detention,
by defendant characteristics
Pretrial detention hearing 
outcomes, by offense
Pretrial detention hearing 
outcomes, by defendant 
characteristics
Behavior of defendants released 
prior to trial, by offense
Behavior of defendants released 
prior to trial, by type of release
Behavior of defendants released 
prior to trial, by defendant 
characteristics
Length of pretrial detention, by form 
of release or detention, and most 
serious offense charged

Chapter 4.  Adjudication

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Defendants in cases commenced, 
by offense
Disposition of cases terminated,
by offense
Time from filing to disposition of 
cases terminated
Dispositions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted 
offenders

Chapter 5.  Sentencing

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Sentence types in cases
terminated, by offense
Type and length of sentences
imposed, by offense
Sentences imposed on convicted 
offenders, by offense of conviction 
and method of disposition
Convicted offenders sentenced to
incarceration, by offense and
offender characteristics
Average incarceration sentence 
lengths imposed, by offense and
offender characteristics
Median incarceration sentence 
lengths imposed, by offense and
offender characteristics

Chapter 6.  Appeals,  79

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Criminal appeals filed, by type of 
criminal case and offense
Criminal appeals filed and criminal 
appeals terminated, by offense
Criminal appeals terminated, by 
type of criminal case and offense
Disposition of criminal appeals 
terminated on the merits, by offense
Criminal appeals cases terminated 
on the merits, by nature of offense

Chapter 7.  Corrections

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Federal offenders under 
supervision, by offense
Characteristics of Federal offenders 
under supervision, by offense
Outcomes of probation supervision, 
by offense
Characteristics of offenders terminating
probation supervision
Outcomes of supervised release,
by offense
Characteristics of offenders terminating
supervised release
Outcomes of parole, by offense
Characteristics of offenders terminating
parole
Admissions and releases of Federal 
prisoners, by offense
Characteristics of Federal prison 
population, by major offense 
category
Number of first releases from
Federal prison, by release method 
and sentence length
Average time to first release and 
percent of sentence served, for 
prisoners released by standard 
methods
Mean time served to first release, 
by length of sentence imposed, offense, 
and type of case, for prisoners 
released by standard methods
Percent of sentence served to first 
release, by length of sentence imposed, 
offense, and type of case, for prisoners 
released by standard methods
Characteristics of first releases from 
prison, by offense, all releases
Mean time served to first release 
from Federal prison for prisoners
released by standard methods,
by offense and offender
characteristics

Figures

Highlights

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure H   Average length of sentences
           imposed, by offense

Figure H   Admissions to Federal Bureau of
           Prisons, releases, and prisoners at
           yearend, by offense

Figure H   Average time to first release,
           standard releases, by offense

System overview
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure S   System overview, Federal criminal
           case processing

Figure S   Federal criminal case processing

Chapter 1.  Arrests for Federal offenses
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Type of drug involved in drug
           arrests, by race of arrestee

Figure     Type of immigration arrests

Chapter 2.  Prosecution
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Suspects in matters 
           concluded: Percentage of 
           suspects that were prosecuted, 
           declined, referred to other 
           authorities for disposition, or
           disposed by U.S. magistrate

Figure     Of suspects in matters declined,
           percent referred or handled in 
           other prosecutions or settled
           through alternative resolution

Chapter 3.  Pretrial release
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Percent of defendants released
           prior to case disposition, 
           by offense category

Figure     Detention hearings held, 
           by offense category

Figure     Pretrial release rates,
           by defendant characteristics

Chapter 4.  Adjudication
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Disposition of cases terminated

Figure     Average time from filing to
           disposition of cases terminated, 
           by offense

Chapter 5.  Sentencing
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Rates of incarceration and
           probation for offenders 
           convicted and sentenced
           in cases terminated

Figure     Incarceration and probation
           sentence lengths (in months) 
           of offenders convicted and 
           sentenced in cases terminated

Figure     Average prison sentences imposed
           on defendants convicted at trial 
           or by guilty plea

Chapter 6.  Appeals
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Types of criminal appeal cases

Figure     Appeals cases filed, by type 
           of offense

Figure     Disposition of criminal appeals
           terminated

Chapter 7.  Corrections
October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Figure     Violation rates of offenders
           terminating probation, supervised
           release, or parole, by type of
           violation

Figure     Violation rates of offenders
           completing probation, supervised
           release, or parole, by category of
           offense

Figure     Rates of violation of conditions
           of supervision, by level of education

Figure     Mean lengths of sentence imposed
           and time served (in months) for
           offenders released from prison for
           the first time

Figure     Characteristics of first releasees

------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

The number of suspects investigated by 
U.S. attorneys increased by 2%between 
1998 and 1999, from 115,692 to 117,994; 
between 1990 and 1999, the number of
investigations increased by 17%.  About 
three-quarters of those for which the 
investigation was concluded were
prosecuted -- either before a U.S. district 
court judge (60%) or before a U.S. magistrate 
(13%) -- and 27% of those investigated were 
not prosecuted by U.S. attorneys.  

The number of defendants prosecuted in 
Federal courts increased by 2% between 
1998 and 1999, from 78,172 to 80,031.
 
The number of offenders under Federal 
correctional supervision increased 52% 
between 1990 and 1999.  At the end of 
fiscal year 1999, the number of 
offenders under Federal correctional 
supervision was 215,687 compared to 
141,790 during 1990. 

At the end of fiscal year 1999, the 
number of Federal inmates serving a 
sentence of imprisonment increased by 
10,260 to 119,185.  The number under 
community supervision was 96,502.  Almost 
two-thirds of those under community 
supervision were on post-incarceration 
supervised release (59,644) or parole 
(5,129). 

Arrest 

During 1999, 109,857 offenders were 
arrested by Federal law enforcement 
agencies for violations of Federal law. 
A third of all arrests were for public 
order offenses, 29% for drug offenses, 
15% for property offenses, 14% for 
supervision violations, 4% for violent 
offenses, and 4% to secure and
safeguard a material witness.

About 72% of all arrests for Federal 
offenses were made by agencies of the 
Department of Justice, while Treasury
Department agencies accounted for 11% 
of all arrests.  Within the Department 
of Justice, 36% of arrests were made by 
the U.S. Marshals Service, 33% of arrests 
were made by the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 15% each were 
made by the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
and the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Prosecution

During 1999 U.S. attorneys initiated 
criminal investigations involving 117,994 
suspects, and they concluded their investigations 
of 113,933 suspects.  Thirty-nine percent of the
suspects were investigated for public-order, 32% 
for drug, 24% for property, and about 5% for 
violent offenses.

The number of suspects investigated for 
immigration offenses increased between 1998 
and 1999, from 14,114 to 15,539.  

Of the suspects in criminal matters concluded, 
U.S. attorneys prosecuted 68,384 in U.S. 
district courts and 14,545 were disposed of 
before U.S. magistrates.  During 1999, U.S.
attorneys declined 27% of matters concluded.

Suspects in criminal matters involving drug 
or violent offenses were slightly more likely 
to be prosecuted in a U.S. district court (77% 
and 59%, respectively) than were the suspects
involved in public-order or property offenses 
(53% and 50%, respectively).  Suspects involved 
in property offenses (such as fraud) or regulatory 
public-order offenses were more likely to
be declined for prosecution (42% and 63%, 
respectively) than were suspects investigated 
for drug or violent offenses (17% and 35%, 
respectively).

Pretrial release

During 1999 about 47% of the 65,559 defendants 
who terminated pretrial services were released 
at some time prior to their criminal trial.  
Defendants charged with property offenses such 
as embezzlement, forgery, and larceny and
those charged with regulatory public-order 
offenses or tax law violations were more 
likely to be released prior to trial (between 
80% and 96% of these defendants were released) 
than were defendants charged with violent 
offenses, drug trafficking, weapons, or 
immigration offenses (between 10% and 46% of 
these defendants were released).  

The proportion of defendants released prior 
to their trial decreased from 62% during 1990 
to 47% during 1999. Defendants charged with 
violent, drug, weapon, or immigration offenses 
were considerably less likely to be released 
during 1999 than during 1990.  During 1990, 
45% of defendants charged with violent offenses, 
54% of drug defendants, 63% of weapon defendants, 
and 30% of immigration defendants were released 
at some point prior to trial.  By contrast, 
during 1999, 35% of defendants charged with violent 
offenses, 41% of drug defendants, 46% of weapon 
defendants, and 10% of immigration defendants 
were released.

Defendants having a prior criminal history 
of serious or violent crimes were less likely 
to be released than those without a prior 
criminal history; defendants with more criminal 
history were less likely to be released than 
those with less criminal history.  Twenty-five 
percent of the defendants with a prior violent 
felony conviction were released before trial, 
while 59% of defendants with no prior convictions 
were released. Forty-nine percent of defendants 
with one prior conviction were released, as 
compared to 38% of defendants having two
to four prior convictions and 27% of defendants 
having five or more prior convictions.

About 82% of defendants released prior to 
trial completed their periods of release 
without violating the conditions of their
release.  About 18% of defendants released 
violated the conditions of their release, 
and 7% of defendants had their release 
revoked.  Defendants charged with drug 
and violent offenses were more likely to 
commit at least one violation of their 
conditions of release (29% and 23%, 
respectively) and to have their release 
revoked (10% and 12%, respectively) than
were other defendants.

Defendants released during 1999 were 
more likely to violate the conditions 
of their pretrial release than those 
released during 1990.  During 1999, 18% 
of those released at some point prior to 
trial violated a condition of their 
release.  During 1990, 12% violated their 
release conditions.

Adjudication

During 1999, 80,031 defendants were 
charged in Federal courts with a criminal 
offense, about 84% of whom were charged 
with felonies.  Of the defendants charged 
with felonies, 41% were prosecuted for 
drug trafficking, 30% for public-order, 
22% for property, and 4% for violent 
offenses.

The number of defendants charged with a 
felony immigration offense increased by 
14% between 1998 and 1999, from 9,254 
to 10,550. The number charged with a 
felony drug offense increased by 5%, 
from 28,021 to 29,306.

Criminal cases were concluded against 
75,723 defendants during 1999, 83% of 
whom had been charged with felonies. 
The proportion of defendants convicted 
in the Federal courts increased from 
81% during 1990 to 87% during 1999. 
Additionally, the proportion of defendants 
who pleaded guilty increased from 88% 
during 1990 to 95% during 1999.

Ninety-one percent of defendants charged 
with felonies were convicted.  The conviction 
rate was about the same for all major offense 
categories: 92% of defendants charged with
public-order offenses and 90% of violent, 
property, and drug defendants.

Sentencing

Defendants convicted during 1999 were more 
likely to be sentenced to prison than those 
convicted during 1990.  During 1999, 72% of 
defendants were sentenced to prison compared
to 60% of those sentenced during 1990.  About 
93% of felony drug offenders and 92% of violent 
felony offenders received prison sentences 
during 1999, as did 84% of felony public-order 
offenders and 59% of felony property offenders.

Average length of sentences imposed,
by offense, October 1, 1998 -
September 30, 1999
 
Most serious             Average sen-
offense of conviction    tence length
 
All offenses                 57.8 mo
 
Felonies                     59.4
Violent offenses             87.7
Property offenses            24.0
Drug offenses                75.4
Public-order offenses        48.7
 
Misdemeanors                 10.7
 
The 47,659 offenders sentenced to prison 
received, on average, 57.8 months of 
imprisonment.  Offenders sentenced
for violent felony offenses and felony 
drug offenses received longer average 
prison terms (87.7 and 75.4 months,
respectively) than those convicted of 
felony property and public-order offenses 
(24.0 and 48.7 months, respectively).

While the proportion of defendants 
sentenced to prison is at an all-time high, 
average prison sentences have declined from
the peak attained during 1992.  During 1992 
the average prison term imposed was 62.6 
months; for violent felony offenders, the 
average term imposed was 94.8 months; for
drug felony offenders, the average term was 
84.1 months.

Appeals

Between 1994 and 1999, the number of appeals 
received by the U.S. Courts of Appeals remained 
relatively constant   between 10,000 and 11,000 
annually.  However, the proportion of criminal 
defendants appealing some aspect of their 
conviction decreased from 21% during 1994 to 16%
during 1999.

During 1999, 10,251 criminal appeals were 
filed.  Forty-seven percent of the appeals 
filed challenged both the conviction and
sentence imposed.  Only 4% of appeals were 
filed by the Government.  Of the 10,675 
appeals terminated during 1999, 77% (or 
8,260) were terminated on the merits.  In 
84% of the appeals terminated on the merits, 
the district court ruling was affirmed, 
at least in part.

Corrections

Community supervision

Between 1990 and 1999, the number of 
offenders on community supervision increased 
by 14%, from 84,801 during 1990 to 96,502 
during 1999.  While nearly equal proportions 
of offenders were serving terms of probation 
and post-incarceration supervision (parole 
or supervised release) during 1990, during 
1999, almost two-thirds were serving a term 
of post-incarceration supervision (62% 
supervised release and 5% parole) while 
33% were on probation.  Drug offenders 
comprised 11% of offenders on probation, 
53% of offenders serving terms of supervised 
release, and 52% of offenders on parole.  
Property offenders comprised 38% of offenders 
on probation, 26% of offenders serving terms 
of supervised release, and 11% of offenders 
on parole.

A total of 16,002 offenders completed their 
terms of probation during 1999.  Most of 
these offenders (81%) completed their terms 
of probation successfully.  Eleven percent of
probationers terminating supervision during 
1999 committed technical violations; 5% 
committed new crimes.

A total of 21,570 offenders completed terms 
of supervised release during 1999.  Of these 
offenders, 64% successfully completed their 
terms without violating conditions of release;
20% committed technical violations; and 13% 
committed new crimes.

Admissions to Federal Bureau of Prisons,
releases, and prisoners at yearend, by offense,
October 1, 1998 - September 30, 1999
 
Most serious offense   All          All         Population
of conviction          admissions   releases    at yearend
 
All offenses             63,986      52,472      119,185
Violent offenses            8.1%        8.6%        11.2%
Property offenses          16.5        19.8          7.3
Drug offenses              41.4        39.2         57.4
Public-order offenses      32.3        31.0         22.2
 
Note:  Percentages of offenses do not total to 100% due
to offenders whose most serious offense of conviction is
unknown or indeterminable.

A total of 2,503 offenders completed terms 
of parole during 1999.  Of these offenders, 
55% successfully completed their terms without 
violating conditions of release; 26% committed
technical violations; and 14% committed new 
crimes.

Prison

Between 1990 and 1999, the number of inmates 
serving a sentence of imprisonment more than 
doubled, from 56,989 during 1990 to 
119,185 during 1999.

During 1999, 47,391 prisoners were 
received by the Bureau of Prisons 
from U.S. district court commitments.  
An additional 16,595 prisoners were 
returned to Federal prison for 
violating conditions of probation, 
parole, or supervised release, or 
were admitted to Federal prison 
from elsewhere than a U.S. district
court.

Drug offenders -- who comprised a 
little over 50% of persons admitted 
into Federal prison -- comprised 
the largest percentage of persons 
in prison (57%) at the end of 1999.

During 1999, 37,672 prisoners were 
released for the first time from 
Federal prison after commitment by 
a U.S. district court. Of these, 
33,748 were released by standard 
methods and 3,924 were released by 
extraordinary means (death, treaty 
transfer, sentence commutation, or 
drug treatment).  An additional 
14,800 prisoners were released 
from subsequent commitments to 
Federal prison.

Time served by Federal offenders 
increased from 19 months during 1990 
to 28 months during 1999.  Additionally, 
the proportion of the sentence 
served increased from 65% during
1990 to 87% during 1999.  

Violent and drug offenders were among 
those offenders who served the longest 
prison terms (53 months and 40 months,
respectively).

Average time to first release, standard
releases, by offense, October 1, 1998 -
September 30, 1999
 
Most serious original       Mean time
offense of conviction       served
 
All offenses                 28.0 mo
Violent offenses             53.3
Property offenses            15.6
Drug offenses                40.1
Public-order offenses        19.1
 
Introduction

This Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) report presents an overview 
of case processing in the Federal 
criminal justice system.  The data 
presented are compiled from the 
BJS Federal Justice Statistics 
Program (FJSP) database.  The FJSP 
database includes data provided by 
the U.S. Marshals Service, Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), 
Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts, Executive Office for 
the U.S. Attorneys, Federal Bureau 
of Prisons, and U.S. Sentencing 
Commission.  The Administrative 
Office of the U.S. Courts, in 
addition to providing data 
describing defendants in cases 
processed by the Federal judiciary, 
provides data describing defendants 
processed by the Federal pretrial 
services agencies and the Federal 
probation and supervision service.  
The BJS Federal Justice Statistics 
database is archived on CD-ROM, copies 
of which are available from the BJS 
Clearinghouse.  The data can be
downloaded from the Federal Justice 
Statistics Resource Center located 
at http://fjsrc.urban.org.

Each agency reports on those 
defendants it processed during 
a given year in an annual statistical 
report.  These agency reports are 
often incomparable due to the varying 
methods the agencies use to report 
case processing activities.  As 
reported by an interagency working 
group, headed by BJS, the differences 
in the case processing statistics are 
attributable, in part, to the differing 
needs and missions of the agencies.  
The working group found the following 
differences in reported statistics:

*  the universe of cases reported 
during a given period -- some agencies 
report on those case processing events 
that occurred during a particular period, 
whereas others report on those events 
recorded during a particular period; 
and

*  many of the commonly used case 
processing statistics   suspect/defendant 
processed, offense committed, disposition, 
and sentence imposed -- are defined 
differently across agencies.

BJS, through its FJSP, has recognized 
the incomparability of these annual 
statistical reports and has attempted 
to reconcile many of the differences 
identified by the working group.  For
instance, by combining databases from 
several years, BJS is able to report 
on those cases that actually occurred 
during the reporting period.  
Additionally, commonly used case 
processing statistics are made 
comparable across stages by applying 
uniform definitions to data obtained 
from each agency.  Because definitions 
in the FJSP are consistent with those 
categories in BJS programs describing 
State defendants convicted, sentenced,
or imprisoned, the comparison of 
Federal and State case processing 
statistics is facilitated.

The 1999 Compendium, 14th in a series 
which includes 1984, 1985, 1986, 1988, 
1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 
1996, 1997, and 1998, describes 
defendants processed at each stage of 
the Federal justice system -- arrest 
by Federal law enforcement agencies 
(chapter 1), investigation and 
prosecution by the U.S. attorneys 
(chapter 2), pretrial release 
or detention (chapter 3), adjudication 
in the U.S. district courts (chapter 4),
sentencing (chapter 5), appeal of the 
conviction and/or sentence imposed 
(chapter 6), and corrections 
(chapter 7) -- for the 12-month period 
ending September 30, 1999 (the Federal 
fiscal year).  Prior to 1994, the 
Compendium was reported on a calendar-
year basis.

The tables presented report events 
that occurred during the Federal fiscal 
year -- October 1, 1998 -- September 
30, 1999. Generally, the tables 
include both individual and organizational
defendants.  Organizational defendants 
are not included in tables describing 
pretrial release and detention or tables
showing defendants sentenced to 
incarceration.  Juvenile offenders charged 
as adults are included in the reported
statistics.  Felony and misdemeanor 
distinctions are provided where possible 
(see "Offense classifications" in 
Methodology).

Organization of the Compendium

Each chapter of the Compendium 
describes a major stage in the 
processing of criminal suspects 
and defendants.  Each chapter 
contains Chapter notes that 
describe the universes of data 
used in the tables and information 
relevant to the interpretation of 
individual tables.  The Compendium 
contains the following:

Chapter 1. This chapter describes 
arrests made by Federal law
enforcement agencies for violations 
of Federal law, including the 
characteristics of arrestees.

Chapter 2.  This chapter describes 
decisions made by Federal
prosecutors in screening criminal 
matters and the characteristics of 
defendants in cases prosecuted or 
declined for prosecution.

Chapter 3.  This chapter describes 
the pretrial release and detention 
practices of the Federal judiciary, 
including the characteristics of 
defendants detained or released 
pending trial.

Chapter 4.  This chapter describes 
actions by the Federal judiciary in 
adjudicating defendants in cases 
filed by the U.S. attorneys, including 
the offense charged and characteristics 
of defendants convicted.

Chapter 5.  This chapter describes 
the sentences imposed by the Federal 
judiciary on convicted defendants, 
including the characteristics of 
defendants sentenced.

Chapter 6.  This chapter describes 
appeals of criminal convictions and 
sentences imposed in the Federal 
courts, including the original 
offense charged.

Chapter 7.  This chapter describes 
defendants under Federal
correctional supervision -- probation, 
parole, and supervised release 
-- including the outcome of the 
supervision (successful completion 
or violations), admissions to and 
releases from Federal prison, and 
time served by Federal inmates.

Methodology.  This section describes 
the procedures followed in analyzing 
data and developing tables.

Glossary.  This section contains 
definitions for terms used in
the Compendium.  Since many terms 
used in the text and tables
have specialized meanings (either 
because they refer to Federal
law or because of reporting procedures 
by the Federal agencies supplying 
the data), readers are encouraged 
to check the glossary for exact 
definitions of tabulated data.

Comparing Case Processing Statistics.  
This document, prepared by an 
interagency working group tasked 
to reconcile differences in Federal 
criminal case processing statistics, 
identifies and describes the major 
differences in the way Federal 
criminal justice agencies collect, 
tabulate, and report criminal case
processing events.

Modifications in the 1999 
Compendium

Figure S.2 shows counts of suspects, 
defendants, and offenders
in various stages of the Federal 
criminal justice system. 
Previously, this figure presented 
this information as a percent
of suspects investigated.

Two new tables have been added to 
Chapter 1.  These show characteristics 
of suspects arrested by DEA agents, 
the kinds of drugs for which these 
arrests were made, and the types 
of weapon used at the time of arrest, 
if suspect was armed.

Sex-related offenses have been 
renamed and reclassified in the
1999 Compendium.  "Rape" has been 
renamed to "Sexual abuse" and
now includes all violent sexual 
offenses.  All  "nonviolent sex
offenses" are now reclassified 
under "Other public-order offenses."  
Tables in all chapters reflect 
this change.

Tables displaying the race of the 
suspect/defendant/offender now show 
four races, where previously two 
were displayed.  In addition to 
"white" and "black," these tables 
now display relevant statistics for 
"Native American" and "Asian/Pacific
Islander" categories.

Notes to reader

The tables in the Compendium were 
constructed to permit valid
comparisons within each table 
and to allow the reader to compare
percentages (but not raw totals) 
across tables.  It should be
understood, however, that the 
total number of subjects/defendants
shown in a particular table may not 
equal the number of subjects/defendants 
involved in a particular stage of 
processing, since some records could 
not be linked and some data sources 
did not include information on 
particular data elements classified 
in a particular table.  Data notes 
indicate the exact universe for 
individual tables.

The Compendium is a statistical 
presentation of Federal criminal
justice information with limited 
analyses of trends or explanatory 
factors underlying the statistics.  
Analyses of Federal justice 
statistics may be found in special 
reports and other publications, 
some of which are cited in the 
Compendium. Assessment of changing 
patterns in the Compendium tabulations
may depend on detailed examination 
of subcategories not shown in the 
tabulations or may require other 
sources of information, such as 
knowledge of legislation or Federal 
agency procedures.

Chapter 1.
  
Arrests for Federal offenses 

Discussion 

Tables

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Arrests for Federal offenses, by offense  
Arrests for Federal offenses and booked by
USMS, by Federal law enforcement agency  
Characteristics of Federal arrestees  
Characteristics of suspects arrested by
Drug Enforcement Administration agents,
by type of drug  
Characteristics of suspects arrested by
Drug Enforcement Administration agents,
by weapon use at time of arrest
  
Chapter notes

Sixty-six Federal agencies employ full-time
personnel empowered to make arrests.  As of
June 1998, these agencies employed about
83,000 officers. ***Footnote 1: Brian A. Reaves
and Timothy C. Hart, Federal Law Enforcement
Offices, 1998, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Washington, DC (NCJ-177607).***  More than 
half (56%) of all law enforcement officers were 
employed by the Department of Justice.  The 
Department of Treasury employed 24% of all 
officers.

Offenders arrested by Federal agencies are
transferred to the custody of the U.S.
Marshals Service for processing, transportation, 
and detention.  ***Footnote 2: The Federal 
agency making the arrest may be different 
from the Federal agency initiating the 
investigation involving the arrestee.  
Statistics describing agencies initiating 
investigations are shown in table 2.3
Of chapter 2, "Prosecution."***  During 1999,
the U.S. Marshals Service received 109,857
offenders for processing from the Federal law
enforcement agencies, including nearly 29,000
offenders arrested by deputy U.S. Marshals.

Arrests by offense categories

During 1999, 109,857 offenders were arrested
by Federal law enforcement agencies for
violations of Federal law.  A third of all
arrests were for public order offenses; 29%
for drug offenses; 15% for property offenses;
14% for supervision violations; 4% for violent
offenses; and 4% to secure and safeguard a
material witness.

Approximately 39% of drug arrests involved
cocaine; 29%, marijuana; 11%, amphetamine (or
methamphetamine); 7%, heroin; and the
remainder other drugs or drug paraphernalia.
 
Almost two-thirds of arrests for public-order
offenses were immigration offenses.  Most
(82%) of these were for illegal entry into the
United States; 13% involved alien smuggling;
4% involved false claims of citizenship by
entrants to the United States; and about 2%
involved other immigration violations.

Arrests by law enforcement agencies

During 1999, 72% of all arrests for Federal
offenses were made by components of the
Department of Justice; the Treasury components
accounted for 11% of all arrests.  In
addition, 3% of arrests were made by State and
local agencies and 7% of offenders were
arrested after voluntarily reporting to the
U.S. Marshals following a summons.

Within the Department of Justice, 36% of
arrests were made by the U.S. Marshals
Service, 34% were made by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, 15% each were made by
the FBI and the Drug Enforcement Administration, 
and less than 1% were made by other Department 
of Justice components.

Within the Treasury Department, 59% of arrests
were made by the U.S. Customs Service, 20%
were made by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms, 15% were made by the Secret
Service, and 6% were made by the IRS.

Arrests across demographic groups

Most (85%) of offenders arrested by Federal 
law enforcement agencies during 1999 were male.  
Most (71%) were white and about a quarter were 
black. Individuals between the 21 and 40 years 
comprised nearly 70% of all those arrested.  
A third of those arrested were identified 
as noncitizens.

Most (67%) offenders arrested for drug
offenses were white, while 31% were black.  
Of those offenders arrested on charges 
involving cocaine, 59% were white and 40% 
were black. Of those offenders arrested 
on charges involving marijuana, 92% were 
white and 7% were black.

Arrests by Drug Enforcement 
Administration agents

During 1999, agents of the Drug Enforcement
Administration arrested 37,746 suspects.  
Some of these suspects were referred to U.S.
attorneys for a prosecutorial decision;
others were referred to a State prosecutor. 
Suspects arrested by DEA agents were
predominantly white (67%) non-Hispanic 
(62%) males (83%) who were U.S. citizens 
(77%).  The highest proportion of them 
were between 21 and 30 years old (43%).

Whites were usually the highest proportion 
of suspects arrested for all drug types, 
with the exception of crack cocaine, where 
blacks were the highest proportion.

Almost 4% of all suspects were armed at the
time of arrest. Males were almost twice as
likely to be armed at arrest as females 
(5% versus 3%). Non-Hispanics (5%) and U.S.
citizens (5%) were more likely to be armed
at time of arrest than were Hispanics (3%)
and U.S. noncitizens.

If armed at arrest, offenders from all
demographic subgroups were more likely to 
be armed with a handgun than any other 
weapon.

Chapter notes

Tables 1.1-1.3 were derived from the U.S.
Marshals Prisoner Tracking System.  Only
records of arrests made during October 1,
1998, through September 30, 1999, were
selected.  Information on individual 
cases, offenses, and detainees were used 
to construct the tables.

Tables 1.4-1.5 were derived from the 
DEA Defendants Statistical System.  
Only records of arrests made during 
October 1, 1998, through September 30, 
1999, were selected. Some suspects
arrested by DEA agents may be transferred 
to State or local jurisdiction and not to 
the U.S. Marshals service.  Therefore, 
counts of DEA arrests from tables 1.4-1.5
can be expected to be higher than 
those reported in table 1.2.

Offenses of arrest were classified by the 
U.S. Marshals into their four-digit offense 
codes. These were then aggregated into the 
offense categories shown in the tables.  
These categories are similar, but may not be
directly comparable, to categories used in
other tables of this Compendium.

Chapter 2
Prosecution

Discussion

Tables
October 1, 1998 -- September 
30, 1999

Suspects in matters received 
by U.S. attorneys, by offense
Disposition of suspects in 
matters concluded, by offense
Suspects in matters concluded 
and declined, by investigating 
agency Basis for declination of 
prosecution by U.S. attorneys
Disposition of matters declined 
for prosecution by U.S. attorneys, 
by offense
Mean and median processing times 
from receipt to filing or declination, 
by offense

Chapter notes

Federal criminal cases may be brought 
by the U. S. Attorney's Office, by 
the Criminal Division of the U.S. 
Department of Justice, or by other 
authorized agencies such as the U.S. 
Marshals Service. The 93 U.S. 
attorneys serve as the chief Federal 
law enforcement officers within their 
respective districts.
  
Investigations are most commonly 
referred to a U.S. attorney by a 
Federal investigative agency 
(primarily the Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation; the Postal 
Inspection Service; the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms; 
and the Secret Service), by the Criminal 
Division, or by a State or local 
investigative agency.  Investigations 
may also be initiated -- and cases
brought directly -- by U.S. attorneys 
or by the Criminal Division of the U.S. 
Department of Justice.  This chapter 
reports only on suspects that were at 
least partially investigated by U.S.
attorneys.
  
U.S. attorneys' decisions

After criminal investigations are 
initiated and criminal suspects
are referred to them, U.S. 
attorneys may file charges against
defendants in a U.S. district 
court, or they may decline to file
these charges for reasons such as 
weak or insufficient evidence, minimal 
Federal interest, lack of resources, 
or lack of criminal intent.  Matters 
that are declined may be referred 
to another authority for prosecution 
or be settled through alternative 
resolution procedures.  U.S. 
attorneys may also file cases before 
U.S. magistrates, who have the 
authority to adjudicate misdemeanor 
offenses (18 U.S.C. sec. 3401). 
Because of the relatively less serious 
nature of these cases, and because 
they are handled by magistrates, the 
U.S. attorneys count these cases as 
criminal matters disposed by U.S. 
magistrates.  

The decision to prosecute a suspect 
in a criminal matter depends upon 
many factors, including the Attorney 
General's priorities, U.S. attorney 
priorities and resources, laws
governing each type of offense, 
and the strength of evidence
in each case.  

During 1999, 60% of suspects in 
all offense categories were prosecuted 
before U.S. district court judges, 
while an additional 13% were handled 
by U.S. magistrates.  Suspects were 
prosecuted at different rates depending 
on their offense. Suspects involved 
in violent and drug offenses were more
likely to be prosecuted before U.S. 
district court judges than were those 
involved in property and public-order 
offenses.  Suspects involved in drug 
offenses were the most likely (77%)
to be prosecuted.  Suspects involved 
in property offenses were the least 
likely to be prosecuted (50%).  However,
suspects involved in property offenses 
were more likely to have their 
matters declined and not referred 
to other authorities for prosecution 
(34%) than were suspects involved
in other types of criminal matters.  
These cases were resolved by other 
means, including restitution, 
civil/administrative procedures, 
and pretrial diversion.

Suspects in matters received

During 1999 there were 117,994 
suspects in new matters received 
for investigation by U.S. 
attorneys.*** Footnote 1: See Chapter
notes, item 1, p. 33.  The 1999 data
are not directly comparable to the
1993 and prior compendia.***  Of these 
suspects, 39% were investigated for 
public-order offenses, 32% for drug 
offenses, and 24% for property offenses.  
Five percent of all suspects were 
investiated for violent crimes. 
Relative percentages of offenses reflect 
criminal activity as well as Federal 
investigative, prosecutorial, and 
statutory priorities.  For example, 
during 1999 priority areas for U.S.
attorneys included drug and violent 
crimes (including firearms
prosecutions), international terrorism, 
white collar crimes, and prosecution 
of those responsible for hate crimes 
and attacks on houses of worship 
(with the National Church Arson Task
Force).***Footnote 2: Statistical 
Report, United States Attorneys'
Offices, Fiscal Year 1999.  U.S. De-
partment of Justice, Executive Office
for United States Attorneys, Washington,
DC.***

Suspects in matters concluded

Upon receiving a matter, a U.S. 
attorney will either immediately 
decline it for prosecution or 
investigate further. Upon conclusion 
of the investigation, a matter may 
be filed as a criminal case in a U.S. 
district court, referred to a U.S.
magistrate, or declined for prosecution.  
Of the 113,933 suspects in 
criminal matters concluded during 
1999, 60% were prosecuted in 
U.S. district court, 27% were 
declined for prosecution, and 
13% were referred to U.S. 
magistrates.  ***Footnote 3: The 
number of suspects in criminal 
matters conclude is not comparable 
to the 1993 and prior compendia.  
See Chapter notes, item 2, p. 33, 
for details.***

Suspects prosecuted -- 

The likelihood of prosecution in 
U.S. district court varied widely
across offense categories.  Drug 
and violent offenders were more 
likely to be prosecuted than 
those involved in property and 
public-order offenses.  U.S. 
attorneys prosecuted approximately 
77% of suspects involved in drug 
offenses, 60% of those in violent 
offenses, 53% of those in public-
order offenses, and 50% of those 
in property offenses.  

Differences in rates of prosecution 
within major categories were substantial.  
For example, among violent offenders, 
75% of robbery suspects were prosecuted, 
while 58% of murder, 44% of assault, 
and 43% sexual abuse suspects were
prosecuted.  Among property offenders, 
suspects investigated for counterfeiting 
were prosecuted at a higher rate than 
those involved in fraud (73% compared 
with 48%), and among suspects involved 
in public-order offenses, immigration 
(78%), weapon (70%), and tax law 
violation suspects (62%) were much more 
likely to be prosecuted than suspects 
in escape (24%) and civil rights (7%) 
offenses.  

Suspects in matters concluded 
and declined, by investigating 
agency -- 

During 1999, 59% of suspects in matters 
concluded were investigated by components 
of the Department of Justice; the
Treasury Department investigated 
19% of suspects in matters
concluded.  In addition, 10% of 
suspects in matters concluded were 
investigated by independent Federal 
agencies and State/local agencies 
(not shown in a table).

Among the investigating agencies, 
the Central Intelligence Agency 
(1%), the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service (3%) and the National Park 
Service (7%) had among the lowest
declination rates, while the Office 
of the Inspector General (54%), the 
Indian Affairs Bureau (53%), and the 
Environmental Protection Agency (61%) 
were among those with the highest
declination rates.  The declination 
rate for matters investigated by 
components of the Department of 
Justice (27%) was the same as the 
overall declination rate.

Suspects in matters declined -- 

Suspects in matters involving 
violent offenses were less likely
to be declined for prosecution 
(35%) than those involved in
property offenses (42%) but more 
likely than those in drug offenses 
(17%).  Suspects in public-order 
offenses were slightly less likely 
to be declined for prosecution than 
those involved in violent offenses -- 
25% compared to 35%.

The decision to decline prosecution 
is based on a number of factors, 
including the lack of prosecutable 
offense, alternative resolution, or 
case- and suspect-related reasons.  
Of the 31,004 declinations during 
1999, 26% occurred because of
case-related reasons, mostly due to 
weak evidence (21%); 22% occurred 
because there was no crime or criminal 
intent was lacking; and 23% occurred 
for other reasons, such as agency 
requests (6%) and lack of resources 
(4%).

Not all suspects whose matters 
were declined for prosecution
avoided prosecution.  Twenty-two 
percent of the suspects in matters 
declined were referred to another 
authority for prosecution.  An 
additional 5% were settled through
alternative resolution procedures.  
Suspects involved in property 
offenses constituted the largest 
number of suspects who were referred 
by U.S. attorneys to other authorities 
for prosecution or resolution. Of 
the suspects whose matters were
declined, those involved in drug 
offenses were the most likely to be 
referred to other authorities for 
prosecution or alternative
resolution.  Thirty-six percent of 
the drug suspects whose matters were 
declined prosecution by U.S. attorneys 
were referred for other prosecution 
or resolution, as were 27% of the 
public-order, 24% of violent and 
property offense suspects.

Within major offense categories, the 
likelihood that suspects in matters 
declined for prosecution were referred 
to other authorities for prosecution 
or alternative resolution varied
among specific offenses.  Within 
property offenses, referral occurred 
with 37% of persons involved in 
counterfeiting, compared to 15% of 
suspects in arson and explosives 
cases. Within public-order offenses, 
47% of agriculture suspects and 62% 
of escape suspects were referred to 
other authorities or had their case 
settled through alternative procedures,
compared to 6% of suspects in civil 
rights cases.

Defendants in cases concluded by 
U.S. magistrates  
 
Cases concluded by U.S. magistrates 
are, by statute, misdemeanors.
***Footnote 4: At the time that U.S.
attorneys receive them, matters may
not be classifiable as felonies or
misdemeanors.  If a U.S. magistrate
disposes of a case   or what the
U.S. attorneys call a "matter"  
its offense level has been determined,
by statute, to be a misdemeanor.***
Overall, U.S. magistrates disposed 
of 13% of all criminal matters 
investigated by U.S. attorneys.  For 
most offenses, the likelihood that a 
U.S. magistrate concluded the matter 
was also relatively low.  The most 
notable exception was escape, for 
which 53% of matters were concluded 
by U.S. magistrates.  The escape 
offense category accounted for 10% 
of all cases concluded by U.S. 
magistrates.

Most of the 2,829 escape violations 
were against defendants who absconded 
to avoid prosecution in State courts, 
the so-called "unlawful flight to 
avoid prosecution."  Upon apprehension 
of the fugitive, these cases are 
normally dismissed by U.S. magistrates 
and turned over to the State for
prosecution on the original warrant.

Other types of offenses having 
comparably high rates of disposal 
by U.S. magistrates included 
migratory birds offenses (86%); 
conspiracy, aiding and abetting, 
traffic, and jurisdictional offenses 
(79%); and other property violations
(68%).

Processing times -- 

For matters concluded during 1999, 
the average number of months from 
receipt of a matter to its conclusion 
by a U.S. attorney as a case filing 
or declination or its disposal by a 
U.S. magistrate was 8.3 months.  
However, the time to process matters 
varied with the outcome of the matter.  
Matters concluded by U.S. magistrates 
in which the suspect was convicted took 
the least amount of time -- an average 
of 3.0 months, and at least 50% of 
these convictions occurred in about 30 
days.  Similarly, 50% of the matters 
declined for prosecution were declined 
within 13.8 months.

Overall, suspects in violent 
and drug offenses were processed
more quickly than suspects in 
other offenses.  For key decisions, 
such as whether to file a case or 
decline a matter for prosecution, 
drug offenses were concluded slightly 
quicker than violent offenses (5.6 
months compared to 6.3 months). At an 
average of 15.0 months, fraudulent 
property offenses took longer to 
conclude than other offenses.

Chapter notes

1) Tables 2.1-2.6 were created 
from the Central System data files 
of the EOUSA.  For table 2.1, only 
records which showed a matter 
received during 1999 were selected.  
For tables 2.2-2.6, only records 
which show a matter terminated by
reason of declination, disposition 
by a U.S. magistrate, or filed as a 
case in U.S. district court from 
October 1, 1998, through September 
30, 1999, were selected.  In all of 
these tables, matters "declined 
immediately" -- those cases in 
which the U.S. attorney spent less 
than 1 hour investigating -- were
excluded.

2) The number of suspects in 
matters investigated in table
2.1, and the number of suspects 
in matters concluded in tables 
2.2 and 2.6 are not directly 
comparable to counts in the
1993 and prior compendia. In 
those years, these statistics
included appellants in appeals 
filed or appeals terminated. In
table 2.1 of this Compendium and 
its corresponding tables in 1994 
and subsequent compendia, the 
number of suspects in matters 
received is limited to suspects 
in criminal matters that were filed 
as cases in U.S. district courts, 
handled by U.S. magistrates, or 
declined for prosecution.  In 
the 1993 and prior compendia, 
the number of suspects in criminal 
matters received included criminal 
appeals.  To obtain a number of
suspects comparable to the statistic 
reported in the 1993 and prior 
compendia, add to the data in table 
2.1 of this Compendium, the number 
of appellants in appeals that were
handled by U.S. attorneys.

In tables 2.2 and 2.6 of this 
Compendium and their corresponding 
tables in the 1994 and subsequent 
compendia, the number of suspects 
in matters concluded also is limited 
to those suspects whose matters 
were concluded by a case filing
in a U.S. district court, by declination, 
or by disposition by a U.S. magistrate.  
In the 1993 and prior compendia, this
number included appellants in criminal 
appeals terminated.

To obtain a number that is comparable 
to the number reported in the 1993 
and prior compendia, the number of 
appellants in appeals terminated and 
handled by U.S. attorneys needs to be
added to the totals in table 2.2.

3) Offenses in the Central System 
data files are classified by the title 
and section of the United States Code 
for the most serious offense investigated, 
as determined by the assistant U.S. 
attorney responsible for the matter.  
For tables in this Compendium, these 
citations were translated into the
corresponding four-digit offense codes 
used by the Administrative Office of 
the United States Courts (AOUSC). 
These four-digit codes were then 
aggregated into the categories shown 
in the tables.

U.S. Code citations often do not 
permit detailed classification
of drug offenses by the type of 
criminal activity involved.  A
person charged with conspiracy is 
classified under the substantive 
offense alleged (for example, 
conspiracy to defraud is classified 
as fraud) unless type of conspiracy
cannot be determined from the U.S. 
Code citation. Unclassified 
conspiracies are included among 
"conspiracy, aiding and abetting, 
traffic, and jurisdictional offenses" 
in tables 2.1, 2.2, 2.5, and 2.6.

The most serious offense investi-
gated is based on the criminal
lead charge as determined by the 
assistant U.S. attorney responsible 
for the criminal matter.

4) In the tables in this chapter, 
the "all offenses" row or "total
declinations" row includes records 
whose offense category (basis for 
declination) is missing or indeter-
minable.  The percentage distributions 
in these tables, however, are based
on the number of observations with 
nonmissing offenses (basis for 
declination) values.  The number of 
missing values are reported either 
on a separate line or in a footnote.

5) In 1999, additional data for 
"lack of resources" as a reason
for declination were discovered; 
these cases previously were
coded as "unknown or indeterminat" 
in 1998 and prior years. Therefore, 
in table 2.4, the apparent increase 
in "lack of resources" as a declina-
tion reason (between 1998-99) is due
in large part to this additional 
information and reclassification
of declination reasons from "unknown 
and indeterminate."

Chapter 3
                               
Pretrial release

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1998 - September 30, 1999

Type of pretrial release, by offense
Type of pretrial release, by defendant
characteristics
Form of pretrial detention, by offense
Form of pretrial detention, by defendant
characteristics
Pretrial detention hearing outcomes,
by offense
Pretrial detention hearing outcomes,
by defendant characteristics
Behavior of defendants released prior
to trial, by offense
Behavior of defendants released prior
to trial, by type of release
Behavior of defendants released prior
to trial, by defendant
characteristics
Length of pretrial detention, by form
of release or detention, and
most serious offense charged
      
Chapter notes

Chapter 3
Pretrial release

The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 
U.S.C. sec. 3141) sets the terms for 
release and detention of defendants 
facing charges in Federal courts.  
At the time defendants first appear 
before a judicial officer, they may 
be (1) released on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond; 
(2) released subject to conditions 
imposed by the court, possibly 
including traditional bail; (3) 
temporarily detained without bail 
(limited to 10 working days) to 
permit deportation, exclusion, or 
the revocation of previously granted 
conditional release; or (4) detained 
pending the outcome of a detention 
hearing.* 18U.S.C. sec. 3142(e)
(1984)*

According to the statute, a 
defendant must be brought before
a judicial officer without 
"unnecessary delay" upon arrest. The
judicial officer, who may be a judge 
but is generally a U.S. magistrate, 
determines whether the defendant 
will be released or detained prior 
to trial.  If a hearing is required, 
the release decision may be delayed 
no longer than 3 days (or 5 days 
if requested by the defendant).

At the initial appearance a 
recommendation to detain the
defendant is made by the U.S. 
attorney and/or the pretrial
services officer.  If the court 
concurs with the recommendation
to detain the defendant, a pretrial 
detention hearing is scheduled -- 
typically within 1 week of the 
initial appearance. At the pretrial 
detention hearing evidence is 
presented to show cause why the 
defendant should be detained 
pending adjudication of the charges.

Recommendations to detain a defen-
dant are limited to those instances 
where the defendant was charged 
with (1) a crime of violence, (2) an 
offense with a statutory maximum sen-
tence of life imprisonment or death, 
(3) a drug offense with a statutory 
maximum sentence of 10 years or 
more imprisonment, or (4) any felony 
offense if the defendant had been 
convicted on two or more occasions 
of an offense described above or a 
similar State-level offense.  Addition-
ally, a detention recommendation may 
be made if there is a serious risk that 
the defendant would flee in an attempt 
to avoid prosecution or would obstruct 
justice or intimidate witnesses or
jurors.

Types of pretrial release

Defendants may be released without 
financial conditions according to the 
following:

Personal recognizance -- defendant 
is released subject to no financial or 
other conditions.

Unsecured bond -- no money is re-
quired to be posted before release, 
but defendant is liable for full bail 
amount if he or she fails to appear.

Conditional release -- any combina-
tion of restrictions that are deemed 
necessary to guarantee the defen-
dant's appearance at trial or the safety 
of the community.  Non-financial con-
ditions commonly place restrictions on 
the defendant's movements, associa-
tions, and/or actions.  They may also
involve employment or treatment for 
medical, psychological, or substance 
abuse conditions.

Defendants may also be released on 
financial conditions. Financial condi-
tions include (1) deposit bond (the de-
fendant is required to post a percent-
age of the total bail amount, usually
10%), (2) surety bond (the defendant 
is released subject to guarantees by a 
third person that the full amount will 
be paid), or (3) collateral bond (collat-
eral equal to the full bail amount re-
quired to be posted by the defendant 
before release). Financial conditions 
may occur in combination with nonfi-
nancial conditions.

Factors relating to release or 
detention

In deciding whether to release a def-
endant and in setting release condi-
tions, the court is directed to consider 
the nature and circumstances of the 
offense charges, the weight of evi-
dence against the defendant, the de-
fendant's character, physical and 
mental condition, family ties, employ-
ment, financial resources, length of 
residence in the community, commu-
nity ties, past conduct, history relating 
to drug or alcohol abuse, criminal his-
tory, and record concerning appear-
ance at court proceedings.

During 1999, 30,841 defendants were 
released for some period of time prior 
to trial.  Those defendants released 
made up 47% of the 65,559 defendants who 
terminated pretrial services during 1999.  
Of the defendants released, 82% completed 
pretrial services without violating the 
conditions of their release. 

In 1999, 44,626 defendants were det-
ained for some period of time prior to 
the disposition of their case.  Those 
defendants detained comprised about 68% 
of all defendants who terminated pretrial 
services during 1999.  Included are those
who were detained prior to having a pre-
liminary hearing with the magistrate, 
at which point they could have been 
either released or ordered to have a 
detention hearing.  Of the defendants 
detained, 55% were ordered detained 
by the court until case disposition.

Pretrial detention hearings were held 
for 33,188 defendants. Of these, 
24,561, or 74%, were ordered detained.

Of the 30,841 defendants released 
prior to trial, 18% violated a condition 
of their release.  The majority (91%) 
of these violations were technical 
violations of the bail conditions. 
Defendants released on deposit bond 
were more likely (26%) than other defen-
dants to incur some violation of the 
conditions of their release.  Conversely, 
defendants given conditional release 
violated their release at the lowest 
rates (4%).  Seven percent of all 
released defendants had their release 
revoked.

Pretrial outcomes by offense 
categories

Releases -- Defendants charged with 
property offenses were more likely 
than other defendants to be released 
prior to criminal trial; in 1999, 
81% of the 13,850 property offenders
were released.  

The percent released varied greatly 
across offense categories. Among  
violent offenders, 24% of those 
charged with robbery were released 
compared to 39% of those charged 
with murder and 59% of those 
charged with assault.  Among public 
order offenders, 10% of those 
charged with immigration offenses
were released compared to 96% of 
those charged with tax law violations 
and 46% of those with weapons 
offenses.

Nearly 41% of all drug defendants 
were released.  Drug trafficking de-
fendants were less likely to be re-
leased than those charged with non-
trafficking offenses (40% compared to
54%), but defendants charged with 
trafficking offenses outnumbered 
those charged with nontrafficking of-
fenses 10 to 1.

The release types for those defen-
dants who were released prior to trial 
varied among offense categories.  
Within each major offense category 
except violent offenses, the highest
percentage of defendants released 
was on unsecured bond. Of the 35% of 
released violent defendants, 41% were 
released on unsecured bond and 44% 
on personal recognizance compared to 
81% of all property defendants 
released, of whom 54% were released 
on unsecured bond and 32% on personal 
recognizance.

Detentions -- Among the major offense 
categories, defendants charged with 
drug or violent offenses were the most 
likely (81% each) to be detained for 
some period of time. However, violent 
defendants were more likely than drug
offenders to be detained by the court 
(64% versus 54%). Property and public-
order defendants were less likely to be
detained than were drug and violent de-
fendants.  During 1999, 75% of 
public-order defendants were detained, 
with 57% of these detained by the 
court. Of public-order defendants, 
those charged with immigration of-
fenses were the most likely to be
detained (97%).  In 1999, 31% of 
defendants charged with property 
offenses were detained, with 45% of 
these detained by the court. 
 
For 69% of defendants charged with 
violent offenses, it was decided at the 
initial appearance that a detention 
hearing was warranted.   This rate 
varied by offense category:  62% of
those charged with drug-related offenses, 
52% of those charged with public-order 
offenses, and 23% of those charged
with property offenses were ordered to 
have a detention hearing.  Of those 
charged with violent offenses, the of-
fenders most likely to have a pretrial 
detention hearing were those charged 
with kidnapping, robbery, or murder.  
The least likely to have a pretrial 
detention hearing were those charged 
with sexual abuse and those charged 
with assault.

Once a defendant was ordered to 
have a detention hearing, the chances 
of being detained were less variable 
across offense categories.  The 
highest rate of defendants ordered
detained were those charged with 
public-order offenses (82%) - pri-
marily immigration (89%) and weap-
ons offenders (72%). Of the 69% of 
defendants charged with violent of-
fenses and given a pretrial detention 
hearing, 74% were ordered detained. 
In 1999, 71% of those charged with 
drug offenses and 61% of those charged 
with property offenses were ordered 
detained following a pretrial hearing.

Violations -- Of defendants released 
prior to trial and terminating pretrial 
services during 1999, those charged 
with drug offenses were more likely 
(29%) than other defendants to incur at 
least one violation during the release 
period.  Among major offense 
categories, those charged with 
property offenses were less likely 
(12%) than others to violate
conditions of their release. Those 
charged with drug offenses and vio-
lent offenses were more likely to 
have their release revoked (10% of 
all released drug defendants, 12% 
of all released violent defendants).  
Only 4% of released public-order de-
fendants were revoked, as were 5% of
released property defendants.

Pretrial outcomes across 
demographic groups

Releases -- Females were more likely 
(73%) than males (42%) to be released 
during 1999.  Males were more likely 
to have a financial condition imposed 
on them as females (20% versus 12%).  
Sixty-three percent of all defendants 
identified as non-Hispanic were released 
during 1999 compared to 23% of Hispanics.  
Non-Hispanic releasees were twice as 
likely to be released on personal 
recognizance as Hispanics.

The higher the education level of the 
defendant, the greater the probability 
of release.  Forty percent of defen-
dants with less than a high school 
education were released in 1999, while
80% of those who had completed college 
were released. Releasees with a college 
degree were less likely to receive
financial conditions (16%) and more 
likely to be released on personal 
recognizance (30%) than those who had 
less education.

Defendants with a history of drug 
abuse were released less frequently 
than those defendants with no known 
drug history (51% versus 60%).  
However, among all released defen-
dants, drug abuse history does not 
appear to have had a major effect
on the form of pretrial release.

Detentions -- Males were more likely 
(72% versus 46%) than females to be 
detained.  Of all detainees, 57% of 
the men and 43% of the women were 
detained following a detention hearing.  
Hispanics had a substantially higher 
probability of being detained (91%) 
as compared with non-Hispanics (54%). 
However, among those detained, His-
panics and non-Hispanics had nearly 
equal chances of being detained fol-
lowing a detention hearing (56% com-
pared to 54%).

Younger defendants were more likely 
than older ones to be detained.  
Seventy-two percent of defendants 
between the ages of 16-18 and 72% 
of defendants in their twenties were
detained, compared to 50% of those 
over 40.  However, among all defen-
dants detained, the chances of being 
detained following a detention hearing 
were similar across all age groups.  
These patterns were more dramatic 
with education levels.  Those defen-
dants with lower levels of education 
were more likely to be detained.  
Seventy-eight percent of those who 
did not graduate from high school 
were detained versus 33% of college 
graduates.  Of those detained, 54% of
defendants without a high school di-
ploma were detained following a de-
tention hearing compared to 48% of 
college graduates.

Not only were male defendants nearly 
twice as likely as female defendants 
to have a detention hearing (54% ver-
sus 33%), they were also more likely 
(76% versus 59%)  to be ordered de-
tained as a result of the hearing.
  
The likelihood of having a detention 
hearing increased with the number of 
prior convictions and severity of the 
defendant's criminal history.  Further-
more, 55% of those with a history of
drug abuse had detention hearings as 
compared to 43% of those without 
such a past.  Those with a history of 
drug abuse were slightly more likely 
to be detained after a hearing.

Violations -- Released males were 
more likely than females to incur 
a violation during the pretrial 
release period (20% versus 14%) and 
were slightly more likely to have 
their release revoked.  Native 
Americans were more likely to 
incur at least one violation than 
were either blacks or whites (26% 
vs. 22% for black and 17% for whites), 
and to have their release revoked (17% 
vs. 8% for blacks and 6% for whites).
Defendants with no prior criminal 
history were less likely to have a pre-
trial release violation than those 
with a prior conviction.  Released 
defendants with a known drug history
were nearly 3 times as likely to 
incur a violation than those with no 
known drug history.  Also, those with 
a history of drug use were substantially 
more likely to have their release
revoked (14% vs. 4%).

Length of pretrial detention
 
Among defendants detained for any 
time prior to case disposition, those 
charged with violent offenses were 
detained the longest (an average of 
96.7 days) compared to drug (82.7
days), public-order (59.9 days), and 
property (43.1 days) defendants (not 
shown in a table).

Of defendants released, those re-
leased conditionally spent the greatest 
average number of days detained 
(71.4 days) compared to those re-
leased on personal recognizance 
(42.5 days), unsecured bond (34.5 days), 
or financial conditions (26.1 days). 
This trend varied only slightly across 
all major offense categories -- 
in general, defendants released by
conditional means were detained 
more days than defendants who were 
released by any other means.

Of defendants not released, those de-
tained following a detention hearing 
were detained longer, on average, 
than those held on financial conditions 
(107.1 days compared with 83.9 days).  
This pattern was true across all 
major offense types.

1)  All tables in chapter 3 were 
created from data in the Pretrial  
Services Information Act System data 
base, which is  maintained by the 
Pretrial Services Agency (PSA) within 
the AOUSC.  The data describe 65,559 
defendants who terminated pretrial 
services during October 1, 1998, 
through September 30, 1999, and 
whose cases were filed by com-
plaint, indictment, or information.  
In these tables, the  totals (e.g., 
"all offenses") included records whose 
offense  or other attributes were 
missing or indeterminable.  The
percentage distributions were 
based on nonmissing values, and 
missing values were reported in a 
separate row or in a footnote.

Offenses in the PSA are based on 
the most serious charged offense, 
as determined by the probation offi-
cer responsible for the interview 
with the defendant. The probation 
officer classifies the major offense 
charged into AOUSC four-digit offense 
codes.  For defendants charged with 
more than one offense on an indictment, 
the probation officer chooses as the 
major charged offense the one carrying 
the most severe penalty or, in the 
case of two or more charges carrying 
the same penalty, the one with the
highest offense severity.  The of-
fense severity level is determined by 
the AOUSC, which ranks offenses according
to the maximum sentence, type of crime, 
and maximum fine amount.  These four-digit 
codes are then aggregated into the same 
offense categories as those used in 
chapter 1.

For drug offenses, the type of drug 
activity -- trafficking or possession 
-- is obtained by the probation offi-
cers from their reading of the indict-
ment or other charging documents. 
The AOUSC citation manual provides 
probation officers with detailed 
instructions on how to code drug 
crimes.

2) In tables 3.1-3.4, the percentages 
showing the methods of release or 
methods of detention were based 
on the number of defendants released 
or the number of defendants detained.  
In tables 3.5 and 3.6, the percentages 
were based on the number of defendants 
who had hearings and were ordered 
detained.  This method departs from 
the 1993 and prior compendia, in which 
the percentages were based on the number 
of defendants terminating pretrial services.

Chapter 4
Adjudication

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999
Defendants in cases commenced, by 
offense
Disposition of cases terminated, by 
offense
Time from filing to disposition of cases
terminated
Dispositions by U.S. magistrates
Characteristics of convicted offenders

Chapter notes

Federal criminal cases may result in 
conviction of the defendant following 
plea or trial, acquital of the defen-
dants after trial, or dismissal of the 
case.***Footnote 1: Unless otherwise
noted, data describe felony and
misdemeanor cases in U.S. district
courts and include Class A misde-
meanors that are handled by U.S.
district curt judges, which occur
infrequently.***

Defendants in cases filed

During 1999, 80,031 defendants had 
criminal charges filed against them 
in U.S. district courts, and 67,442 
(84%) of those defendants were charged 
with felonies.  The 29,306 drug felony 
defendants comprised 37% of all criminal 
defendants in cases filed and 43% of 
all felony defendants.  Felony property
and public-order defendants comprised 
19% and 26%, respectively, of all 
defendants in cases filed. The 12,474
misdemeanor defendants constituted 16% 
of all defendants in cases filed; 40% 
of those misdemeanor defendants were
charged with traffic violations.

Defendants in cases terminated

Cases were terminated against 75,723 
defendants during 1999, 62,839 (91%) 
of whom were felony defendants. During
1999, the 27,008 drug-related felony 
defendants comprised nearly 36% of all 
defendants in cases terminated and 43% of
all felony defendants.

Eighty-seven percent of all defendants, 
91% of all felony defendants and 71% 
of misdemeanor defendants were convicted.  
For major felony offense categories, 
conviction rates remained around 90%.  
Within major offense categories, however, 
the conviction rates varied more widely.  
For example, within the violent offense 
category, the conviction rates ranged 
from 71% for those found guilty of 
making threats against the President, 
to 95% for robbery.  Within the
public-order category, the conviction 
rate ranged from 60% for civil rights 
violations to 96% for tax law violations 
and 98% for antitrust offenses.

Most defendants who were convicted 
pleaded guilty.  Overall, over 94% 
of those convicted pleaded guilty, 
while only 5% were convicted at trial.  
For felony offenses, 95% pleaded guilty 
to their charges.  For the major felony 
offense categories, guilty pleas were 
registered for 90% of violent offenders, 
95% of drug offenders, and 96% each for
public-order and property offenders.

During 1999, 4,352 defendants exercised 
their right to a trial. A higher percentage 
of violent offenders went to trial than
drug, property, and public-order offenders.  
Ten percent of violent offenders went to 
trial as compared with 5% of both property 
and public-order offenders, and 7% of drug 
offenders.

Of defendants who exercised their 
right to a trial, 3,236 (74%) were 
convicted either by a jury or a bench 
trial.  The felony trial conviction 
rate was 82%, while the misdemeanor
conviction rate was 44%.  Among felony 
offenses, trial conviction rates ranged 
from 77% for property defendants to
85% for drug defendants.  Violent and 
public-order offenders fell in between, 
as about 80% were convicted at trial 
for each respectively.

Case processing times

The data in table 4.3 cover the interval 
from the time a case is filed in U.S. 
district court through sentencing for 
those convicted as well as the interval 
from case filing through disposition for 
those not convicted, or those whose cases 
are dismissed.  Title I of the Speedy 
Trial Act of 1974, as amended, sets time 
requirements for processing criminal
cases in Federal courts.  Except for 
certain exclusions, indictment must 
occur within 30 days of arrest; defen-
dants are guaranteed at least 30 days 
to prepare for trial; and the Government 
must be ready for trial within 70 days.  
The Speedy Trial Act does not specify 
an interval from trial to sentencing,
***Footnote 2: The Sentencing Reform
Act of 1984 specifies minimum intervals
for the disclosure and objections to
the presentence report.  (See rule 31,
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.)***
and the time limits set by the act 
exclude several enumerated periods 
of pretrial procedure such as time 
spent awaiting rulings on 
motions.***Footnote 3: 18 U.S.C. 3161 et. 
Seq.***  Additionally, defendants may
waive their rights within the Speedy
 Trial Act.  As a result, the actual 
processing time for most defendants 
can be longer than the statutory limits 
without violating the provisions of 
the act.  

Overall, the average time for process-
ing defendants was 9.2 months.  For 
felony defendants, the overall proc-
essing time average was 9.8 months; 
for those charged with misdemeanor
crimes, the average processing time 
was 5.8 months. Defendants who 
pleaded guilty were processed, on av-
erage, 4 months quicker than defen-
dants who went to trial.  Overall,
defendants whose cases were ultimately 
dismissed took longest to process 
(16 months), on average.  Among major
felony offense categories, case 
processing times were similar to 
the overall pattern, except for 
violent offenses.  Defendants
convicted of violent offenses took 
a greater amount of time for trial 
(13 months), on average, than for 
dismissal (10.6 months).

Convictions by U.S. magistrates
 
During 1999 U.S. magistrates dis-
posed of 12,019 misdemeanor criminal 
defendants, 71% of whom were convicted.  
Public-order offenders comprised 58% 
of the defendants disposed by U.S. 
magistrates, with property offenders 
comprising another 29%.  Drug offenses 
comprised a little over 11% of U.S. 
magistrates' cases.

Characteristics of convicted 
defendants

Among defendants convicted, there 
were over 5 times as many men as 
women (85% versus 16%); over twice 
as many whites as blacks (67% ver-
sus 28%); and almost twice as many 
non-Hispanics as Hispanics (61% ver-
sus 39%).  Most were U.S. citizens 
(66%), had graduated high school or
completed some higher education 
(55%), and had some criminal history 
(55%).  Persons over the age of 30
represented 55% of defendants.

Chapter notes

1) Tables 4.1-4.4 were derived from 
the Administrative Office of U.S. 
Courts (AOUSC) criminal master 
data files.  Only records with cases 
filed in U.S. district court or 
cases that terminated in U.S. district 
court during October 1, 1998, through 
September 30, 1999, were selected.  
Offenses were classified according to 
the most serious offense charged.  In
the case of multiple offenses, the 
offense carrying the most severe 
potential penalty was selected.

In this Compendium, carjacking of-
fenses are classified as robberies, 
based on title and section of the 
U.S. Code.  In compendia prior to 
the 1997 Compendium, they were
classified as motor vehicle thefts, 
based on the AOUSC offense 
classifications.

2) Table 4.5 was created by matching 
the AOUSC master data files with 
the U.S. Sentencing Commission 
(USSC) monitoring system files 
and the Pretrial Services Agency
(PSA) data files.  These latter two 
data files contain information on 
the characteristics of defendants.  
The USSC monitoring system files 
are limited to records of defendants
sentenced under the Federal sen-
tencing guidelines only. These in-
clude defendants convicted of felo-
nies or Class A misdemeanors.  
Excluded from the USSC data 
were defendants convicted only of 
Class B or C misdemeanors or in-
fractions, defendants whose of-
fenses were committed before No-
vember 1, 1987, and juvenile of-
fenders.  Juveniles charged as 
adults are included in table 4.5.
Some of the defendants excluded 
from the USSC data files were in-
cluded in the PSA data.  (See 
Chapter 3 Chapter notes for more 
information on the PSA data.)  Ta-
ble 4.5 indicates the number of re-
cords for which relevant data were 
available.  Percentage distributions
were based on records with known 
values of defendant characteristics 
and offenses.

3) A criminal record, as reported in 
table 4.5, is limited to prior adult 
convictions.  For some defendants in 
this table, it is further limited to 
the portion that is relevant for cal-
culating sentences under the Federal 
sentencing guidelines.  In general, 
this is limited to sentences imposed 
within a 15-year period prior to the 
current offense and offenses committed
within the United States.  For most 
defendants, the criminal history used 
to calculate sentencing guideline 
ranges includes their entire adult 
criminal history.

Chapter 5
Sentencing
 
Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999
Sentence types in cases terminated,
by offense
Type and length of sentences imposed,
by offense
Sentences imposed on convicted 
offenders, by offense of conviction 
and method of disposition
Convicted offenders sentenced to 
incarceration, by offense and offender
characteristics
Average incarceration sentence lengths 
imposed, by offense and offender
characteristics
Median incarceration sentence lengths
imposed, by offense and offender
characteristics

Chapter notes

Depending upon the type and severity 
of the offense, convicted offenders 
may be sentenced to incarceration,
probation, a fine, or a combination of 
sanctions such as a split or mixed 
sentence (imprisonment as well as a 
period of probation supervision). (For 
a definition of mixed sentences, see 
Glossary, p. 113.)  The Federal sen-
tencing guidelines require a term of 
supervised release following service 
of any prison sentence of more than 1 
year. In addition, courts have the dis-
cretion to impose supervised release 
in any other case.

Except where otherwise indicated, ta-
bles in this chapter are based on the 
most serious offense of conviction.  
They are not directly comparable with 
tables in earlier chapters that are
based on the most serious offense in-
vestigated or most serious offense 
charged (see "Offense classifications" 
in Methodology, p. 109).

Offenders convicted and 
sentences imposed

Of the 66,055 offenders sentenced 
during 1999, 47,659 (72%) were sen-
tenced to prison; 12,977 (20%) were 
sentenced to probation; and 3,148 
(5%) were ordered to pay only a fine. 
(Offenders given an intermediate 
sanction such as intermittent confine-
ment or community confinement that 
also included probation supervision 
are counted among offenders given
probation.)  Of the 47,659 offenders 
sentenced to prison, 46,070 (97%) 
were convicted of felonies, and 83% 
of convicted felons were sentenced to 
prison. Felony drug and violent of-
fenders were more likely to receive 
prison sentences (92% and 91% re-
spectively) than were either property 
(59%) or public-order (84%) offenders.

Among public-order offenders, per-
sons convicted of weapons (93%), 
immigration offenses (90%), and es-
cape (91%) were almost as likely to 
receive prison sentences as were vio-
lent and drug offenders.

Among property offenders, persons 
convicted of arson or the use of 
explosives (82%) were the most likely 
to receive prison sentences.

Overall, 20% of convicted offenders 
were sentenced to probation. The 
percentage of misdemeanants sen-
tenced to probation (49%) was three 
times that of convicted felons (14%). 
Among felons, persons convicted of 
postal law violations were the most 
likely to be given probation (91%)
followed by persons convicted of 
communication (65%) and agriculture 
(64%) violations.

While less than 1% of all convicted 
felons were ordered to only pay a fine, 
31% of the felons convicted of anti-
trust violations were so ordered. Fines 
generally were reserved for misde-
meanor offenders, 28% of whom received 
fines.

Average prison sentences imposed
 
For all offenders given prison terms, 
the average term of imprisonment im-
posed was 57.8 months. Persons 
convicted of felonies received an 
average prison term of 59.4 months.

The average length of prison sen-
tence imposed varied among major 
offense categories.  Property of-
fenders received the shortest 
sentence, on average, while violent 
offenders received the longest (24.0 
months compared to 87.7 months).
Drug offenders received 75.4 months, 
on average, and public-order offend-
ers received 48.7 months. The aver-
age prison term for public-order of
fenders was primarily attributable to 
sentences imposed for weapons of-
fenders. The 3,191 weapons offenders 
sentenced to prison comprised 22%
of the 14,683 public-order offenders 
sent to prison; weapons offenders 
received an average prison term of 
98.7 months, and public-order 
offenders other than weapons offenders
received an average prison term of 
34.8 months.

Relationship between sentence 
imposed and mode of conviction

Offenders convicted by plea were less 
likely to receive prison sentences than 
those convicted at trial. Seventy-two 
percent of the offenders convicted by 
guilty plea received some prison time, 
while 85% of the offenders convicted 
at trial received prison sentences.

For violent offenders, 91% of those 
convicted by plea received prison sen-
tences, as did 97% of those convicted 
at trial. For fraudulent property offend-
ers, 58% of those convicted by plea
received prison sentences, compared 
to 84% of those convicted at trial. 
And, for regulatory public-order of-
fenders, 43% of those convicted by 
plea went to prison, but 79% of
those convicted at trial did.

The average prison term imposed on 
defendants convicted at trial was 
longer than the term imposed on de-
fendants convicted by plea. Defend-
ants convicted at trial received 155.4
months, on average, while those con-
victed by plea received an average of 
52.3 months.  Drug offenders convicted 
at trial received an average of 209.7 
months as compared to the 67.9 months 
for drug offenders convicted by a 
guilty plea. Violent offenders who 
went to trial received an average 
sentence of 163.4 months as compared 
to the 80.6 months for those convicted 
by plea.

Characteristics of offenders 
sentenced to prison 

The majority of persons convicted 
during 1999 were male (84%), white 
(67%), non-Hispanic (58%), and U.S. 
citizens (66%).  (Percents were calcu-
lated from numbers in table 5.4.) 
The percentage sentenced to prison was 
not uniform across all categories of 
age, race, sex, education, and ethnic-
ity. Similarly, the average sentences 
imposed were not uniform across 
these categories.  However, conclusions 
about the effect that characteristics 
may have had on sentencing cannot
be drawn from the aggregate patterns 
in the data. Such an assessment 
would require detailed information 
for each category showing the presence 
or absence of factors that are legally 
intended to affect sentencing, such 
as offense severity, weapon use, role 
in the offense, victim injury, dollar 
loss, and so forth.

One such study of the factors affect-
ing sentencing found that "nearly all of 
the aggregate differences among sen-
tences for whites, blacks, and Hispan-
ics during 1989-90 can be attributed 
to characteristics of offenses and of-
fenders that current law and sentenc-
ing guidelines establish as legitimate
considerations in sentencing 
decisions."*Douglas C. McDonald and 
Kenneth E. Carlson, Sentencing in the
Federal Courts: Does Race Matter? 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
December 1993 (NCJ 145328).*

Average sentences imposed were 
longest for males (60.5 months), 
blacks (86.8 months), non-Hispanics 
(67.2 months), and U.S. citizens (67.2 
months). These longer terms are due
in large part because these categories 
of offenders (males, blacks, non-
Hispanics, and U.S. citizens) are 
more highly concentrated in the offense 
types that also are associated with
longer average sentences.  For 
example, incarceration rates for blacks 
exceed those of whites in the violent, 
drug, as well as regulatory and 
nonregulatory public-order offense
categories. These offenses are 
associated with longer average sentences 
than are property offenses or misdemeanors 
-- the categories in which whites' 
incarceration rates exceed those of 
blacks.  In general, within categories 
of offender characteristics, average 
prison terms were longer for violent 
and drug offenses than for property 
and regulatory public-order offenses. 
These two offense categories generally
are considered to be more serious under 
the Federal sentencing guidelines 
than are property and regulatory
public-order offenses. As a result, 
for aggregate tables like the ones 
presented in this chapter, persons 
with a certain characteristic may 
appear to receive more severe sentences
on average. The primary reason for 
the longer averages is the larger 
number of serious offenses that made 
up the average sentences.

Chapter notes

1) Tables 5.1-5.3 were derived 
from the AOUSC criminal master data 
files.  Only records of defendants 
sentenced during October 1, 1998, 
through September 30, 1999, were
selected.  Offenses shown in these 
tables -- offenses of conviction -- 
are based on the longest actual 
sentence imposed.

2) Tables 5.4-5.6 were created 
from AOUSC criminal master data 
files, supplemented with linked 
data on offender characteristics 
from two sources:  the United 
States Sentencing Commission 
(USSC) monitoring system files
(which are limited to records of 
defendants sentenced under the 
Federal sentencing guidelines); 
and the Pretrial Services Information 
Act System database, maintained 
by the Pretrial Services Agency 
(PSA).  These two supplemental 
data files contain information on 
the characteristics of defendants. 
Table 5.4 indicates the number of 
records for which relevant data were 
available.  Percentage distributions 
were based on records with known 
values of defendant characteristics 
and offenses.  Means and medians in 
tables 5.5 and 5.6 were based on the 
number of records shown in table 5.4.

3) Criminal record, as reported 
in tables 5.4-5.6, is limited to
prior adult convictions.  For some 
defendants in these tables, it is 
further limited to the portion of 
their criminal record that is
relevant for calculating sentences 
under the Federal sentencing guidelines.  
In general, this is limited to sentences
imposed within 15 years of the current 
offense and sentences for offenses 
committed within the United States.  
For most defendants, the criminal 
history used to calculate sentencing
guideline ranges is the same as their 
adult criminal history.

Chapter 6.  
Appeals

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1998 -- September 30, 1999

Criminal appeals filed, by type of
criminal case and offense
Criminal appeals filed and criminal
appeals terminated, by offense
Criminal appeals terminated, by type
of criminal case and offense
Disposition of criminal appeals
terminated on the merits, by offense
Criminal appeals cases terminated
on the merits, by nature of offense

Chapter notes

Prior to implementation of the Sen-
tencing Reform Act of 1984, only 
criminal convictions could be ap-
pealed.  However, the Sentencing Re-
form Act provided for the appellate 
review of sentences imposed given 
that the sentence was (1) imposed in
violation of the law; (2) imposed as 
the result of an incorrect sentencing 
guideline application; (3) outside 
the recommended guideline sentencing 
range; or (4) imposed for an offense 
for which no sentencing guideline 
exists and is plainly unreasonable.  
Both the defendant and the Government 
have the right to appeal an imposed 
sentence.*18 U.S.C. sec. 3742*

Appeals filed

During 1999 the U.S. Court of Ap-
peals received 10,251 criminal
appeals.  Of all appeals, 4% were 
filed by the Government (not shown 
in a table).

Forty-seven percent of appeals filed 
in 1999 challenged both the conviction 
and the sentence imposed. About 
twice as many appeals challenged 
only the sentence imposed as those 
that challenged only the conviction 
(23% versus 13%).  Fifteen percent 
of appeals filed were appeals of con-
victions for crimes committed before 
1987, when the sentencing guidelines 
took effect.

The distribution of appeals by type 
of appeal filed (sentence, conviction, 
or both) was relatively constant across 
the major offense categories underly-
ing the appeal.  However, 54% of ap-
peals filed for immigration offenses 
appealed both the sentence and the 
conviction, compared to 47% for all 
criminal categories. 

Nearly half of all appeals filed (for 
which the offense is known) were for 
drug convictions (46%).  Appeals for
public-order convictions comprised 
30% of all appeals filed, property 
offenses comprised 18%, and the re-
maining 6% of appeals filed were for 
violent offenses.

Appeals terminated

A total of 10,675 appeals terminated 
during 1999.  Of these, 49% were ap-
peals of both the sentence and con-
viction, 24% were appeals of the sen-
tence only, and 12% were appeals of 
the conviction only.  Fifteen percent 
were appeals of convictions for of-
fenses sentenced under laws in effect 
prior to the sentencing guidelines.

In nearly half of all appeals terminated 
in 1999 (for which the offense is 
known), drug offense convictions un-
derlie the appeal (48%); the underly-
ing offense in 27% of the appeals was 
a public-order offense; 19% were 
property offense appeals; and 6%
were appeals for violent offense con-
victions.  For 38% of public-order 
appeals, the underlying offense of 
conviction was for weapons.  Robbery 
offenses composed 47% and murder 
composed 24% of the underlying of-
fenses for appeals of a violent
conviction.  Sixty-three percent of 
property offense appeals were 
for fraud convictions.

Of the 10,675 appeals terminated dur-
ing 1999, 77% were terminated on the 
merits, while the remainder were ter-
minated on procedural grounds.  For 
appeals based on a conviction of a 
drug offense or a public-order offense, 
78% were terminated on the merits.  
Also terminated on the merits were 
82% of appeals based on a violent 
conviction and 76% of appeals based 
on a property conviction.  Within 
these major offense categories, 92% 
of appeals based on murder convictions 
were terminated on the merits, as 
were 81% of weapons offenses, and 78% 
of robbery offenses.

In 79% of appeals terminated on the 
merits, the district court ruling was 
affirmed.  In another 5% it was 
partially affirmed. Eighty-two percent 
of all drug offense appeals were af-
firmed, as were 83% of violent of
fense appeals and 74% of property appeals.
Seventy-six percent of public-order 
offense appeals were affirmed.

District court decisions were reversed 
or remanded back to the court in 9% of 
the cases.  Property offenses had the 
highest rate of reversal or being 
remanded back to the court (12%). 
Nine percent of violent and public or-
der offense appeals were reversed or 
remanded, as were 7% of drug offense 
appeals. 

Overall, appeals were dismissed in 
7% of cases.  The highest dismissal 
rate was for public-order appeals 
(9%).

Chapter notes

Tables in chapter 6 were created from 
the AOUSC appeals database.  Records 
of appeals filed or terminated during 
October 1, 1998, through September 30, 
1999, were selected.  Data include 
records of 10,251 criminal appeals 
filed during fiscal year 1999 and 
10,675 appeals terminated during 
the same period.

The unit of analysis in the appeals 
data is a single case.  Most records 
in the appeals data report on a 
single appellant. Appeals were 
classified into the offense categories 
that represent the underlying 
offense of conviction.  Offenses
represent the statutory offense 
charged against a defendant in a
criminal appeal.  Offenses were 
classified by the AOUSC into their 
four-digit offense codes.  These 
were then aggregated into the offense 
categories shown in the tables.

Chapter 7
Corrections

Discussion

Tables

October 1, 1998 - September 30, 1999
Federal offenders under supervision, 
by offense

Characteristics of Federal offenders 
under supervision, by offense

Outcomes of probation supervision, 
by offense

Characteristics of offenders 
terminating probation supervision
Outcomes of supervised release, 
by offense

Characteristics of offenders 
terminating supervised release 
Outcomes of parole, by offense

Characteristics of offenders 
terminating parole

Admissions and releases of Federal 
prisoners, by offense

Characteristics of Federal prison 
population, by major offense category
Number of first releases from Federal 
prison, by release method and sentence 
length

Average time to first release and 
percent of sentence served, for 
prisoners released by standard methods

Mean time served to first release, 
by length of sentence imposed, offense, 
and type of case, for prisoners released
by standard methods

Percent of sentence served to first 
release, by length of sentence imposed, 
offense, and type of case, for prisoners
released by standard methods

Characteristics of first releases from 
prison, by offense, all releases

Mean time served to first release 
from Federal prison for prisoners 
released by standard methods, by 
offense and offender characteristics

Chapter notes

Federal offenders under 
supervision

As of the end of the fiscal year 1999, 
there were 96,502 offenders under 
active Federal supervision, of which 
most (89%) were felons.  Sixty-seven 
percent of these offenders were re-
ceiving one of two forms of post-
incarceration supervision:  supervised 
release (59,644) or parole (5,129).  
The remainder (31,729) were under 
probation supervision.  Most of the
probationer population had been con-
victed of either a property felony 
(38%) or some type of misdemeanor
offense (32%).  Fifty-three percent 
of offenders under supervised release 
and nearly 52% of parolees had
been convicted of a drug offense.

Among the 96,502 offenders under 
active Federal supervision at the 
end of the fiscal year 1999, 79% 
were male; 65% were white; 84% were 
of non-Hispanic origin; 39% were over 
age 40 (compared to 31% who were 
between 31-40 years of age and 31% 
who were 30 or younger); 36% had a
high school diploma only (compared 
to 33% who had at least some college 
and 32% who had less than a high 
school diploma); and 64% had no 
known drug history.  

Outcomes of offenders completing 
supervision

Probation -- During 1999, 16,002 
offenders completed one or more terms 
of active probation.  Overall, 81% of 
offenders successfully completed their 
term of probation, another 17% violated 
their conditions of probation, and the 
remaining 2% were administrative
closures.  Of offenders terminating 
probation, 5% committed a new crime.   
Most committed technical violations, 
including drug use (3%) or absconding
(2%).

Offenders convicted of violent of-
fenses were less likely than others to 
successfully complete a term of pro-
bation without a violation.  During 
1999, almost 39% of probationers con-
victed of violent offenses violated 
their conditions of probation, as did 
17% of drug, 14% of property, and 12% 
of public-order offenders.  Violent 
offenders were also more likely to
commit new crimes (17%) than were 
probationers convicted of drug (6%), 
property (5%), and public-order (4%) 
offenses.

Supervised release -- During 1999, 
21,570 offenders completed terms of 
supervised release.  Overall, 64%
of them successfully completed their 
term of supervised release; 20% 
committed technical violations, such 
as drug use (8%) or absconding (4%);
and almost 13% of these offenders 
violated their probation supervision 
by committing a new crime. The 
remaining 3% had their supervision
administratively terminated. 

Violent offenders were less likely than 
others to complete a term of supervised 
release without a violation.  Fifty-
seven percent of violent offenders
violated conditions of supervised 
release, while 33% of public-order, 32% 
of drug, and 28% of property offenders 
violated supervised release.  Violent
offenders were also more likely to 
commit new crimes (19%) than offenders 
convicted of public-order (16%), drug 
(12%), or property (10%) offenses.

Parole -- During 1999, 2,503 offenders 
completed terms of parole.  Overall, 
55% of these offenders successfully 
completed their term of parole.  During
1999, 14% of these offenders violated 
their supervision by committing a 
new crime; 26% committed technical 
violations, such as drug use (13%) 
or absconding (4%); and 4% completed 
their parole term through an 
administrative case closure.

Offenders convicted of violent of-
fenses were less likely than others 
to complete a term of parole without
a violation.  Sixty-one percent of 
violent offenders violated conditions 
of parole, while 35% of public-order, 
and 31% of property and drug offenders
violated parole.  Violent offenders 
were also more likely to commit new 
crimes (23%) than offenders convicted 
of property (15%), public-order (12%), 
or drug (10%) offenses.

Characteristics of offenders 
completing supervision

Probation -- Among offenders who 
completed a term of probation, 
73% were male; 68% were white and
87% were of non-Hispanic origin; 
34% were less than age 31 (compared 
to 39% over age 40); 26% had less
than a high school diploma (compared 
to 37% whose highest education was 
a high school diploma and 37% who 
had at least some college education); 
and 78% had no known drug history.

Younger offenders, those with a his-
tory of drug abuse, and those with a 
lower educational background had
higher probabilities of violating the 
conditions of probation.  Offenders 
ages 16 to 20 were more likely (36%) 
to violate conditions of supervision 
than probationers in other age groups 
-- 24% of those ages 21 to 30 and 12% 
of those over age 30. 

Probationers with a history of drug 
abuse were 6 times more likely to 
violate probation for drug use than
offenders who were not drug abusers.  
Probationers with known histories of 
drug abuse were also more likely to 
violate supervision for other reasons 
(fugitive status or new crimes) than 
were other probationers.  Probationers 
with lower levels of education were more
likely to violate the conditions of 
probation than those with higher levels 
of education.  Those who did not graduate 
high school had a 25% violation rate, 
those whose highest education was a 
high school diploma had a 16% violation 
rate, those with some college had a 12% 
violation rate, and those with a college 
degree had only a 5% violation rate.

Supervised release -- Among those who 
completed a term of supervised release, 
84% were male; 65% were white; 82% were 
of non-Hispanic origin; 25% were less 
than age 31 (40% were over age 40);  
38% had only some high school (35% 
whose highest education was a high 
school diploma and 27% had at least 
some college); and 56% had no known 
drug history.

Younger offenders, those with a 
history of drug abuse, and those with 
a lower educational background had
higher probabilities of violating 
the conditions of supervised release.  
Offenders under age 30 were more likely 
to violate conditions of their 
supervision than offenders in other 
age groups -- 51% of those under age 
31 violated a condition of their 
supervision compared to 19% of 
those over age 40.

Releasees with a history of drug 
abuse were almost 4 times more likely 
to terminate their supervision for
technical violations of drug use as 
were releasees who were not drug 
abusers. 
 
Releasees with known histories of 
drug abuse were also more likely to 
violate supervision with technical
violations or new crimes.

Similarly, releasees with lower 
levels of education were more likely 
to violate conditions of  supervised
release than those with higher levels 
of education. Those who did not 
graduate from high school had a
41% violation rate, those whose 
highest education was a high school 
diploma 32% violation rate, those
with some college had a 24% violation 
rate, and those with a college degree 
had a 11% violation rate.

Parole -- Among those who completed 
a term of parole, 95% were male; 
62% were white; 86% were of non-Hispanic 
origin; 79% were over age 40; 45% had
only some high school (34% whose highest 
education was a high school diploma 
and 21% had at least some college); and 
47% had no known drug history.

Offenders with a history of drug 
abuse and those with a lower educational 
background had higher probabilities of 
violating the conditions of parole.
Releasees with a history of drug abuse 
were almost 3 times more likely to 
terminate their supervision for
technical violations of drug use 
than were releasees who were not drug 
abusers.  Releasees with known 
histories of drug abuse were also 
more likely to violate supervision with 
technical violations or new crimes.

Releasees with lower levels of educa-
tion were usually more likely to violate 
conditions of parole than those with 
higher levels of education.  Those 
whose highest education was a high 
school diploma had a 44% violation 
rate, those who did not graduate from 
high school had a 42% violation rate, 
those with some college had a 35% 
violation rate, and those with a college 
degree had a 16% violation rate.

Admissions, releases, and 
standing population of Federal 
prisoners

The Federal prison population grew 
by 11,514 persons during fiscal year 
1999, increasing from 107,671 sen-
tenced prisoners to 119,185.  The
greatest growth was among drug and 
public-order offenders, particularly im-
migration and weapons offenses.  In 
1999 the number of drug offenders in
prison grew by 5,922  and the number 
of immigration offenders increased by 
3,006.

Federal prisoners: First releases 
and time served

During 1999, 37,672 prisoners were 
released from Federal prison for the 
first time after serving a sentence 
imposed by a U.S. district court.
***Footnote 1: Tables 7.11-7.16 
include only prisoners first released 
by the BOP during 1999.***  Of these, 
33,748 were released by standard means.  
These standard releases served an 
average of 28.0 months (table 7.12) 
in prison -- 91% of the sentence imposed, 
on average.***Footnote 2: Average time 
to first release is the number of months
in Bureau of Prisons facilities minus 
credits for time spent in jail prior
to final disposition or sentencing.
Percent of sentence served is the
average percentage of each individual
prisoner's percent of total sentence
obligation served until first release.***
   
The remaining 3,924 first releases 
were released by extraordinary means:  
2,671 were released early due to 
participation in a drug treatment 
program; 371 were deported; 200 had 
their sentences commuted; 228 died; and 
454 were released for other reasons --
including completion of an intensive 
confinement program  Drug offenders 
made up the majority of those released 
by extraordinary means (83%).

Time served until first release varied 
by offense: Violent offenders served 
an average of 53.3 months; drug of-
fenders served an average of 40.1 
months; public-order offenders served 
an average of 19.1 months; and prop-
erty offenders served an average of
15.6 months.  During 1999 the 
average time to first release for 
public-order offenders was influenced
heavily by the relatively short time 
served by immigration offenders.  Im-
migration offenders composed 64% of 
all released public-order offenders
and, on average, served 12.2 months 
until first release.  This was nearly 
seven months fewer than the average 
time served for all public-order 
offenders (19.1 months).  Exclusive of 
immigration offenders, public-order 
offenders served an average of 31.4
months until first release (not shown 
in a table).

While violent and drug offenders 
served more time before first release, 
property and public-order offenders 
served more of their sentences than 
violent and drug offenders.

Old law offenders -- those who 
committed crimes before implementa-
tion of Federal Sentencing Guidelines 
in November 1987-- that were re-
leased in 1999 are not shown sepa-
rately in any table.  Only 2%, or 639, 
of released offenders were old law of-
fenders. New law offenders released 
during 1999 served, on average, 26.6 
months in prison (92% of the sen-
tence imposed).  Since the Guidelines 
became effective as of November 1987, 
new law offenders sentenced to
terms of imprisonment greater than 
163 months could not have been 
released by standard means as of 
the end of fiscal year 1999.
***Footnote 3: The Federal Sentencing
Guidelines allow a prisoner up to 54
days per year for good behavior, so a
prisoner sentenced to 163 months in 
prison in November 1987 could have 
served 142 months of his or her sentence 
and been released in 1999.***  They 
could have been released for extraordinary 
reasons such as death, commutation, 
or treaty transfer.***Footnote 4: Prisoners
released for extraordinary reasons 
have been excluded from all time served
calculations.***

Characteristics of Federal 
prisoners
Standing population -- Of prisoners 
in Federal prison at the end of 
1999, 93% were male, 57% were white,
40% were black, 29% were Hispanic, 
and 74% were U.S. citizens.  Fifty
-seven percent of the yearend
population were 31 years of age or 
older.  This portrait of the Federal 
prison population was similar across
offenses and for new law offenders, 
except for the ethnicity and 
citizenship of violent and property
offenders.  More than 88% of these 
offenders were non-Hispanic and U.S. 
citizens.

Prisoners released -- Of prisoners 
released during 1999, 88% were male, 
73% were white, 24% were black, 42% 
were Hispanic, and 60% were U.S.
citizens.  Fifty-five percent were 
31 years of age or older.  These 
patterns were most similar for those
released for drug offenses, and least 
similar for offenders released for 
violent offenses. Ninety-four percent 
of released violent offenders were 
male, 52% were white, 33% were black, 
8% were Hispanic and 95% were U.S. 
citizens.

Time served to first release -- Of 
prisoners released by standard methods, 
males served more time than females 
(29.0 months vs. 20.6 months); blacks 
served more time than whites (39.0 
months vs. 24.5 months); and non-
Hispanics served more time than 
Hispanics (32.7 months vs. 22.2 
months).  Older persons served more 
time than younger (until over age 
40), and U.S. citizens served more 
time than noncitizens.  However, 
across offenses, the overall 
pattern does not apply.  For example, 
blacks served more time on average 
than whites, but among property
offenders released from prison, 
whites served more time than blacks.  
White offenders served an average
of 21.0 months for non-fraudulent 
property offenses compared to 14.9 
months by black offenders.  Among
violent offenders, Hispanics 
and non-Hispanics both served 
about 53 months in prison before 
being released.

Chapter notes

1) Offenders were classified accord-
ing to their most serious offense at 
conviction.  In cases involving multiple 
offenses, the AOUSC offense severity 
hierarchy was applied.  The most serious 
offense was the one with the most severe 
penalty imposed.  If equal prison terms 
were imposed, or there was no imprisonment, 
the offense with the highest severity code, 
as determined by the U.S. Title and Code 
Criminal Offense Citations Manual, was 
selected.

2) Tables 7.1 and 7.2 were created using 
the probation, parole, and supervision 
data files of the Federal Probations 
Supervision Information System (FPSIS), 
which is maintained by the AOUSC. Yearend 
pending cases (that is, records with of-
fenders who were under active supervision 
as of the end of the fiscal year, September 
30, 1999) were selected.

Corporate defendants were ex-
cluded from table 7.1.

3)  Tables 7.3-7.8 were created using 
the FPSIS data files as well.  Only 
records with one or more terminations of 
active supervision during October 1, 1998, 
through September 30, 1999, were selected.  
Each termination was counted separately.  
Technical violations and terminations for 
new crimes are shown only if supervision 
terminated with incarceration or removal 
from active supervision for reasons of a 
violation.

Corporate defendants were ex
cluded from tables 7.3-7.8.

4) Table 7.9-7.16 were created from the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) data 
files.

Tables 7.9 and 7.10 show sentenced
prisoners in the custody of the BOP 
at the end of fiscal year 1999.  Tables  
7.11-7.16 include only prisoners 
committed by U.S. district courts or 
released by the BOP during fiscal
year 1999.

In these tables, a single person 
may be counted more than once if 
that person was committed into, or 
released from, the BOP more than 
one time during fiscal year 1999, 
or if that person appears in more 
than one column in a table, e.g., 
commitment and population.

Offense categories in these tables 
were based on combinations of offense
designations used by the BOP.  They 
are similar, but may not be directly 
comparable, to the categories used in 
other tables of this Compendium.  Of-
fenses for some prisoners admitted or 
released were not able to be classified; 
these offenders were included in the 
totals and are shown as "other 
prisoners" on the last line of tables.

In these tables, offenses were clas-
sified according to the offense as-
sociated with the longest single 
sentence actually imposed. Classi-
fications in other tables may have 
been based on the longest potential 
sentence allowed by law.

5) Tables 7.9-7.16 distinguish be-
tween prisoners committed by U.S. 
district courts for violations
of the U.S. Code and other prisoners. 
Prisoners released after commitment 
from U.S. district court are called 
"first releases." The other admissions 
and releases include offenders who 
returned to prison after their first 
release (such as probation, parole, 
or supervised release violators), of-
fenders convicted in other courts 
(such as military or District of 
Columbia courts), and persons admitted 
to prison as material witnesses or for
purposes of treatment, examination, or
transfer to another authority.  Of-
fenders who entered or left a prison 
temporarily -- such as for transit 
to another location, for health care,
or to serve a weekend sentence -- 
were not counted as admitted or 
released.  Persons who were 
detained for deportation by the
Immigration and Naturalization 
Service and who were not criminal 
offenders were also not included 
in the tables.

Table 7.11 distinguishes between 
standard and extraordinary methods 
of release from prison. "Standard" 
releases include the usual methods 
of exiting from prison, such as
full-term sentence expirations, 
expirations with good time, mandatory 
releases, and releases to parole.  
Extraordinary releases are unusual
exits from prison, such as death,
commutation, and transfer to another 
facility.

6) Tables 7.11-7.16 include only 
prisoners committed by U.S. district 
courts and released by the BOP 
during fiscal year 1999. Prisoners 
committed by U.S. district court -- 
but not for a violation of the U.S. 
Code, or whose offense could not 
be classified -- were included in 
the total but are not shown sepa-
rately.  Table 7.9, however, shows 
these prisoners separately.  Other 
prisoners -- such as probation and 
parole violators and prisoners com-
mitted by other courts, such as 
courts martial or District of Colum-
bia Superior Court -- were ex-
cluded from tables 7.11-7.16, as 
were other persons admitted to 
Federal prison but not committed 
from a U.S. district court.

7) In tables 7.11-7.16, time served 
was calculated for prisoner's arrival 
into jurisdiction of the BOP until first 
release from prison, plus any jail 
time served and credited.  The cal-
culation is the same as that cur-
rently used by the BOP.  Prisoners 
serving consecutive sentences may 
have total imposed sentences ex-
ceeding the longest single sen-
tence length. Accordingly, time ac-
tually served may exceed the longest 
single imposed sentence.  The percent 
of sentenced served is the average of
each individual prisoner's percent of 
sentence served.  Because other 
publications may include different 
groups of prisoners, calculate time 
served differently, or use a different
offense classification, data in tables 
in this Compendium may differ from 
estimates of time served in previous 
publications by the BOP or in 
publications based on other data 
sources.

Time served, as reported in tables 
7.11-7.16 in this Compendium, may 
not be directly comparable to the 
calculation of time served in the 
1993 and prior compendia.  The
methodology in this report uses ad-
ditional information to identify 
prison commitment dates and account 
for jail credit.  In previous 
reports, jail credits were overesti-
mated in some cases.  In addition, 
time served estimates reported in 
tables 7.12-7. 14 and 7.16 include 
only prisoners released by standard 
methods (expirations, mandatory
releases, and releases to parole).  
Prisoners released by extraordinary 
means (death, commutation, trans-
fer, etc.) are excluded from the 
time served calculations in these 
tables.

8) Table 7.9 shows all persons admit-
ted to, or released from, the juris-
diction of the BOP during fiscal 
year 1999.  Prisoners counted in
this column are the same as pris-
oners included in tables 7.11, 7.12, 
and 7.13.  Table 7.9 shows in 
separate columns, as well as in the 
total, prisoners committed by a 
U.S. district court -- but not for a 
violation of the U.S. code, or whose 
offense could not be classified.  
Other columns in table 7.9 include
prisoners who were committed by 
other courts, returned to prison for 
violation of the conditions of super-
vision, or were received for exami-
nation, treatment, or transfer to an-
other jurisdiction.  Offenders who 
returned to prison for a violation of 
the conditions of supervision with-
out a new court commitment, were
classified according to the offense 
with the longest single sentence 
originally imposed at conviction.

Methodology

The Federal justice database

Source of data
The source of data for all tables
in this Compendium is the
Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) Federal justice database. 
The database is presently
constructed from source files
provided by the U.S. Marshals
Service, the Executive Office for
U.S. Attorneys, the
Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, the United States
Sentencing Commission, and
the U.S. Bureau of Prisons.  The
Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, in addition to providing
data describing defendants in
cases processed by the Federal
judiciary, provides data
describing defendants
processed by the Federal
pretrial services agencies and
the Federal probation and
supervision service.  Federal
law prohibits the use of these
files for any purposes other than
research or statistics.  A
description of the source agency
data files is provided in the table
at the end of this section.

Some records in the Federal
justice database are matched
according to a statistically
weighted combination of names,
other personal identifiers, dates
of court appearances, types of
offenses, and other relevant
information contained in the
files.  Using the matched data
files, it is possible to combine
information about two or more
stages of the processing of a
criminal matter or case, for
example from adjudication to
probation or parole supervision.

Reporting period
Wherever possible, matters or
cases have been selected
according to some event which
occurred during fiscal year 1999
(October 1, 1998, through
September 30, 1999).  Some
data files provided by source
agencies are organized
according to a calendar year
time frame; these have been
combined and divided into fiscal
years for purposes of the
Compendium.  Files which are
organized by their source
agencies according to fiscal
year nonetheless include some
pertinent records in later years'
files.  For example, tabulations
of suspects in matters
concluded during fiscal year
1999 in this Compendium have
been assembled from source
files containing records of 1999
matters concluded which were
entered into the data system
during fiscal years 1999 or
2000.

Availability of data items
The availability of particular
items of information is affected
by the data source.  For
example, data on prosecutors'
decisions prior to court filing are
provided for cases investigated
by U.S. attorneys but not for
those handled by other litigating
divisions of the U.S. Department
of Justice.  Criminal Division
cases enter the data base once
they are filed in U.S. district
court, however.

Many items of social and
demographic information come
from presentence investigation
records, supervision records, or
sentencing records, and are
available only for arrested
defendants who were convicted
and/or began serving a
sentence involving supervised
release.  This particularly affects
sex, race, ethnicity, and prior
record information.

Table construction and
interpretation

The tables presented report
events that occurred during the
Federal fiscal year -- October 1,
1998 - September 30, 1999. 
Generally, the tables include
both individual and
organizational defendants. 
Organizational defendants are
not included in tables describing
defendants under pretrial
release and detention,
defendants sentenced to
incarceration, and offenders
under post-conviction
supervision.  Juvenile offenders
are included in the reported
statistics.

Unit of analysis
The unit of analysis in chapters
1 through 6 is a combination of
a person (or corporation) and a
matter or case.  For example, if
a single person is involved in
three different criminal cases
during the time period specified
in the table, he or she is counted
three times in the tabulation. 
Similarly, if a single criminal
case involves a corporate
defendant and four individual
defendants, it counts five times
in the tabulation.  In chapter 7,
the unit of analysis for
incarceration, probation, parole,
or other supervised release is a
person entering custody or
supervision, or a person leaving
custody or supervision.  For
example, a person convicted in
two concurrent cases and
committed once to the custody
of the Federal Bureau of Prisons
in the indicated time period is
counted as one admission to a
term of incarceration.  A person
who terminates probation twice
in the indicated time period,
such as with a violation and
again after reinstatement, is
counted as two terminations of
probation.

Interpretation
The tables in the Compendium
are constructed to permit the
user to make valid comparisons
of numbers within each table
and to compare percentage
rates across tables.  The total
numbers of subjects in
Compendium tables that are
based on records linked
between two files are generally
less than the total number of
records in either source file. 
Accordingly, comparisons of
absolute numbers across two or
more tables in this volume and
other data sources are not
necessarily valid.

Offense classifications

Procedure
The offense classification
procedure used in this
Compendium is based on the
classification system followed by
the Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts.  Specific offenses
combined to form the BJS
categories shown in the
Compendium tables.*These categories
correspond to the Bureau of Justice
Statistics crime definitions and, 
to the extent possible, are or-
ganized and presented consistent
with BJS publications on State
criminal justice systems.*

Offense categories for Federal
arrestees in chapter 1 are based
on the FBI's National Crime
Information Center (NCIC)
offense classifications, which
are converted into U.S.
Marshals' four-digit offense
codes, which, in turn are
aggregated into the offense
categories shown in the tables. 
These categories are similar,
but may not be directly
comparable to the BJS offense
categories used in other
chapters of this Compendium. 
For data from the Executive
Office for U.S. Attorneys, which
include United States Code
citations but do not include the
Administrative Office offense
classifications, United States
Code titles and sections are
translated into the
Administrative Office
classification system and then
aggregated into the offense
categories used in the tables. 
Offense categories for prisoners
in chapter 7 are based on
combinations of offense
designations used by the
Bureau of Prisons.  They are
similar to the categories in other
chapters and other tables in
chapter 7, but may not be 
directly comparable.

Felony/misdemeanor distinctions
Felony and misdemeanor
distinctions are provided where
possible.  Felony offenses are
those with a maximum penalty
of  more than 1 year in prison. 
Misdemeanor offenses are
those with a maximum penalty
of 1 year or less.  Felonies and
misdemeanors are further
classified using the maximum
term of imprisonment
authorized.  Section 3559, U.S.
Code, Title 18 classifies
offenses according to the
following schedule:

Felonies
Class A felony -- life imprisonment, 
or if the maximum penalty is death.

Class B felony -- 25 years or more.

Class C felony  -- less than 25
years but more than 10 years.

Class D felony  -- less than 10
years but more than 5 years.

Class E felony --  less than 5
years but more than 1 year.

Misdemeanors
Class A misdemeanor -- 1 year
or less but more than 1 month.

Class B misdemeanor -- 6
months or less but more than 30
days.

Class C misdemeanor -- 30
days or less but more than 5
days.

Infraction -- 5 days or less, or 
if no imprisonment is authorized.

In this Compendium, felony and
misdemeanor distinctions are
provided where the data permit
these distinctions.  Chapters 1
and 2 do not use this distinction
because many suspects cannot
be so classified at the arrest and
investigation stages in the
criminal justice process. 
Chapter 3 no longer reports this
distinction because the Pretrial
Services Agency no longer
gathers this information.
Chapters 4 and 5 distinguish
between felony and misdemeanor 
offenses, as do tables 7.1-7.6.  
Tables 7.7-7.11 follow the con-
vention of other BJS publications 
by separately tabulating offenders 
whose actual imposed sentences are
less than or equal to 1 year and
those whose actual sentences
are greater than 1 year.

Most serious offense selection
Where more than one offense is
charged or adjudicated, the
most serious offense (the one
that may or did result in the
most severe sentence) is used
to classify offenses. The offense
description may change as the
criminal justice process
proceeds.  Tables indicate
whether investigated, charged
or adjudicated offenses are
used.  In chapter 2, the most
serious offense is based on the
criminal lead charge as
determined by the assistant U.S.
attorney responsible for the
criminal proceeding.  In chapter
3, the major charged offense is
based upon the Administrative
Office's offense severity
classification system, as
determined by the pretrial officer
responsible for the case.  To
select this offense, the officer
ranks offenses according to
severity based on maximum
imprisonment, type of crime,
and maximum fines.  In chapter
4, the most serious offense
charged is the one that has the
most severe potential sentence. 
For chapter 5, conviction
offenses are based on statutory
maximum penalties.  In chapter
6, offenses are classified by the
offense of conviction.  In tables
7.1-7.6, the most serious
offense of conviction is either
the one having the longest
sentence imposed or, if equal
sentences were imposed or
there was no imprisonment, it
was the offense carrying the
highest severity code as
determined by the Administrative 
Office's offense severity code 
ranking.  In tables 7.7-7.13, 
prisoners are classified according 
to the offense which bears the longest
single incarceration sentence.
 
Offense categories
For offense categories in all text
tables, the following conditions
apply:

"Murder" includes nonnegligent
manslaughter.

"Sexual abuse" includes only
violent sex offenses.

"Fraud" excludes tax fraud.

"Larceny" excludes transportation 
of stolen property.

"Other property felonies"
excludes fraudulent property
offenses, and includes
destruction of property and
trespass.

"Tax law violations" includes
tax fraud.

"Obscene material" denotes
the mail or transport thereof.

"All other felonies" includes
felonies with unknown or
unclassifiable offense type.

"Misdemeanors" includes
misdemeanors, petty offenses,
and unknown offense levels.

"Drug possession" also includes 
other drug misdemeanors.

Glossary

Acquittal -- legal judgment that a
criminal defendant has not been
proven guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt of the charges against him.

Affirmed -- in the appellate courts,
the decree or order is declared
valid and will stand as rendered in
the lower court.

Agriculture violations   violations 
of the Federal statutes on agriculture 
and conservation: for example, violations 
of the Agricultural Acts, Insecticide Act,
and the Packers and Stockyards
Act, 1921; also violations of laws
concerning plant quarantine and
the handling of animals pertaining
to research (7 U.S.C., except
sections on food stamps (fraud);
also 16 U.S.C. sections relating
generally to violations in operating
public parks, such as trespassing
for hunting, shooting, and fishing).
 
Antitrust violations -- offenses
relating to Federal antitrust
statutes, which aim to protect trade
and commerce from unlawful
restraints, price fixing, monopolies
(for example, 15 U.S.C. secs. 1, 3,
8, 20, and 70(i)), and discrimination
in pricing or in furnishing services
or facilities (15 U.S.C. secs. 13(c)
and 13(e)).
 
Appeal -- a review by a higher
court of a judgment or decision of a
lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of -- an
intermediate Federal court, inferior
to the U.S. Supreme Court, but
higher than the U.S. district court. 
The function of the U.S. court of
appeals is to review the final
decisions of the district courts, if
challenged.  There are 13 courts of
appeal in the Federal system
representing the 12 judicial circuits
and the Federal circuit (28 U.S.C.
sec. 41).

Appellant -- the party which takes
an appeal from 1 court or
jurisdiction to another; opposite of
appellee.

Appellee -- the party against
whom the appeal is taken; opposite
of appellant.

Arson -- willfully or maliciously
setting, or attempting to set, fire to
any property within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction
of the United States as defined in
18 U.S.C. sec. 7 (18 U.S.C. sec.
81; and 49A U.S.C. secs. 1804 and
1809).  (See also, "Explosives.")

Assault -- intentionally inflicting or
attempting or threatening to inflict
bodily injury to another person. 
Applies to anyone within the
special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7, or to
any Government official, foreign
official, official guest, internationally
protected person, or any officer or
employee of the United States
designated in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1114
(for example, 16 U.S.C. secs.
1857(e) and 1859; 18 U.S.C. secs.
111(a), 112(b), 113(c)(e), 114,
115(c), 351(d)(e), 372, 373, 1502,
1751(c), 1959, 2118(c), and
2231(a); 21 U.S.C. secs. 461(c),
675(b), and 1041(c); 26 U.S.C.
secs. 7212(a)(b); 29 U.S.C. sec.
1141; 46 U.S.C. sec. 701; and 49A
U.S.C. sec. 1472(k)); also certain
violations of the Fair Housing Act
of 1968 (42 U.S.C. secs. 3610 and
3631).

Bail -- the sum of money promised
as a condition of release, to be
paid if a released defendant
defaults (18 U.S.C. sec. 3142(c)).

Bribery -- offering or promising
anything of value with intent to
unlawfully influence a public official
in the discharge of official duties. 
Applies generally to bank
employees, officers or employees
of the U.S. Government,
witnesses, or any common carrier. 
Includes soliciting or receiving
anything of value in consideration
of aiding a person to obtain
employment in the U.S.
Government.  Also, receiving or
soliciting any remuneration, directly
or indirectly, in cash or any kind in
return for purchasing, ordering,
leasing, or recommending to
purchase any good, service, or
facility (18 U.S.C. secs. 201(a),
203(a)(b), 204, 207(a)(c), 208,
210, 211, 213, 215, and 663; 21
U.S.C. sec. 622; 46 U.S.C.sec.
239(i); and 49 U.S.C. secs.l 104,
917(b), and 11904(b)).
 
Burglary -- breaking and entering
into another's property with intent
to steal within the special maritime
and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States, as defined in 18
U.S.C. sec. 7.  Includes breaking
and entering into any official bank,
credit union, savings and loan
institution, post office, vessel or
steamboat assigned to the use of
mail service, or personal property
of the United States; or breaking
the seal or lock of any carrier
facility containing interstate or
foreign shipments of freight or
express (18 U.S.C. secs. 2111,
2113(a), and 2115-17).

Career offender -- defendants are
counted as career offenders if they
are at least 18 years old at the time
of the instant offense, if the instant
offense of conviction is a felony --
that is either a crime of violence or
a drug crime; and if they have at
least two prior felony convictions of
either a crime of violence or a drug
crime.
 
Case -- in this Compendium, a
judicial proceeding for the
determination of a controversy
between parties wherein rights are
enforced or protected, or wrongs
are prevented or redressed; any
proceeding judicial in its nature.

Civil rights -- violations of civil
liberties such as the personal,
natural rights guaranteed and
protected by the Constitution. 
Includes the Civil Rights Acts, such
as those enacted after the Civil
War, and more recently in 1957
and 1964.

Collateral bond -- an agreement
made by a defendant as a
condition of his or her pretrial
release that requires the defendant
to post property valued at the full
bail amount as an assurance of his
or her intention to appear at trial.

Communication -- violations
covering areas of communication
such as the Communications Act of
1934 (including wire tapping and
wire interception).  A
communication is ordinarily
considered to be a deliberate
interchange of thoughts or opinions
between two or more persons.

Community confinement  -- a
form of commitment either as a
substitute for Federal imprisonment
or as a condition of probation in a
community treatment center,
halfway house, restitution center,
mental health facility, alcohol or
drug rehabilitation center, or other
community facility; and
participation in gainful employment,
employment search efforts,
community service, vocational
training, treatment, educational
programs, or similar
facility-approved programs during
non-residential hours.  Under the
Federal sentencing guidelines,
community confinement may be a
substitute for imprisonment on a
day-to-day basis for defendants
with a guideline maximum of less
than 16 months of imprisonment
(see also, U.S.S.G. sec. 5C1.1(e)).

Complaint -- a written statement
of the essential facts constituting
the offense charged, with an offer
to prove the fact, so that a
prosecution may be instituted.  The
complaint can be "taken out" by the
victim, the police officer, the district
attorney, or other interested party.
 
Concurrent sentence -- a
sentence imposed which is to be
served at the same time as another
sentence imposed earlier or during
the same proceeding (18 U.S.C.
sec. 3584).  (See also,
"Consecutive sentence.")
 
Conditional release -- in this
Compendium, at the pretrial stage,
a conditional release is release
from detention contingent on any
combination of restrictions that are
deemed necessary to guarantee
the defendant's appearance at trial
or the safety of the community (see
text in Chapter 2 of this
Compendium.)

Consecutive sentence -- a sen-
tence imposed that will follow
another sentence imposed earlier
or during the same proceeding;
opposite of concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy -- an agreement by
two or more persons to commit or
to effect the commission of an
unlawful act or to use unlawful
means to accomplish an act that is
not in itself unlawful; also any overt
act in furtherance of the
agreement.  A person charged with
conspiracy is classified under the
substantive offense alleged.

Continuing criminal enterprise -- 
a felony committed as part of a
continuing series of violations,
which is undertaken by a person in
concert with five or more other
persons with respect to whom such
person occupies a position of
organizer, a supervisory position,
or any other position of
management, and from which such
person obtains substantial income
or resources (21 U.S.C. sec.
848(c)).

Conviction -- the result of a
criminal trial which ends in a
judgment that the defendant is
guilty.  The final judgment on a
verdict or finding of guilty, a plea of
guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere,
but does not include a final
judgment which has been
expunged by pardon, reversed, set
aside, or otherwise rendered
invalid.

Corporate surety -- in this
Compendium, a surety; one who
has entered into a bond to give
surety for another; for example,
bail bondsman.  As a condition of
his or her release, the defendant
enters into an agreement that
requires a third party such as a bail
bondsman to promise to pay the
full bail amount in the event that
the defendant fails to appear.  (See
also, "Surety bond.")

Counterfeiting -- falsely making,
forging, or altering obligations with
a view to deceive or defraud, by
passing the copy or thing forged for
that which is original or genuine. 
Applies to obligation or security of
the United States, foreign
obligation or security, coin or bar
stamped at any mint in the United
States, money order issued by the
Postal Service, domestic or foreign
stamp, or seal of any department
or agency of the United States. 
Includes passing, selling,
attempting to pass or sell, or
bringing into the United States any
of the above falsely made articles. 
Also, making, selling, or
possessing any plates or stones
(or any other thing or instrument)
used for printing counterfeit
obligations or securities of the
United States, foreign obligations
or securities, Government
transportation requests, or postal
stamp; or knowingly and
intentionally trafficking in falsified
labels affixed to phonorecords,
motion pictures, or audio visual
works (for example, 18 U.S.C.
secs. 471, 473, 477, 479, 481, 485,
487, 501, 507, 509, 513(b), 2318,
and 2320).

Courts -- See "Appeals, U.S.
Court of" and "District court, U.S." 
Pursuant to Article III of the
Constitution, judicial power is
vested in the following Federal
Courts:  The U.S. Supreme Court,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, and the U.S.
district court for the District of
Columbia.

Criminal career -- the longitudinal
sequence of crimes committed by
an individual offender.
 
Criminal history category --
under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, a quantification of the
defendant's prior criminal record
and the defendant's propensity to
recidivate.  Guideline criminal
history categories range from
Category I (primarily first-time
offenders) to Category VI (career
criminals).

Custom laws -- violations
regarding taxes which are payable
upon goods and merchandise
imported or exported.  Includes the
duties, toll, tribute, or tariff payable
upon merchandise exported or
imported.

Deadly or dangerous weapon --
an instrument capable of inflicting
death or serious bodily injury.
 
Declination -- the decision by a
prosecutor not to file a case in a
matter received for investigation. 
In this Compendium, immediate
declinations (i.e., where less than 1
hour of time is spent on a case) are
excluded.

Defendant -- the party against
whom relief or recovery is sought
in an action or suit, or the accused
in a criminal case.

Departure -- under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, the term
used to describe a sentence
imposed outside the applicable
guideline sentencing range.  A
court may depart when it finds an
aggravating or mitigating
circumstance of a kind, or to a
degree, not adequately taken into
consideration by the Sentencing
Commission in formulating the
guidelines that should result in a
sentence different from that
described (18 U.S.C. sec. 3553(b);
U.S.S.G. sec. 5K2.0).  (See also,
"Substantial assistance.")
 
Deposit bond -- an agreement
made by a defendant as a
condition of his or her release that
requires the defendant to post a
fraction of the bail before he or she
is released.

Detention -- the legally authorized
confinement of persons after
arrest, whether before or during
prosecution.  Only those persons
held 2 or more days are classified
as detained in this Compendium.

Dismissal -- termination of a case
before trial or other final judgment
(including nolle prosequi and
deferred prosecution).

Disposition -- the decision made
on a case brought before a criminal
court.

Distribution -- delivery (other than
by administering or dispensing) of
a controlled substance (21 U.S.C.
sec. 802(6)).  The term "controlled
substance" means any drug or
other substance, or immediate
precursor, included in schedule I,
II, III, IV, or V of part B of
subchapter I of Chapter 13 (title
21).  The term does not include
distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, or tobacco, as those
terms are defined or used in
subtitle E of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986.

District court, U.S. -- trial courts
with general Federal jurisdiction
over cases involving Federal laws
or offenses and actions between
citizens of different States.

District of Columbia -- the
jurisdiction of the U.S. district court
for the District of Columbia.  This
Compendium includes Federal
offenses prosecuted in U.S. district
courts, and except for tables based
on data from the Bureau of
Prisons, excludes violations of the
District of Columbia Code and
cases prosecuted in the District of
Columbia Superior Court.
  
Drug offenses -- offenses under a
Federal or State laws prohibiting
the manufacture, import, export,
distribution, or dispensing of a
controlled substance (or counterfeit
substance), or the possession of a
controlled substance (or a
counterfeit substance) with intent
to manufacture, import, export,
distribute, or dispense.  Also using
any communication facilities which
causes or facilitates a felony under
title 21, or furnishing of fraudulent
or false information concerning
prescriptions as well as any other
unspecified drug-related offense. 
(See also, "Distribution,"
"Possession," and "Trafficking.")

Embezzlement -- the fraudulent
appropriation of property by a
person to whom such property has
been lawfully entrusted.  Includes
offenses committed by bank
officers or employees; officers or
employees of the Postal Service;
officers of lending, credit, or
insurance institutions; any officer or
employee of a corporation or
association engaged in commerce
as a common carrier; court officers
of the U.S. courts; or officers or
employees of the United States. 
Also, stealing from employment
and training funds, programs
receiving Federal funds, and Indian
tribal organizations; or selling,
conveying, or disposing of any
money, property, records, or thing
of value to the United States or any
department thereof without
authority (for example, 15 U.S.C.
sec. 645(c); 18 U.S.C. secs. 153,
334, 642-57, 665(a)(b), 666(b),
1163, 1709, 1711, 1956, and 1957;
25 U.S.C. sec. 450(d); 29 U.S.C.
sec. 502(b); and 42 U.S.C. secs.
1760, 2971, and 3220(b)).

Escape  -- departing or attempting
to depart from the custody of a
correctional institution; a judicial,
correctional, or law enforcement
officer; or a hospital where one is
committed for drug abuse and drug
dependency problems.  Knowingly
advising, aiding, assisting, or
procuring the escape or attempted
escape of any person from a
correctional facility, an officer, or
the above-mentioned hospital as
well as concealing an escapee. 
Providing or attempting to provide
to an inmate in prison a prohibited
object; or making, possessing,
obtaining, or attempting to make or
obtain a prohibited object (as
defined in 18 U.S.C. sec.
1791(d)(1)(A)).  Instigating,
assisting, attempting to cause, or
causing any mutiny or riot at any
Federal penal, detention, or
correctional facility, or conveying
into any of these institutions any
dangerous instrumentalities (for
example, 18 U.S.C. secs.
751(a)(b), 752(a), 753, 755-56,
1071, 1073, 1791(a)(c), (d)(1)(A),
1792, 3146(a)(b)(d), 3147 and
3615; 28 U.S.C. sec. 1826; 42
U.S.C. secs. 261 and 3425; and 50
U.S.C sec. 823).

Explosives -- violations of Federal
law involving importation,
manufacture, distribution, and
storage of explosive material. 
Includes unlawful receipt,
possession or transportation of
explosives without a license (18
U.S.C. sec. 842(a)), where
prohibited by law (18 U.S.C. sec.
842(c), or using explosives during
commission of a felony (18 U.S.C.
sec. 844(h)).  Also includes
violations relating to dealing in
stolen explosives (18 U.S.C. sec.
842(h)), using mail or other form of
communication to threaten an
individual with explosives (18
U.S.C. sec. 844(e), and
possessing explosive materials at
an airport (18 U.S.C. sec. 844(g),
and 49A U.S.C. secs. 1804 and
1809).  (See also, "Arson" and 18
U.S.C. secs. 842(e)(g)(i)(k); and
sec. 844(b).)
  
Failure to appear -- willful
absence from any court
appointment.

Felony -- a criminal offense
punishable by death or
imprisonment for a term exceeding
1 year.  According to 18 U.S.C.
sec. 3559, felonies are classified
into 5 grades based on maximum
terms of imprisonment:  Class A
felony, if the maximum term is life
imprisonment, or if the maximum
penalty is death; Class B, if 25
years or more; Class C, if less than
25 years, but 10 years or more;
Class D, if less than 10 years, but
five or more years; and Class E, if
less than 5 years, but more than 1.  

Filing -- the initiation of a criminal
case in U.S. district court by formal
submission to the court of a
charging document alleging that
one or more named persons have
committed one or more specified
offenses.  In this Compendium,
each defendant in a case is
counted separately, and only the
most serious alleged offense is
considered.

Financial conditions -- monetary
conditions upon which release of a
defendant before trial is contingent. 
Includes deposit bond, surety
bond, and collateral bond.  (See
also, "Specific definitions.")

First release -- in this
Compendium, prisoners who are
released from the Bureau of
Prisons for the first time after their
commitment by a U.S. district court
(i.e., excludes offenders who are
returned to prison after their first
release, such as probation, parole,
etc.).

Food and drug violations --
violations of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act such as
regulations for clean and sanitary
movement of animals (21 U.S.C.
sec. 134(b)), adulteration or
misbranding of any food or drug
(21 U.S.C. sec. 331(a)), failure to
transmit information about
prescription drugs (21 U.S.C. sec.
331(o)), and intent to defraud and
distribute adulterated material (21
U.S.C. sec. 676).  (See also, 18
U.S.C. sec. 1365(b); 21 U.S.C.
secs. 17, 22, 63, 115, 122, 126,
134(d), 142, 144, 151, 153, 155,
158, 201, 205, 209, 210, 212,
331(b)--(g), 331(i)--(n)(p)(t),
333(a), 458(a), 459, 460(a)--(d),
461(a), 463, 466, 610(a)(c),
611(a), 620, 642, 1037, 1041(a),
and 1175.)

Forgery -- falsely making or
materially altering a document with
the intent to defraud.  Includes
such falsification with intent to pass
off as genuine any of the following:
U.S. Postal Service money order;
postmarking stamp or impression;
obligation or security of the United
States; foreign obligation, security,
or bank note; contractors' bond,
bid, or public record; deed; power
of attorney; letters patent; seal of a
court or any department or agency
of the U.S. Government; the
signature of a judge or court
officer; ships' papers; documents
on entry of vessels; customs
matters; coin or bar; and so forth. 
Also includes making, possessing,
selling, or printing plates or stones
for counterfeiting obligations or
securities, and detaching, altering,
or defacing any official, device,
mark or certificate (for example, 18
U.S.C. secs. 483, 493, 495, 497,
503, 505, 510(a)(b), and 511; 19
U.S.C. sec. 1436; and 21 U.S.C.
secs. 458(b)(c)). 

Fraud -- unlawfully depriving a
person of his or her property or
legal rights through intentional
misrepresentation of fact or deceit
other than forgery or counterfeiting. 
Includes violations of statutes
pertaining to lending and credit
institutions, the Postal Service,
interstate wire, radio, television,
computer, credit card, veterans
benefits, allotments, bankruptcy,
marketing agreements, commodity
credit, the Securities and
Exchange Commission, railroad
retirement, unemployment, Social
Security, food stamp, false
personation, citizenship, passports,
conspiracy, and claims and
statements, excluding tax fraud. 
The category excludes fraud
involving tax violations that are
shown in a separate category
under "Public-order, other
offenses."  (See also, specific
offenses in this glossary for
citations.)

Fraudulent property offenses --
see "Property offenses,
fraudulent."

Gambling -- the Federal offense of
transporting, manufacturing,
selling, possessing, or using any
gambling device in the District of
Columbia or any possession of the
United States or within Indian
country or the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United
States as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec.
7. Includes transporting gambling
devices in the jurisdiction of the
United States (except under
authority of the Federal Trade
Commission or any State that has
a law providing for their exemption
from these provisions), transmitting
wagering information in interstate
or foreign commerce, interstate
transporting of wagering
paraphernalia, importing or
transporting lottery tickets, or
mailing lottery tickets or related
matter (for example, 15 U.S.C.
secs. 1173 and 1175; and 18
U.S.C. secs. 1082(a), 1084, 1302,
1956, and 1962).

Good-time -- time credited toward
early release to an offender for
good behavior in imprisonment. 
Under the 1984 Sentencing
Reform Act, two classes of
prisoners are ineligible to receive
good-time credits:  (1)
misdemeanants serving a term of
imprisonment of 1 year or less; and
(2) felons serving life sentences. 
All other Federal prisoners receive
a flat allocation of 54 days per year
of sentence served; credit for a
partial year remaining at the end of
the sentence is prorated.  The
annual allotment does not change
according to the length of time a
Federal inmate already has spent
in prison (18 U.S.C. sec. 3624(b)).

Guideline sentencing range --
under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, the range of
imprisonment corresponding to the
applicable guideline offense level
and criminal history category.  The
guideline offense level incorporates
any minimum terms of
imprisonment required by statute
as well as the statutory maximum
term of imprisonment, where
applicable.

Guilty plea -- a plea in response to
formal charges admitting that the
defendant committed offenses as
charged.  In this Compendium, this
category also includes pleas of
nolo contendere.

Hispanic -- ethnic category based
on classification by reporting
agency.  Hispanic persons may be
of any race.

Home detention -- a form of
confinement and supervision either
as a substitute for imprisonment or
as a condition of probation that
restricts the defendant to his place
of residence continuously (except
for authorized absences) and
enforced by appropriate means of
surveillance by the probation office. 
Under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, home detention may be
a substitute for imprisonment on a
day to day basis for defendants
with a guideline maximum
sentence of less than 16 months
imprisonment.  (See also, U.S.S.G.
sec. 5C1.1.)

Homicide -- see "Murder."

Immigration offenses -- offenses
involving illegal entrance into the
United States, illegally reentering
after being deported, willfully failing
to deport when so ordered, willfully
remaining beyond days allowed on
conditional permit, or falsely
representing oneself to be a citizen
of the United States.  Includes
violations relating to provisions for
special agricultural workers and to
those relating to limitations on
immigrant status (such as
employment).  Also includes
bringing in or harboring any aliens
not duly admitted by an
immigration officer (for example, 8
U.S.C. secs. 1160, 1252(d), 1255,
1282(a), 1286, 1324-25, and
1326(a)).
 
Incarceration  -- any sentence of
confinement, including prison, jail,
and other residential placements.
Indeterminate sentence  -- a
prison sentence whose maximum
or minimum term is not specifically
established at the time of
sentencing (18 U.S.C. secs.
4205(b)(1)(2)).

Indictment -- the formal charging
of the defendant with a particular
crime by a grand jury.  In the
Federal system, a defendant may
waive indictment and be
proceeded against through an
information.  (See also,  Fed. R.
Crim. P. 7(b).)

Information -- the formal
accusation charging the defendant
with a particular crime but brought
by the U.S. Attorney rather than by
the grand jury.

Infraction -- an offense for which
the maximum term of imprisonment
is 5 days or less, or where no
imprisonment is authorized,
according to 18 U.S.C. sec. 3559.
Instant offense -- the offense of
conviction, and all relevant conduct
under U.S.S.G sec. 1B1.3. 
  
Intermittent confinement  -- a
form of commitment, in a prison or
jail, either as a substitute for
imprisonment or as a condition of
probation.  Under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, intermittent
confinement may be a substitute
for imprisonment (each 24 hours of
intermittent confinement is credited
as 1 day of incarceration) for
defendants with a guideline
maximum of less than 16 months
imprisonment.  (See also, U.S.S.G.
sec. 5C1.1.)

Jurisdictional offenses -- acts
that are Federal crimes because of
the place in which they occur (such
as on an aircraft, on Federal land
or property) and for certain crimes
on Indian reservations or at sea,
but which cannot be classified in a
more specific substantive category.

Juvenile  -- a person who has not
attained the age of 18 years; or for
the purposes of a juvenile
delinquency hearing, a person who
has not attained the age of 21
years (18 U.S.C. sec. 5031).
 
Juvenile delinquency  -- a
violation of Federal law committed
by a person prior to the age of 18
years which would have been a
crime if committed by an adult (18
U.S.C. sec. 5031).

Kidnaping -- unlawfully seizing
any person as defined in 18 U.S.C.
sec. 1201 for ransom or reward,
except in the case of a minor by a
parent.  Includes receiving,
possessing, or disposing of any
money or other property that has
been delivered as ransom or
reward in connection with a
kidnaping as well as conspiring to
kidnap.  Also, includes kidnaping or
attempting to kidnap any
Government official, the President
of the United States, the
President-elect, the Vice President,
any foreign official, any official
guest, or any internationally
protected person.  (See also, 18
U.S.C. sec. 351(b); and hostage
taking as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec.
1203.)

Labor law violations  -- violations
of, for example, the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 and the
Taft-Hartley Act, which govern a
broad spectrum of activities
relating to labor-management
relations (for example, 29 U.S.C.
secs. 186(a), 461(a), 463, 1021(b),
1022, 1023(b)(d), 1024(a)(c),
1027, 1111(a)(b), 1112(c), 1811,
1816, 1821 and 1851).
 
Larceny  -- the act of taking and
carrying away any personal
property of another with intent to
steal or convert it to one's own use
or gain.  Includes stealing,
possessing or illegally selling or
disposing of anything of value to
the United States or any of its
departments or agencies; or
stealing from a bank, the Postal
Service, or any interstate or foreign
shipments by carrier.  Also
encompasses receiving or
possessing stolen property or
pirate property; and stealing or
obtaining by fraud any funds,
assets, or that belong to, or are
entrusted to, the custody of an
Indian tribal organization (for
example, 18 U.S.C. secs, 641,
659, 661-62, 667, 1168(a), 1704,
1707, and 2113(b)).  (This offense
category excludes the
transportation of stolen property.)

Liquor violations  -- violations of
Internal Revenue Service laws on
liquor, as well as violations of liquor
laws not cited under these laws,
such as dispensing or unlawfully
possessing intoxicants in Indian
country; transporting intoxicating
liquors into any State, territory,
district, or possession where sale
is prohibited; shipping packages
containing unmarked and
unlabeled intoxicants; shipping
liquor by C.O.D.; knowingly
delivering a liquor shipment to
someone other than to whom it has
been consigned; and violating in
any way the Federal Alcohol
Administration Act (for example, 18
U.S.C. secs. 1154, 1156, 1263 and
1265; 26 U.S.C. secs. 5113,
5171(c), 5179, 5214, 5222, 5291,
5301(b), 5601, 5603(a), 5604,
5606, 5608(a), 5661(a), 5662,
5672, 5681(a)(c), 5683, 5685(b)
and 5687; and 27 U.S.C. secs.
203, 205(f), 206(b) and 208(a))
. 
Magistrates (U.S.) (Federal) --
judicial officers appointed by
judges of Federal district courts
having many but not all of the
powers of a judge.  Magistrates are
designated to hear a wide variety
of motions and other pretrial
matters in both criminal and civil
cases.  With consent of the parties,
they may conduct civil or
misdemeanor criminal trials. 
Magistrates, however, may not
preside over felony trials or over
jury selection in felony cases.

Mailing or transportation of
obscene materials -- a violation of
Federal law relating to knowingly
using the mail for mailing obscene
or crime-inciting matter, as defined
in 18 U.S.C. sec. 1461 and 39
U.S.C. sec. 3001(e).  Also includes
transporting for sale or distribution,
importing, or transporting any
obscene matter in interstate or
foreign commerce.  (See also, 18
U.S.C. secs. 1462-63.)

Major offense (while on
conditional release) -- allegation,
arrest, or conviction of a crime for
which the minimum sentence is
incarceration for over 90 days or
greater than 1 year on probation. 
(See also, PACTS Statistical
Reporting Guide, Version 1.0,
Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts.)
 
Mandatory sentences -- a sentence 
that includes a minimum
term of imprisonment that the
sentencing court is statutorily
required to impose barring the
government's motion of substantial
assistance.  See, for example, 18
U.S.C. secs. 841 and 960, which
provide for mandatory sentences
ranging from 5 years imprisonment
to life imprisonment depending on
the quantity of drugs involved.
 
Mandatory sentencing
enhancement -- a form of
mandatory sentence in which the
minimum term of imprisonment is
to be imposed consecutive to any
other term of imprisonment
imposed.  See, for example, 18
U.S.C. sec. 924(c), which provides
for a 5-year to lifetime
enhancement for the use of a
firearm during the commission of a
crime; 18 U.S.C. sec. 844(h),
which provides for a 5-year
enhancement for use of firearms or
explosives during the commission
of a crime; and 18 U.S.C. sec. 929
which provides for a 5-year
enhancement for the use of
armor-piercing ammunition during
the commission of a crime.

Mandatory release -- the release
of an inmate from prison after
confinement for a time period equal
to his or her full sentence minus
statutory good-time, if any. 
Federal prisoners released on
mandatory release may still be
subject to a period of post-release
community supervision.

Matter -- in this Compendium, a
potential case under review by a
U.S. attorney on which more than 1
hour is expended.

Matters concluded -- in this
Compendium, matters about which
a final decision has been reached
by a U.S. attorney.  Specifically
includes matters filed as cases,
matters declined after
investigation, matters referred for
disposition by U.S. magistrates,
and matters otherwise terminated
without reaching court.

Migratory birds offenses --
violations of acts relating to birds
which move from one place to
another in season.  Includes
taking, killing, or possessing
migratory birds, or any part, nest,
or egg thereof, in violation of
Federal regulations or the
transportation laws of the State,
territory, or district from which the
bird was taken.  Also, misuse or
non-use of a migratory-bird hunting
and conservation stamp (for
example, 16 U.S.C. secs. 690(g),
701, 703, 704-6, 707(b), 708, 711,
and 718(a)(e)(g)).
 
Minor offense (while on conditional 
release) -- conviction of a crime 
for which the maximum sentence is 
incarceration for 90 days or less, 
probation of 1 year or less, or 
a fine of $500 or less. 
(See also, PACTS Statistical
Reporting Guide, Version 1.0,
Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts.)
 
Misdemeanor -- a criminal offense
punishable by a jail term not
exceeding 1 year and any offense
specifically defined as a
misdemeanor by the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts for the
purposes of data collection. 
According to 18 U.S.C. sec. 3559,
misdemeanors are classified in 3
letter grades, based on the
maximum terms of imprisonment: 
Class A, if 1 year or less, but more
than 6 months; Class B, if 6
months or less, but more than 30
days; and Class C, 30 days or
less, but more than 5 days.  (This
category includes offenses
previously called minor offenses
that were reclassified under the
Federal Magistrate Act of 1979.)

Mixed sentence -- a sentence
requiring the convicted offender to
serve a term of imprisonment,
followed by a term of probation. 
Unless otherwise noted, offenders
receiving mixed sentences are
included in both incarceration and
probation categories.
 
Most serious offense -- in this
Compendium, the offense with the
greatest potential sentence; or with
respect to tables describing
Federal prisoners, the offense with
the greatest imposed sentence (for
example, prison data in Chapter 6).

Motor carrier violations --
violations of the Federal statutes 
relating to the Motor Carrier Act,
which regulates (routes, rates) of
motor carriers of freight and
passengers in interstate
commerce.  The Act is
administered by the Interstate
Commerce Commission (for
example, 15 U.S.C. secs. 1984,
1986, 1988 and 1990; 49 U.S.C.
secs. 117(a), 301(f), 303(f),
322(a)(d), 411, 526, 917(f),
1021(b)(f), 11703, 11903(a),
11904, 11907, 11909(a), 11909(c),
11910, 11913, and 11914; and 49A
U.S.C. sec. 120).

Motor vehicle theft -- interstate or
foreign transporting, receiving,
concealing, storing, bartering,
selling, or disposing of any stolen
motor vehicle or aircraft (for
example, 18 U.S.C. secs. 2119,
2313, and 2322; and 49A U.S.C.
sec. 1472(i)).

Murder -- the unlawful killing of a
human being with malice
aforethought, either express or
implied.  Nonnegligent
manslaughter is the unlawful killing
of a human being without malice. 
This offense covers committing or
attempting to commit murder (first
or second degree) or voluntary
manslaughter within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction
of the United States (18 U.S.C.
sec. 7).  Includes killing or
attempting to kill any Government
official, the President of the United
States, the President-elect, the
Vice President, any officers and
employees of the United States,
any foreign officials, any official
guests, or any internationally
protected persons.  As applied to
the owner or charterer of any
steamboat or vessel, knowingly
and willfully causing or allowing
fraud, neglect, misconduct, or
violation of any law resulting in loss
of life (18 U.S.C. secs. 113(a),
115(a), 1111-13, 1115, 1117,
1512(a)(1), 1751(a), and 2332(b)).

National defense violations --
violations of the national defense
laws on the Military Selective
Service Act, the Defense
Production Act of 1950, the
Economic Stabilization Act of 1970
(which includes prices, rents, and
wages), the Subversive Activities
Control Act, alien registration,
treason (including espionage,
sabotage, sedition, and the Smith
Act of 1940); also violations
relating to energy facilities, curfew
and restricted areas, exportation of
war materials, trading with an
enemy, illegal use of uniform and
any other violations of the Federal
statutes concerning national
defense (for example, 8 U.S.C.
secs. 1304(e) and 1306(b)(d); 10
U.S.C. secs. 976 and 2408; 18
U.S.C. secs. 703, 705, 711, 713,
792, 794, 797, 799, 953, 961, 965,
967, 970, 1366(a), 1382, 2152,
2153(b), 2154(b), 2155(b),
2156(b), 2382, 2384, 2386,
2388(a)(c), and 2390; 22 U.S.C.
secs. 253, 286, 447, 447(c), 450,
455, 612, 614(b)(f), 617, 1178(c),
1182, 1199, 1978(c), 2778(b),
4198, 4202 and 5113(c); 42 U.S.C.
secs. 2274(b), 2276, 2278(b) and
2384(b); and 50A U.S.C. secs. 2,
3(a)(c), 16, 167, 210, 322, 324,
326, 328, 421(a)(c), 462, 468(b),
643(a), 781, 783(b)(d), 789, 794,
797, 851, 1152, 1705, 1436(e),
1809(c), 2062, 2071(b), 2073,
2405(a)(b), and 2410(b)).

Negligent manslaughter --
causing the death of another,
within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United
States as defined in 18 U.S.C. sec.
7, by wanton or reckless disregard
for human life.  Also negligent
manslaughter of any Government
official, the President of the United
States, the President-elect, the
Vice President, any officers and
employees of the United States,
any foreign officials, any official
guests, or any internationally
protected persons.  This offense
category also includes misconduct,
negligence, or inattention to duties
by ship officers on a steamboat or
vessel resulting in death to any
person (18 U.S.C. sec. 1112).

New law -- In this Compendium
defendants convicted and
sentenced pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 
(See also "Old law.")

Nolo contendere -- defendant's
plea in a criminal case indicating
that he or she will not contest
charges, but not admitting or
denying guilt.

Non-citizen -- a person who is
without U.S. citizenship, including
legal aliens (for example, resident
aliens, tourists, and
refugees/asylees) and illegal
aliens.
Nonviolent sex offenses --
transporting, coercing, or enticing
any individual (including minors) to
go from one place to another in
interstate or foreign commerce, in
the District of Columbia, or in any
territory or possession of the
United States with the intent and
purpose to engage in prostitution,
or any sexual activity for which any
person can be charged with a
criminal offense (8 U.S.C. sec.
1328 and 18 U.S.C. secs. 1460,
1466, 2251-52, 2257, 2421 and
2423).

Not convicted -- acquittal by
bench or jury trial, mistrial, and
dismissal (including nolle prosequi
and deferred prosecution).

Not guilty  -- plea entered by the
accused to a criminal charge.  If
the defendant refuses to plead, the
court will enter a plea of not guilty. 
Also the form of a verdict in a
criminal trial where the jury acquits
the defendant.

Offense -- violation of U.S. criminal
law.  In this Compendium, where
more than 1 offense is charged,
the offense with the greatest
potential penalty is reported.

Offense level  -- under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, a
quantification of the relative
seriousness of the offense of
conviction and any offense-specific
aggravating or mitigating factors. 
Guideline offense levels range
from level 1 (the least serious
offense) to level 43 (the most
serious offense).

Old law -- in this Compendium,
defendants convicted and
sentenced pursuant to laws
applicable before the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984.  (See also,
"New law.")

Parole -- period of supervision
after release from custody before
the expiration of sentence.  The
U.S. Parole Commission is
empowered to grant, modify or
revoke the parole of all Federal
offenders.  Pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984,
parole was abolished and
defendants are required to serve
the imposed sentence (less 54
days per year good-time for
sentences greater than 1 year, but
not life imprisonment), followed by
a term of supervised release. 
Because of the number of Federal
inmates sentenced under
pre-Sentencing Reform provisions,
parole is being phased out.

Perjury -- a false material
declaration under oath in any
proceeding before or ancillary to
any court or grand jury of the
United States.  Includes knowingly
or willfully giving false evidence or
swearing to false statements under
oath or by any means procuring or
instigating any person to commit
perjury.  This offense also includes
any officers and employees of the
Government listed under 13 U.S.C.
secs. 21-25 who willfully or
knowingly furnish, or cause to be
furnished, any false information or
statement (for example, 2 U.S.C.
sec. 192; 13 U.S.C. sec. 213; 15
U.S.C. sec. 2614; 18 U.S.C.secs.
401, 402, 1504, 1506, 1508, 1510,
1512(b), 1513, and 1622; 28
U.S.C. sec. 1866(g); 42 U.S.C.
sec. 5411; 43 U.S.C. sec. 104; and
49A U.S.C. secs. 1472 (m)(o)).

Personal recognizance -- pretrial
release condition in which the
defendant promises to appear at
trial and no financial conditions are
required to be met.

Petty offense -- a Class B
misdemeanor, a Class C
misdemeanor, or an infraction with
fines as specified in 18 U.S.C.
secs. 3571.  (See also,
"Misdemeanor" and "Infraction.")

Plea bargaining -- practice
whereby a defendant in a criminal
proceeding agrees to plead guilty
to a charge in exchange for the
prosecution's cooperation in
securing a more lenient sentence
or some other mitigation.

Pornographic -- that which is of or
pertaining to obscene literature;
obscene, licentious.  Material is
pornographic or obscene if the
average person, applying
contemporary community
standards, would find that the work
taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest; and if it depicts in
a patently offensive way sexual
conduct; and if the work taken as a
whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(See Milla v. California, 113 U.S.
15 (1973).)

Possession -- offense involving
the possession of a controlled
substance, acquiring a controlled
substance by misrepresentation or
fraud, attempting or conspiring to
possess, or simple possession of a
controlled substance in schedules
I-V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. secs.
812).  Includes possession of a
controlled substance in schedule I
or II, or a narcotic drug in schedule
III or IV on board a vessel of the
United States or vessels within
custom waters of the United
States, or by any citizen of the
United States on board a vessel. 
Also, possessing any punch, die,
plate, stone, or any other thing
designed to reproduce the label
upon any drug or container is an
offense under this category. 
Distributing a small amount of
marijuana for no remuneration is
treated as simple possession and,
therefore, is included in this
offense category (for example, 21
U.S.C. secs. 829 (a)(b)(c),
841(a)(b)(d)(g), 842(a)(c), 843(a),
844(a), 846, 955, and 962).

Postal laws -- offenses relating to
the mail; pertaining to the post
office.

Presentence Investigation Report 
(PSR) -- following a presentence 
investigation, a report
to the court prepared by the
probation officer before the
imposition of sentence, as required
by law; unless the court finds that
there is information in the record
sufficient to enable the meaningful
exercise of sentencing authority
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. sec. 3553,
and the court explains this finding
on the record.

Presentment -- an accusation
initiated by the grand jury itself,
and in effect, an instruction that an
indictment be drawn.

Pretrial diversion -- an agreement
to defer (and possibly drop)
prosecution conditioned on the
defendant's good behavior and/or
participation in programs (such as
job training, counseling, education)
during a stated period.

Pretrial release  -- the release of a
defendant from custody, for all or
part of the time, before or during
prosecution.  The defendant may
be released either on personal
recognizance or unsecured bond
or on financial conditions.  The
category includes defendants
released within 2 days after arrest
and defendants who were initially
detained but subsequently
released after raising bail or having
release conditions changed at a
subsequent hearing.

Probation -- sentence imposed for
commission of a crime whereby the
convicted criminal offender is
released into the community under
the supervision of a probation
officer in lieu of incarceration.  
An act of clemency available only 
to those found eligible by the court,
probation offers a chance for
reform and rehabilitation for the
defendant.  For this purpose, the
defendant must agree to specified
standards of conduct; violation of
such standards subjects his liberty
to revocation.
   
Property offenses, fraudulent --
property offenses involving the
elements of deceit or intentional
misrepresentation.  Specifically
includes embezzlement, fraud
(excluding tax fraud), forgery, and
counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraud-
ulent -- violent offenses against
property:  burglary, larceny, motor
vehicle theft, arson, transportation
of stolen property, and other
property offenses (destruction of
property and trespassing).  These
offenses are termed "non-fraudulent
" only for the purpose of 
distinguishing them from the 
category "Property offenses, 
fraudulent," above.

Property offenses, other --
offenses that involve the
destruction of property moving in
interstate or foreign commerce in
the possession of a common or
contract carrier.  Includes the
malicious destruction of
Government property, or injury to
U.S. postal property such as
mailboxes or mailbags. 
Trespassing on timber and
Government lands is also included
in this category of offenses (for
example, 2 U.S.C. sec. 167(c)(g);
15 U.S.C. sec. 1281; 16 U.S.C.
secs. 3, 45(d), 114, 121, 123, 152,
430(q), 433, 470, 478, 481, 551,
and 605; 18 U.S.C. secs. 1164,
1361-62, 1364, 1852, 1854, 1856,
1858, 1860, 1863, 1864(c), and
2071(b); 40 U.S.C. secs. 193
(h)(q)(r)(s); 43 U.S.C. sec. 316;
and 47 U.S.C. secs. 13 and 22).
 
Public-order offenses,
non-regulatory -- offenses
concerning weapons; immigration;
tax law violations (tax fraud);
bribery; perjury; national defense;
escape; racketeering and extortion;
gambling; liquor; mailing or
transporting of obscene materials;
traffic; migratory birds; conspiracy,
aiding and abetting, and
jurisdictional offenses; and "other
public-order offenses."  These
offenses are termed
"non-regulatory" only for the
purpose of distinguishing them
from the category "Public-order
offenses, regulatory" below.

Public-order offenses, other --
violations of laws pertaining to
bigamy, disorderly conduct on the
U.S. Capitol grounds, civil disorder,
and travel to incite to riot (for
example, 18 U.S.C. secs. 228,
231, 1367, and 1385; 40 U.S.C.
secs. 193(b)(d)(g)(o)(p); and 47
U.S.C. secs. 223(a)(b)).  Included
in "Public-order offenses,
non-regulatory."

Public-order offenses,
regulatory -- violations of
regulatory laws and regulations in
agriculture, antitrust, labor law,
food and drug, motor carrier, and
other regulatory offenses that are
not specifically listed in the
category "Public-order offenses,
non-regulatory." 
 
Racketeering and extortion --
racketeering is demanding,
soliciting, or receiving anything of
value from the owner, proprietor or
other person having a financial
interest in a business, by means of
a threat or promise, either express
or implied.  Extortion is the
obtaining of money or property
from another, without his consent,
induced by the wrongful use of
force or fear.  This offense code
covers using interstate or foreign
commerce or any facility in
interstate or foreign commerce to
aid racketeering enterprises such
as arson, bribery, gambling, liquor,
narcotics, prostitution, and
extortionate credit transactions;
obtaining property or money from
another, with his or her consent
induced by actual or threatened
force; violence, blackmail, or
committing unlawful interference
with employment or business;
transmitting by interstate
commerce or through the mail any
threat to injure the property, the
person, or the reputation of the
addressee or of another; or
kidnaping any person with intent to
extort.  Applies to officers or
employees of the United States, or
anyone representing himself or
herself as such (for example, 18
U.S.C. secs. 831, 872, 874,
875(b)(d), 877, 878(b), 892, 894,
1365(d), 1952-53, 1955-60,
1962-63).
 
Release

Extraordinary release -- unusual
methods of prisoners exiting
prison, such as death,
commutation, and transfer to
another facility.

Standard release -- the usual way
prisoners exit prison, including
full-term sentence expirations,
expirations with good time,
mandatory releases, and releases
to parole.

Remand -- to send back.  The act
of an appellate court in sending a
case back to the lower court for
further action.

Remove -- transfer from Federal
court (usually to a State court).

Restitution -- the action of
restoring or giving back something
to its proper owner, or making
reparations to one for loss or injury
previously inflicted.

Reversal -- the act of an appellate
court annulling a judgment of a
lower court because of an error.

Revocation -- termination of a
probation, parole, or mandatory
release order because of either a
rule violation or a new offense, and
forcing the offender to begin or
continue serving his or her
sentence.

Robbery -- taking anything of
value from the person or presence
of another by force or by
intimidation, within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction
of the United States (18 U.S.C.
secs. 7).  Includes robbery of bank
property, U.S. postal property, or
personal property of the United
States.  Also, assaulting or putting
the life of any person in jeopardy
by the use of a dangerous weapon
while committing or attempting to
commit such robbery (for example,
18 U.S.C. secs. 1661, 1991, 2112,
2113(c) (d), 2114, 2116, and
2118(a)).
 
Rule 20 transfer -- upon petition
by a defendant, a transfer of
proceedings to the district in which
the defendant is arrested, when the
defendant is arrested, held, or
present in a district other than that
in which an indictment or
information is pending against him. 
In this case, the defendant may
state in writing a wish to plead
guilty or nolo contendere, to waive
trial in the district in which the
indictment or information is
pending, and to consent to the
disposition of the case in the
district in which the defendant was
arrested (Fed. R. Crim. P. 20).

Rule 40 transfer -- upon petition
by the U.S. attorney, commitment
to another district; transfer
proceedings of a defendant
arrested in a district for an alleged
offense committed in the another
district (Fed. R. Crim. P. 40).

Sentence -- sanction imposed on a
convicted offender.  For sentences
to incarceration, the maximum time
the offender may be held in
custody is reported.  (See also,
"Split sentence," "Mixed sentence,"
"Indeterminate sentence," and
"Mandatory sentence.")

Sentencing Guidelines (Federal)-- 
guidelines established by the
United States Sentencing
Commission to be followed by the
Federal courts in the sentencing of
those convicted of Federal
offenses.  Established pursuant to
the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, the sentencing guidelines
prescribe a range of sentences for
each class of convicted persons as
determined by categories of
offense behavior and offender
characteristics.

Sexual abuse -- rape, assault with
intent to commit rape, and carnal
knowledge of a female under 16
who is not one's wife, within the
territorial and special maritime
jurisdictions of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. sec. 7 (for
example, 22D U.S.C. sec. 2801). 
Also includes cases of sexual
abuse, including of a minor (18
U.S.C. secs. 2241(a) (c),
2242(2)(B), and 2243) and in
Federal prisons (18 U.S.C.
sec. 2244(a)).

Shock incarceration  -- an intense
confinement program, consisting of
a highly regimented schedule that
provides the strict discipline,
physical training, hard labor, drill,
and ceremony characteristic of
military basic training.
 
Special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction -- areas of Federal
jurisdiction outside the jurisdiction
of any State, including (1) the high
seas, Great Lakes, and connecting
waterways; (2) Federal lands; and
(3) U.S.-owned aircraft in flight
over the high seas (18 U.S.C. sec.
7).

Split sentence --  See, "Mixed
sentence."

Stale -- the case/matter is too old
to support successful prosecution.

Substantial assistance -- a form
of cooperation with the government
in which the defendant provides
the government with information,
testimony, or other assistance
relating to the criminal activities of
other persons in exchange for a
sentence reduction.  Substantial
assistance provides the only
mechanism for judges to impose a
sentence below an applicable
mandatory sentence (U.S.S.G.
5K1.1 as codified at 18 U.S.C. sec.
3553(e)).

Supervised release  -- under the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, a
form of post-imprisonment
supervision to be imposed by the
court as a part of the sentence of
imprisonment at the time of initial
sentencing.  Unlike parole, a term
of supervised release does not
replace a portion of the sentence of
imprisonment, but rather is an
order of supervision in addition to
any term of imprisonment imposed
by the court (compare also with
probation).

Surety bond -- an agreement by
the defendant as a condition of his
or her release that requires a third
party (usually a bail bondsman) to
promise to pay the full bail amount
in the event that the defendant fails
to appear.

Suspect -- a person who is under
investigation or interrogation as a
likely perpetrator of a specific
criminal offense.

Tax law violations  -- tax fraud
offenses such as income tax
evasion and fraud; counterfeiting
any stamps with intent to defraud
the collection or payment of tax;
willfully failing to collect or pay tax;
failure to obey summons to
produce any papers concerning
taxes; failing to furnish receipts for
employees of tax withheld; failing
to furnish information relating to
certain trusts, annuity, and bond
purchase plans; putting fraudulent
or false statements on tax returns;
and not obtaining a license for a
business that makes a profit from
foreign items.  Also included in this
offense category are violations of
excise and wagering tax laws and
any other laws listed below from
the Internal Revenue Service Code
(for example, 26 U.S.C. secs.
3402, 4412, 5751, 5762(a1),
6047(a)(c), 6331, 6420(e2), 6674,
7121, 7201, 7203(c), 7204,
7206(a)(c), 7208(a)(c), 7210,
7213(b), (d), 7214(b), 7216, 7232,
7513, 7602, and 7604(b)). 

Technical violation -- failure to
comply with any of the conditions
of pretrial release, probation, or
parole, excluding alleged new
criminal activity.  May result in
revocation of release status. 
Examples of conditions that may
be imposed and then violated
include remaining within a
specified jurisdiction or appearing
at specified intervals for drug tests.

Termination  -- at the pretrial
services stage:  execution of
sentence, acquittal, dismissal,
diversion, or fugitive status; in the
U.S. district court:  conviction,
acquittal, or dismissal; and at
probation or supervised release: 
the removal of a person from
supervision either for successful
completion of the term of
supervision or as the result of a
revocation.
 
Threats against the President --
knowingly and willfully depositing in
the mail, at any post office, or by
any letter carrier a letter, paper,
writing, print, missive, or document
containing any threat to take the
life of or to inflict bodily harm upon
the President, Vice President, or
any other officer in order of
succession to the Presidency. 
Knowingly and willfully making
such threats in any way to the
above-named people (18 U.S.C.
sec. 871).
 
Traffic offenses  -- driving while
intoxicated, or any moving or
parking violations on Federal lands
(for example, 40 U.S.C. sec.
212(b)).

Trafficking -- knowingly and
intentionally importing or exporting
any controlled substance in
schedule I, II, III, IV, or V (as
defined by 21 U.S.C. secs. 812). 
Includes manufacturing,
distributing, dispensing, selling, or
possessing with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or sell a
controlled substance or a
counterfeit substance; exporting
any controlled substance in
schedules I-V; manufacturing or
distributing a controlled substance
in schedule I or II for purposes of
unlawful importation; or making or
distributing any punch, die, plate,
stone, or any other thing designed
to reproduce the label upon any
drug or container, or removing or
obliterating the label or symbol of
any drug or container.  Also
includes knowingly opening,
maintaining or managing any place
for the purpose of manufacturing,
distributing, or using any controlled
substance (for example, 19 U.S.C.
sec. 1590; 21 U.S.C. secs. 333(e),
825(a)--(d), 830(a), 841(a)--(b)
(d)(e)(g), 842(a), 843(a)(b), 845,
846, 848, 854, 856, 858, 859(a)(b),
860(a), 861(c)(f), 952(a)(b),
953(a)(e), 957, 959, 960(a)(b)(d),
961, 962, and 963; and 46A U.S.C.
secs. 1903(g) and (j)).

Transportation -- violations of the
Federal statutes relating to the
Motor Carrier Act, which regulates
(routes, rates) motor carriers of
freight and passengers in interstate
commerce.

Transportation of stolen property
-- transporting, selling, or
receiving stolen goods, stolen
securities, stolen moneys, stolen
cattle, fraudulent State tax stamps,
or articles used in counterfeiting, if
the above articles or goods involve
or constitute interstate or foreign
commerce (18 U.S.C. secs. 2315,
2317).
 
Trial conviction -- conviction by
judge or jury after trial.

True bill -- an indictment.

United States -- includes the
outlying territories (Guam, Puerto
Rico, Northern Marianas Islands,
and the U.S. Virgin Islands) and
the territory occupied by the 50
States and the District of Columbia.

U.S. attorneys -- all United States
attorneys.  Prosecutorial data in
this Compendium come from the
Central System and Central
Charge Files of the Executive
Office for U.S. Attorneys.
Unsecured bond -- an agreement
by the defendant as a condition of
his or her release in which the
defendant agrees to pay full bond
amount in the event of
nonappearance at trial, but is not
required to post security as a
condition to release.

Violation (of pretrial release,
probation, or parole) -- allegation
of a new crime or a technical
violation while on pretrial release,
probation, or parole.

Violent offenses -- threatening,
attempting, or actually using
physical force against a person. 
Includes murder, negligent
manslaughter, assault, robbery,
sexual abuse, kidnaping, and
threats against the President.  
(See also, specific offenses for
citations.)

Weapons violations -- violations
of any of the provisions of 18
U.S.C. secs. 922 and 923
concerning the manufacturing,
importing, possessing, receiving,
and licensing of firearms and
ammunition.  Includes
manufacturing, selling, possessing,
or transporting (within any territory
or possession of the United States,
within Indian country, or within the
special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States)
(18 U.S.C. secs. 7) any
switchblade knife; or making,
receiving, possessing, or
transporting a firearm not
registered in the National Firearms
Registration Transfer Record. 
Also, engaging in importing,
manufacturing, or dealing in
firearms if not registered with the
secretary in the Internal Revenue
Service District in which the
business is conducted or not
having paid a special occupational
tax.  In addition, this code covers
cases where in a crime of violence
or drug trafficking enhanced
punishment is handed down when
committed with a deadly weapon
(for example, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1242;
18 U.S.C. secs. 922(a)(c)(e)
(g)(i)(k)(m)(n)(q), 923,
924(a)(c)(f)(h) and 930; 26 U.S.C.
secs. 5801, 5811, 5821, 5841,
5843, 5851, and 5861(b)(d)(h)(j)(l);
40 U.S.C. sec. 193f(a); and 49A
U.S.C. sec. 1472(q)).

End of file
04/12/01 ih





 
 
