U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

Census of Public Defender Offices, 2007

County-based and Local Public Defender Offices, 2007

September 2010   NCJ 231175

-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2211

This report is associated with the Census of Public Defender
Offices, 2007. For a list of related publications go to 
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=215

-------------------------------------------------------------


Donald J. Farole, Jr., Ph.D., and 
Lynn Langton
BJS Statisticians

-------------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

*County-based public defender offices received more than 
4 million cases and spent nearly $1.5 billion in operating
expenditures in 2007. 

* Offices providing county-based public defender services in
25 states with death penalty statutes spent a combined total
of nearly $30 million for capital case representation in
2007. 

* Misdemeanors and ordinance violations accounted for the
largest share (56%) of cases received by county-based public
defender offices.

* About three-quarters (73%) of county-based public defender
offices exceeded the maximum recommended limit of cases
received per attorney in 2007.

* County-based offices employed a median of 7 litigating
public defenders.

* In 2007, 40% of all county-based public defender offices
had no investigators on staff.
* The attrition rate of attorneys in county-based offices was
less than 1% in 2007.
------------------------------------------------------------

In 2007, 49 states and the District of Columbia had public
defender offices to provide legal representation for some or
all indigent defendants. In 27 states and the District of
Columbia, counties or local jurisdictions funded and
administered public defender offices. In the remaining 22
states, one office oversaw indigent defense operations
throughout the state (figure 1).

Public defender offices administered at the local level and
funded principally by the county or through a combination of
county and state funds are referred to as county-based
offices. Although the public defender office in the District
of Columbia was entirely federally funded, it operates like a
county-based office and was classified as such.

Professional guidelines for the provision of indigent defense

County-based and Local Public Defender Offices, 2007 presents
the Bureau of Justice Statistics' (BJS) 2007 Census of Public
Defender Offices (CPDO) data in the context of applicable
professional guidelines for representing indigent clients.
The American Bar Association (ABA), the National Legal Aid
and Defender Association (NLADA), and special commissions,
such as the National Study Commission on Defense Services
(1976) and the President's National Advisory Commission on
Criminal Justice Standards and Goals (1973), have released
professional guidelines for the provision of indigent
defense. In 2002 the ABA condensed these guidelines into the
ABA's Ten Principles of a Public Defense Delivery System. The
ten principles are widely regarded as a succinct statement of
the currently accepted requirements for adequate defense
representation and are referenced throughout the report. The
report also references professional guidelines from the
American Bar Association Standards for Criminal Justice,
Providing Defense Services (3rd ed. 1992) and the National
Legal Aid and Defender Association, Performance Guidelines
for Criminal Defense Representation (1995). 

Ten Principles

1.The public defense function, including the selection,
funding, and payment of defense counsel, is independent.

2.Where the caseload is sufficiently high, the public
defense delivery system consists of both a defender office
and the active participation of the private bar.  

3.Clients are screened for eligibility, and defense counsel
is assigned and notified of appointment, as soon as feasible
after clients' arrest, detention, or request for counsel.

4.Defense counsel is provided sufficient time and a
confidential space within which to meet with the client.

5.Defense counsel's workload is controlled to permit the
rendering of quality representation.

6.Defense counsel's ability, training, and experience match
the complexity of the case.

7.The same attorney continuously represents the client until
completion of the case.

8.There is parity between defense counsel and the
prosecution with respect to resources, and defense counsel is
included as an equal partner in the justice system.

9.Defense counsel is provided with and required to attend
continuing legal education.

10.Defense counsel is supervised and systematically reviewed
for quality and efficiency according to nationally and
locally adopted standards.

Other professional guidelines

National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice Standards
and Goals, Task Force on Courts, Chapter 13: The Defense
(1973).

National Study Commission on Defense Services, Guidelines for
Legal Defense Systems in the United States (1976). 

American Bar Association Standards for Criminal Justice,
Providing Defense Services (3rd ed. 1992). 

National Legal Aid and Defender Association, Performance
Guidelines for Criminal Defense Representation (1995).

County-based public defender offices employed 71% of the
nation's 15,026 public defenders in 2007 (table 1). The
10,705 attorneys in county-based offices served a total
population of approximately 167 million residents. These
attorneys handled more than 4 million cases in 2007, which
was 73% of the total number of public defender cases
nationwide. 

In 1963 the United States Supreme Court ruled in Gideon v.
Wainwright that state courts are required to ensure that the
provisions of the right to counsel under the Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendments apply to indigent defendants. Since the
Gideon ruling, states, counties, and jurisdictions have
established varying means of providing public representation
for defendants unable to afford a private attorney. Indigent
defense systems typically provide representation through some
combination of three methods:

1.A public defender office.

2.An assigned counsel system in which the 
court schedules cases for participating private attorneys.

3.A contract system in which private attorneys contractually
agree to take on a specified number of indigent defendants or
indigent defense cases.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics' (BJS) 2007 Census of Public
Defender Offices (CPDO) collected data on public defender
offices, one of three methods used to deliver indigent
defense services. Public defender offices had a salaried
staff of full or part-time attorneys who were employed either
by the government or by a public, nonprofit organization, to
represent indigent defendants. 

The CPDO collected data on the staffing, caseloads,
expenditures, standards and guidelines, and attorney training
from the approximately 1,000 public defender offices in 49
states and the District of Columbia in 2007. Maine had no
public defender offices in 2007. The CPDO was the first
systematic, national study of public defender offices. Public
defender offices employed over 15,000 litigating attorneys in
957 offices nationwide, received approximately 5.6 million
indigent defense cases, and spent about $2.3 billion
representing indigent defendants in 2007. 

This report presents data on the policies and operations of
the 530 county-based public defender offices operating in 27
states and the District of Columbia. It examines office
expenditures, caseloads, staffing, and policies and
procedures, by public defender office case volume, as
measured by the number of cases received per office in 2007.
CPDO findings based on state-based public defender programs
are discussed in the BJS report, State Public Defender
Programs, 2007, BJS Web, September 2010.

The public defense function should be independent of undue
political influence. To safeguard independence and promote
efficiency and quality of services, a nonpartisan board
should oversee defender systems.

County-based offices handled a median of about 2,500 cases
with a median operating expenditure of $708,000 in 2007     

The 27 states and the District of Columbia with county-based
public defender offices operated a total of 530 offices in
2007 (table 2). The District of Columbia had one office in
2007, while Illinois had 70 offices, the most county-based
offices among the 27 states. 

County-based public defender offices served a median
population of about 117,000 residents with a median operating
budget of about $708,000 in 2007. County-based offices
received a median of nearly 2,500 cases and employed a median
of 7 litigating attorneys. The 154 offices with the highest
caseloads (more than 5,000 cases) in 2007 served a median
population of approximately 430,000 residents, received a
median of approximately 10,100 cases, and employed a median
of 28 litigating attorneys per office.
 
One in 3 county-based public defender offices had an advisory
board or commission

About 1 in 3 (36%) county-based public defender offices had
an advisory board or commission in 2007 (table 3). Of the 189
county-based offices with an advisory board or commission, a
county commission was either the sole appointing entity or
one of multiple appointing entities for 44% of these offices.
The state governor was an appointing authority for 36% of
offices, and the state legislature was the appointing
authority for 20%. A county commission was less likely to be
an appointing authority for offices with larger caseloads
than for those with smaller caseloads. Conversely, a state
supreme court was less likely to be an appointing authority
in offices with smaller caseloads than those with higher
caseloads. 

In about 4 in 5 (83%) county-based offices with an advisory
board or commission, the board had authority to hire or
remove chief public defenders. In two-thirds of the offices,
the advisory board had rule-making authority (68%) and the
ability to make budgetary decisions (67%).

The defender office should screen clients for eligibility,
with eligibility decisions then subject to review by the
court. The determination of eligibility should be based on
the liquid assets of the defendant, as well as the
defendant's own assessment of his or her ability to obtain
sufficient representation. The office should not base
indigency determinations on whether the defendant was able to
post bond following his or her arrest.

Four in 5 county-based public defender offices followed
specific criteria or written guidelines to determine
indigency

In 2007, 83% of county-based public defender offices reported
using formal criteria to determine if a defendant qualified
as indigent and was eligible for public representation (table
4). Nearly all (98%) offices with formal criteria used a
defendant's income level as a criterion. The majority of
county-based public defender offices used a sworn application
(79%) or the judge's discretion (67%) as criteria. Less than
half (41%) of county-based offices used an unsworn
application, and about 1 in 3 (34%) offices used the
defendant's ability to post bail or bond as a criterion to
determine indigency. 

Judges (52%) and public defenders (47%) were the most common
entities responsible for screening potential clients for
indigency in jurisdictions served by county-based public
defender offices. Pretrial services or probation officers
were involved in the screening process in 4% of these
jurisdictions (not shown in a table).

The majority of county-based public defender offices used a
court-administered assigned counsel program for conflict
cases

Public defender offices had various procedures to handle
cases in which there was a conflict of interest, such as a
co-defendant already handled by the defender office. The
majority (52%) of county-based public defender offices
reported handling conflict cases through a court administered
assigned counsel program; about a quarter (23%) of offices
handled conflict cases through previously established
contracts with private attorneys (figure 2). Less than 1 in
10 (7%) county-based public defender offices used an ethical
screen, whereby an office would take a case regardless of the
conflict but preclude an attorney with conflicting
connections from involvement in the case.

The same attorney should represent a client through all
stages of case proceedings.

Most county-based offices required the same attorney to
represent clients throughout all stages of the case
proceedings 

Vertical representation refers to the practice of one
attorney representing a client from arraignment through the
duration of the case. It is distinguished from horizontal
representation in which a different attorney represents the
same client at various stages of the case. Sixty percent of
county-based public defender offices had a written policy
requiring vertical representation of indigent cases (table
5). 

About 7 in 10 (71%) offices reported providing primarily
vertical representation in felony, non-capital cases (these
offices may or may not have had written policies requiring
vertical representation), compared to 13% of offices that
handled conflict cases through a combination of vertical and
horizontal representation. Public defender offices with
smaller caseloads were more likely than those with higher
caseloads to provide vertical representation. 

The majority of county-based public defender offices had
formal policies that required the most experienced attorneys
to handle the most complex cases (58%) and about a quarter
(28%) required that an attorney be appointed to the case
within 24 hours of client detention. Offices with lower
caseloads were less likely to have these policies in place
than offices with higher caseloads. 

Public defender programs can charge fees to indigent
defendants under circumstances in which the defendant's
contribution would not impose significant financial hardship.

More than 4 in 5 county-based public defender offices charged
fees for defense services

Eighty-two percent of county-based public defender offices
allowed for some form of cost recoupment for public defender
services in 2007 (table 6). Among the offices that permitted
cost recoupment, the most widely available fee was a charge
based on the cost for the defender's services (69% of
offices). A majority of offices also allowed recoupment of
court-related expenses (63%) and standard statutory fees
(53%). More than 2 in 5 (44%) offices charged an up-front
application or administrative fee, which typically ranged
from $10 to $200 depending on the state and the type of
case.***Footnote 1 American Bar Association. (December
2001). 2001 Public Defender Up-front Application Fees Update.
<http://www.abanet.org/legalservices/downloads/sclaid/indigen
tdefense/pdapplicationfees2001-table.pdf>.*** The least
commonly available fee was for expert witness expenses (15%)
in 2007. 

County-based public defender offices received more than
4,000,000 cases in 2007


County-based public defender offices received 4,081,030 cases
in 2007, with a median of about 2,500 cases per office (table
7). The office with the highest case volume reported
receiving 354,000 cases; the office with the lowest case
volume reported receiving no cases in 2007 (not shown in a
table). Misdemeanors and ordinance violations accounted for
the majority (56%) of cases received in county-based public
defender offices. County-based public defender offices
received a median of 1,013 misdemeanor and ordinance
violation, 853 felony non-capital, 150 juvenile-related, 15
civil, and 2 appeals cases in 2007.***Footnote 2 The CPDO
did not collect data from public defender offices providing
primarily juvenile or appellate case representation.*** 

Misdemeanor and ordinance violations made up a greater share
of cases received in offices with higher caseloads than in
offices with lower caseloads. These cases made up a median of
59% of the overall caseload in offices receiving 5,000 cases
or more and a median of 45% of the overall caseload in
offices receiving fewer than 1,000 cases (not shown in a
table).

The 530 county-based public defender offices received a total
of 1,210 felony capital cases in 2007. Nearly all (1,086)
felony capital cases were received in the 153 highest-caseload 
offices. Seven in 10 (70%) offices in statesthat had death penalty 
statutes in 2007 reported receiving no felony capital cases 
in that year. 

The CPDO did not collect data on the total number of indigent
defense cases received by all indigent defense providers
within a jurisdiction. Thus, the extent to which variations
in the numbers and types of cases received were due to
differences in the operation of all methods of indigent
defense is unknown.

County-based public defender offices spent nearly $30 million
providing capital case defense in 2007 

In 2007, 25 of the 27 states with county-based public
defender offices had death penalty statutes. (The District of
Columbia, Michigan, and West Virginia did not have the death
penalty in 2007.) Public defender offices in states with a
death penalty statute received more than 1,200 death penalty
eligible cases, spending nearly $30 million to provide
capital case representation (table 8). Offices with a
caseload of more than 5,000 cases in 2007 received 90% of the
death penalty eligible cases during the year. Public defender
offices represented 932 indigent defendants in cases in which
the prosecutor filed for the death penalty. 

About 1 in 4 county-based public defender offices in states
with death penalty statutes had a specialized death penalty
unit to provide legal representation for trial-level capital
cases. Less than 1 in 10 offices had specialized units to
provide representation for direct appeals or post-conviction
capital cases. 

The defense counsel's workload should be sufficiently
controlled to allow defenders the time needed to provide
quality representation in each case. Furthermore, public
defenders are expected to decline appointments that exceed
the established caseload limits.

Less than half of county-based public defender offices
reported caseload limits or the ability to refuse
appointments due to caseload

In 2007, 15% of county-based public defender offices had
formal caseload limits, and 36% had the authority to refuse
appointments due to excessive caseloads (table 9). About 6 in
10 (59%) offices reported having neither caseload limits nor
the authority to refuse cases. About half (49%) of offices
that received more than 5,000 cases reported having the
authority to refuse appointments due to excess caseload,
compared to 28% of offices that received fewer than 1,000
cases in 2007. 

The 1973 U.S. Department of Justice's National Advisory
Commission (NAC) on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals
recommended the follow-ing maximum annual caseloads for a
public defender office: on average, defenders in these
offices should not exceed, per year, 150 felony, 400
misdemeanor, 200 juvenile, 200 mental health cases, or 25
appeals.

More than 7 in 10 county-based offices had an insufficient
number of attorneys to meet the professional guidelines

County-based public defender offices received a median of 853
felony non-capital cases and 1,000 misdemeanor cases, and
employed a median of 7 full-time equivalent (FTE) litigating
public defenders per office in 2007 (table 10). The median
number of litigating attorneys was 14 times greater in the
highest caseload offices (28) than in offices having the
smallest caseloads (2).

The National Advisory Commission (NAC) guidelines recommend a
caseload for each public defender's office, not necessarily
each attorney in the office. They state that "the caseload of
a public defender office should not exceed the following:
felonies per attorney per year: not more than 150;
misdemeanors (excluding traffic) per attorney per year: not
more than 400; juvenile court cases per attorney per year:
not more than 200; Mental Health Act cases per attorney per
year: not more than 200; and appeals per attorney per year:
not more than 25."***Footnote 3 Department of Justice,
National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice Standards
and Goals, Task Force on Courts, Courts 13.12 (1973).***
While  caseload' can apply to the number of cases per
attorney at a given time, BJS interprets the NAC standard as
applicable to the sum of cases attorneys in an office are
responsible for in a given year. Because the CPDO only
collected data on cases received in 2007, these caseload
numbers may understate the actual caseload of attorneys who
are responsible not only for the new cases received in a
given year but also cases pending from previous years.

One way to examine the numeric caseload guideline is to
assess the number of cases received per FTE litigating
attorney. Since the CPDO did not collect data on the
caseloads of individual attorneys, it was assumed for
estimation purposes that the felony and misdemeanor cases
received in 2007 were equally distributed among FTE
litigating attorneys.

Using this estimation method, a public defender office would
meet the guideline for cases received in 2007 if the FTE
litigating attorneys received no more than 75 felony
non-capital and 200 misdemeanor cases.***Footnote 4 The NAC
guideline frames caseloads as though an attorney handles only
one type of case. The misdemeanor and felony caseload
guidelines were halved to follow the analytic assumption that
attorneys handle both types of cases.*** 

This conservative measure also assumes that attorneys did not
have any cases pending from previous years and did not handle
any other type of case. Still, 36% of county-based public
defender offices met the guideline for felony non-capital
cases per attorney, and 66% met the guideline for the number
of misdemeanor cases per attorney. Offices with larger
overall caseloads were more likely than those with smaller
caseloads to exceed the maximum recommended limit for both
felony and misdemeanor cases. About 4 in 5 offices that
received more than 2,500 cases in 2007 failed to meet the
national guideline of felony non-capital cases per attorney.

Another way to examine caseloads is to calculate the number
of defenders needed to meet the nationally accepted caseload
guideline of 150 felony non-capital cases, 400 misdemeanor
cases, 200 juvenile cases, or 25 appellate cases per defender
each year. To calculate the total number of attorneys needed
in each office, analysts first computed the number of
attorneys needed to handle the cases received in each of the
four case categories: felony non-capital, misdemeanor,
juvenile-related, and appellate. The numbers of attorneys
needed for each case type were then summed to get the total
number of litigating attorneys recommended by the caseload
guideline.

To meet this guideline in 2007, the median office would have
needed 11 attorneys who only handled the median number of
felony, misdemeanor, juvenile-related, or appellate cases
reported (not shown in table). The median office reported
employing 7 FTE litigating attorneys, approximately 64% of
the estimated number needed.

Twenty-seven percent of county-based public defender offices
reported sufficient numbers of litigating attorneys to handle
the cases received in those offices in 2007 (figure 3). About
a quarter (23%) of all offices reported less than half of the
number of litigating attorneys required to meet the
professional guidelines for the number of cases received in
2007 (not shown in a table).

Three in 5 (60%) offices that received fewer than 1,000 cases
in 2007 reported employing a sufficient number of attorneys
to meet the caseload guideline. Among offices with an overall
caseload of more than 5,000 cases, 88% reported an
insufficient number of attorneys to meet the professional
guideline.

There should be 1 managerial attorney for every 10 staff
attorneys in an office to ensure effective attorney
supervision.

Four in 5 (84%) county-based public defender offices met the
professional guideline of 1 managerial attorney per 10 staff
attorneys

County-based public defender offices employed a total of 490
chief public defenders, 185 managing attorneys, and 958
supervisory attorneys in 2007 (table 11). These offices also
employed a total of 8,595 full-time assistant public
defenders and 1,053 part-time defenders. 

The 273 county-based offices with 5 or more litigating
attorneys reported a median of 1.7 managerial attorneys for
every 10 assistant public defenders (not shown in a
table).***Footnote 5 Since the professional guideline
recommends 1 managerial attorney for every 10 staff
attorneys, the guideline is inapplicable to offices with
fewer than 5 FTE assistant public defenders. The guideline
applies to offices with at least 5 and less than 10 FTE
assistant public defenders, since these offices may employ
part-time managerial attorneys.*** Sixteen percent of these
offices had less than 1 managerial attorney for every 10
staff attorneys. In offices that received more than 5,000
cases in 2007, 1 in 5 (20%) did not meet this guideline. 

County-based public defender offices employed 7,500 support
staff in addition to attorneys in 2007

County-based public defender offices in 27 states and the
District of Columbia employed 7,514 support staff in 2007
(table 12). Support staff refers to employees, such as
clerical and administrative staff, paralegals, investigators,
social workers, indigency screeners, and interns, who are not
typically attorneys, but who provide case assistance for
public defenders. About half (46%) of these support staff
were in clerical or administrative positions. County-based
public defender offices employed about 1,500 investigators
and 800 paralegals.
 
About three-quarters (5,696 of 7,514) of all support staff
were employed in the 153 high caseload offices which received
more than 5,000 cases in 2007. These offices employed 95% of
all training staff, 85% of all social workers, and 81% of all
investigators. Collectively, the 136 offices that received
fewer than 1,000 cases employed a total of one social worker,
one indigency screener, and no training staff in 2007.

A public defender program should have at least 1 investigator
for every 3 litigating attorneys in a public defender
program.
 
Four in 10 county-based public defender offices employed no
investigators in 2007.

In 2007, 7% of the 469 county-based public defender offices
with at least 1.5 FTE litigating attorneys met the accepted
professional guideline for the ratio of investigators to
attorneys (table 13).***Footnote 6 Since the guideline 
recommends 1 investigator per 3 litigating attorneys, 
the guideline is inapplicable to offices with fewer than 
1.5 FTE litigating attorneys. The guideline applies to 
offices with at least 1.5 and less than 3 FTE litigating 
attorneys, since these offices may employ part-time 
investigators.*** Two of these 469 offices employed 2 or
more investigators per 3 litigating attorneys.

Forty percent of all county-based offices employed no
investigators. Among offices receiving less than 1,000 cases
in 2007, nearly 9 in 10 (87%) had no investigators on staff. 

Defender organizations should offer professional development
opportun-ities to assist attorneys in providing quality
representation for indigent clients. Public defense counsels
should also have systematic and comprehensive training
appropriate to specific areas of practice.
 
Nearly all county-based offices provided opportunities for
public defense attorneys to improve trial skills

More than 9 in 10 (92%) county-based public defender offices
reported having formal policies concerning continuing
education requirements (table 14). About half (48%) had
formal policies related to annual attorney performance
review.

The CPDO collected data on the types of training provided by
county-based public defender offices. Nine in 10 (92%)
offices provided attorneys with professional development
opportunities in the area of trial skills. A majority also
provided opportunities in juvenile delinquency (76%), mental
illness (58%), and appellate cases (53%). Sixty-two percent
of offices in states that had the death penalty in 2007
provided professional development opportunities in death
penalty defense. Civil defense training (20%) was the least
common type of professional development offered by
county-based public defender offices. Offices with higher
caseloads were more likely to offer professional development
opportunities in trial skills as well as juvenile
delinquency, mental illness, and appellate cases.

The attrition rate of assistant public defenders in
county-based offices was less than 1% in 2007

County based public defender offices turned over less than 1%
of their assistant public defenders due to resignation,
termination, retirement, or illness (table 15). The median
attrition rate was 0% among offices receiving fewer than
2,500 cases in 2007. This may be due in part to the fact that
there was little opportunity for turnover because these
offices employed few litigating attorneys 37% of all offices
receiving less than 2,500 cases employed two or fewer FTE
litigating attorneys (not shown in table). The median
attrition rate in offices receiving more than 5,000 cases in
2007 was 8%.

The median salary for entry-level assistant public defenders
ranged from $42,000 to $45,000. With 6 years or more
experience, assistant public defenders earned a median salary
in the range of $54,000 to $68,000. Assistant public
defenders in higher caseload offices received higher salaries
in general.

---------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 1% of offices accounted for 21% of all cases
received in county-based public defender offices

Three offices with the highest caseloads accounted for
one-fifth (21%) of all cases received, 17% of overall
operating expenditures, and 16% of all FTE litigating
attorneys among the 530 county-based offices in 2007 (table
16). Cases received in these three offices were more likely
to be misdemeanors or ordinance violations than the types of
cases received in all other offices. These three offices
served 14% of the overall population served by the 530
county-based offices nationwide (not shown in a table).
---------------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

The 2007 Census of Public Defender Offices (CPDO) collected
office-level data from approximately 950 publicly funded
public defender offices located in the 49 states and the
District of Columbia. (Maine had no public defender offices
in 2007 and provided all indigent defense services through
assignment to and contract services with private attorneys.)
The universe included all public defender offices principally
funded by state or local governments and that provided
general criminal defense services, conflict services, or
capital case representation.

Federal public defender offices that provided primarily
contract or assigned counsel services with private attorneys
were excluded from the data collection. Additionally, any
public defender offices that were privately funded or
principally funded by tribal governments, or provided
primarily appellate or juvenile services were outside the
scope of the project and were excluded.

Scope of Data Collection

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), the National Legal
Aid and Defender Association (NLADA), and a number of chief
defenders and other experts in the field of indigent defense
collaborated to develop the CPDO data collection instrument.
The instrument was sent to the American Bar Association's
Standing Committee for Legal Aid and Indigent Defense and the
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers for review
and comment. Data collection began in April 2008 and was
completed in March 2009.

Questionnaires were sent to 1,046 public defender offices in
the United States. Approximately 97% of the offices provided
responses to at least some of the critical items identified
in the survey instrument.
 
Organizational Structure of Public Defender Offices

Office included in the census were administered and funded at
the county or state level. State-based offices functioned
entirely under the direction of a central administrative
office that funded and administered all the public defender
offices in the state. County-based offices were administered
at the local level and funded principally by the county or
through a combination of county and state funds. In the
District of Columbia and states with county-based public
defender offices, each of 588 offices submitted one completed
questionnaire via hardcopy or online submission. This report
examines the 530 offices that served as the principal public
defender office for the district. For information on data
collection methods in state-based public defender programs,
see the BJS report, State Public Defender Programs, 2007, BJS
Web, September 2010.

Measuring caseload versus workload

The CPDO was designed to collect aggregate data from public
defender offices or programs. Respondents were instructed to
provide the number of cases received by the office or program
in 2007. This caseload number is presented throughout the
report as a measure of public defender office labor. 

While workload -which factors into account case complexity,
administrative duties public defenders may carry, and other
matters -is generally considered to be a more accurate
measure of the burden on public defenders than caseload, an
assessment of workload requires data on the number and types
of cases handled by individual attorneys within an office, as
well as information about additional attorney
responsibilities. The survey instrument and project design
did not allow for assessment of the workload of individual
attorneys within an office. Providing data on individual
attorneys would have been burdensome and time-consuming for
the public defender offices and programs.
 
Calculating number of full-time equivalent (FTE) litigating
attorneys

Full-time equivalent (FTE) is a computed statistic calculated
by dividing the hours worked by part-time employees by the
standard number of hours for full-time employees (40 hours
per week) and then adding the resulting quotient to the
number of full-time employees. (See U.S. Census Bureau,
Government Employment, 1997, Web. Updated annually.
<http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/meta/long_58632.htm>).
 
Included as FTE litigating attorneys are attorneys carrying a
caseload (supervisory attorneys, assistant public defenders,
and chief defenders). Excluded are managing attorneys who do
not litigate cases.
 
---------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

This Special Report was written by Donald Farole, Jr., Ph.D.
and Lynn Langton. Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D. and Kyle C. Harbacek
verified the report.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina
Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

September 2010, NCJ 231175

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2211>.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

--------------------------------------------------------------

9/14/2010/TLD/  