U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Data Brief

National Crime Victimization Survey

Crime and the Nation's Households, 2005


April 2007, NCJ 217198


--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cnh05.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cnh
--------------------------------------------------------

By Patsy Klaus
BJS Statistician

In 2005, 14% of the Nation's households, accounting for 16
million households, experienced one or more violent or 
property victimizations as measured by the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS). These crimes include rape, 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault,
purse snatching or pocket picking, household burglary, motor 
vehicle theft, and property theft. They also include crimes 
both unreported and reported to police. 

About 3% of households in 2005 had a member age 12 or older
who experienced one or more violent crimes. Simple assault 
was the type of violent crime experienced by most households.
About 12% of households, or 14.1 million households,
experienced one or more property crimes, which include 
household burglary, motor vehicle theft and property theft. 
About 1 in 10 households experienced property theft, the most 
frequently encountered property crime. 

While there were no real differences between 2004 and 2005 in
the percentage of households experiencing any crime, both 
violent and property crime declined between 1994 and 2005. 
U.S. households experiencing one or more crimes dropped from 
25% in 1994 to 14% in 2005. The percentages declined each year 
from 1994 through 2001, before leveling off in 2002 through
2005. There were no year-to-year changes after 2001.

Measuring crime by counting the affected households gives an
understanding of whether crime is concentrated in fewer 
households or spread among more households in the Nation. When
interpreted in relation to the criminal victimization 
statistics reported in the annual BJS Bulletin, Criminal 
Victimization 2005, the households-victimized-by-crime indicator 
shows the proportion of households in the Nation that experience 
different crimes.

Major findings include --  

* Fewer than 1% of households had members victimized by 
more than one type of violence.

* About 1 in 320 households were affected by intimate 
partner violence.

* 4.4% of households experienced at least 1 vandalism 
victimization.

* 18% of households headed by Hispanics experienced one or 
more crimes, compared to 13% of non-Hispanics. 

* Households in the West were more likely to experience one 
or more crimes compared to households in other regions.

1 in 36 households experienced one or more violent 
crimes in 2005

In 2005 about 16 million of the 117.1 million U.S. households
experienced one or more violent or property victimizations as 
measured by the National Crime Victimization Survey (see box
below). Violent crimes, which include rape, sexual assault,
robbery, simple and aggravated assault, were experienced by 
about 1 in every 36 households in 2005. About 2.2 million
households had members who experienced simple assault, the
most frequently encountered crime of violence. Simple assault 
does not result in serious injury and does not involve a 
weapon.

-----------------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization Survey

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source of information 
on the frequency, characteristics, and consequences of 
criminal victimization. One of the largest continuous 
household surveys conducted by the Federal Government, 
the NCVS collects information about crimes both reported 
and not reported to police. 

The survey, conducted since 1972, provides a national 
forum for victims to describe their experiences of 
victimization and the impact of crime.

Information is collected twice a year from households 
that remain in the sample for three years. Data are 
collected by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS).

For more information about the NCVS see
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cvict.htm#programs>.
-----------------------------------------------

Few households experienced more than one type 
of crime

Fewer than 1% of households had members victimized by more
than one type of violence in 2005. About 1% of households 
were victimized by both violent and property crimes. Such
households were counted once in the violent crime measure,
once in the property crime measure and once in the overall 
crime measure.

Intimate partner violence affected about 1 in 320 
households in 2005

Fewer than 1% of households experienced intimate partner
violence, which is violence committed by a current or 
former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend. One or more members 
of about 365,000 households experienced at least one intimate 
partner violence victimization in 2005
(see <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/intimate/ipv.htm>). There 
was no change between 2004 and 2005. If two or more members 
of a household were victims or if a member experienced 
multiple victimizations, the household would be counted only 
once in the households-victimized-by-crime measure.

Vandalism was counted separately from the overall 
measure of households experiencing crime

In 2005 about 5.1 million households or 4.4% of U.S. households 
experienced at least one vandalism victimization. First compiled 
by the NCVS in 2000, vandalism is not included in the overall 
measure of households experiencing violent or property crime. 
If vandalism were included in the total percentage of households 
experiencing crime, the percentage would increase from 14% to 
17%. The total number of households experiencing one or more 
crimes, including vandalism, would increase to 19.8 million 
households.

Households experiencing crime differed by race 
and Hispanic origin

In 2005 white households (14%) were more likely than households 
of other races (11%) to sustain one or more crimes. The other 
races category is composed of American Indians, Alaska Natives, 
Asians, Native Hawaiians, and other Pacific Islanders. There 
were no measurable differences in the percentages of white 
and black households sustaining one or more crimes. Households 
headed by persons identifying themselves as being of more than 
one race were more likely to sustain crimes than those in other 
racial categories. Fewer than 1% of all heads of households 
identified themselves as being of more than one race.

Households headed by Hispanics were more likely to sustain one 
or more crimes than those headed by non-Hispanics(18% compared 
to 13%). Hispanic origin is tabulated separately from race.

Households in the West were more likely than those 
in other regions to experience crime

When compared with households in other regions of the country, 
households located in the West were more likely to have 
experienced one or more victimizations. The overall findings 
are primarily the result of property crime. The Midwest was 
more likely than the Northeast to have one or more household 
members victimized by crime. There was no statistical 
difference between the South and the Midwest in households 
victimized during 2005.

Larger households were more likely 
to experience crime

Household size affected the likelihood of experiencing criminal 
victimization in 2005. The larger the size of household, the 
more likely it was to have a member who had experienced one or 
more victimizations. Ten percent of one-person households were
victimized during 2005 compared with 27% of households with 
six or more members. In general these patterns applied to both
violent and property crimes. For overall violence households
with four or more members were more likely to have experienced 
violence than smaller households. For property crimes the 
larger the household size, the higher the percentage of 
households experiencing one or more property crimes.

Percentage of households experiencing crimes was 
higher in urban areas

Households in urban areas were more likely to experience one
or more crimes than suburban households and rural households 
in 2005. Fifteen percent of urban households had experienced 
a property crime, compared to 10% of rural households.

Methodology

This report presents data on nonlethal violence and property
crimes from the National Crime Victimization Survey(NCVS). In 
2005, 77,200 households and 134,000 individuals age 12 or older 
were interviewed. For the 2005 NCVS data presented here, the 
response rate was 90.7% for eligible households and 84.3% of 
eligible individuals.

The households-victimized-by-crime measure counts each
household once for the calendar year, regardless of the number 
of times a household experienced a particular type of crime. 
For the overall indicator, household-based crime estimates are 
derived from NCVS statistics on rape, sexual assault, robbery, 
assault (both aggravated and simple), personal theft, household 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and property theft. A household 
is counted if anyone in the household experienced one or more 
of these crimes within the year. A household is counted only 
once if members experienced multiple crimes of each type 
within the year.

Additional information about criminal victimization is 
available in the annual bulletin, Criminal Victimization, 
2005 at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cv05.htm>.  

More detailed tables from the survey and detailed information 
about the survey methodology are available in Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2005 Statistical Tables, 
at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cvusst.htm>.

Detailed information about the construction of the
households-victimized-by-crime measure is available in Crime 
and the Nation's Households, 2000, with Trends, 1994-2000 at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cnh00.htm>.

--------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. 
Sedgwick is director. This Data Brief was written by 
Patsy Klaus, under the supervision of Michael R. Rand. 
Cathy T. Maston verified the report. Tina Dorsey and 
Carolyn Williams produced the report and Jayne Robinson 
prepared the report for final printing, under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

April 2007, NCJ 217198
---------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII 
and its related statistical data and tables are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cnh05.htm>.
----------------------------------------------


End of file
04/16/07 ih