U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Correctional Populations in the United
States, 1998

September NCJ 192929               


---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/corpop98.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm
---------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 2: Jails
Methodology                        

Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ)

In each year between the full censuses, a survey
of jails is conducted to estimate baseline
characteristics of the Nation's jails and the
inmates housed in these jails.  The 1998 Annual
Survey of Jails is the 14th such survey in a
series begun in 1982.  The reference date for
the 1998 survey was June 30.  

Based on information from the 1993 Census of
Jails, a sample of jail jurisdictions was
selected for the 1994-1998 surveys.  A
jurisdiction is a county (parish in Louisiana)
or municipal government that administers one or
more local jails.  The sample included all jails
in 795 selected jail jurisdictions and 25
multijurisdiction jails.  A multijurisdiction
jail is one in which two or more jurisdictions
have a formal agreement to operate the facility. 

In the drawing of the sample, jail jurisdictions
were first stratified into two groups: single-
jurisdiction jails and multijurisdiction jails.  
All of the multijurisdiction jails were included 
in the survey.  The remaining jurisdictions were 
then further stratified into two groups: 
jurisdictions with jails authorized to hold 
juveniles and jurisdictions with jails
holding adults only.  Jurisdictions were then
selected based on the average daily population
in the 1993 census. 

All jails in 204 jurisdictions were automatically 
included if in 1993 the jurisdiction held 
juveniles and had an average daily population of 
250 or more inmates or if it held only adults and 
had an average population of 500 or more. The other 
jurisdictions (591) were then selected based on 
stratified probability sampling.  

Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. 
After follow-up phone calls to nonrespondents,
the response rate for the survey was 100%.

Sampling error

Survey estimates have an associated sampling
error because not all jurisdictions were
contacted for the survey.  Estimates based on
the sample survey may differ somewhat from the
results of conducting a complete census. 

Different samples could yield somewhat different
results.  Standard error is a measure of the
variation among the estimates from all possible
samples, stating the precision with which an
estimate from a particular sample approximates
the average of all possible samples.  The
estimated relative sampling error for the number
of persons under the jurisdiction of jail
authorities of 664,847 on June 30, 1998, was
0.87%; for persons held in custody of jail
authorities of 592,462, 0.67%.

Measuring confinement status

For the first time, in 1995 the ASJ obtained
separate counts of the total number of offenders
under jail supervision, those held in jail
facilities, and those supervised outside jail
facilities.  Previous surveys and censuses
included a small but unknown number of offenders
under community supervision.  To estimate the
percentage change from 1994 to 1995 in the jail
population, the 1995 survey included a count of
inmates held at midyear 1994.

In the 1996 survey, the number of persons
supervised outside a jail facility included for
the first time persons under drug, alcohol,
mental health, or other medical treatment. 
Comparisons with the 1995 estimates should
exclude these persons.

Juveniles
     
State statutes and judicial practices allow
juveniles to be incarcerated in adult jails
under a variety of circumstances.  Because of
the differing statutes and practices, however,
accurate and comparable data on juveniles are
difficult to collect.  

Beginning in 1994 the ASJ provided estimates of
the total number of jail inmates under age 18,
the number held as adults, and the number held
as juveniles.  New sampling procedures were also
introduced in 1994 to minimize the standard
errors of these estimates.  By stratifying
jurisdictions based on the authority to house
juveniles, the precision of the juvenile counts
was improved.

Chapter 3:  Probation 
Explanatory notes

Because many States update their population
counts, the January 1, 1998, numbers may 
differ from those previously published for 
December 31, 1997.

Federal             

Data for the Federal system are from the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts as
provided to the BJS Federal Justice Statistics
Program.  Definitional differences exist 
between probation data reported here and in 
other BJS data series.

"Other" entries include probationers whose 
cases were reopened statistically.

"Other" discharges include probationers for
which specific codes were not assigned. 
Includes such cases as closings at chief's
discretion, closings because of revocation 
in another case, and withdrawing of warrants 
after expiration.

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander"
probationers.

"Other" offense type includes petty offenses.

Although no formal intensive supervision program
exists at the national level, some individual
probation offices that use electronic monitoring
may regard such a program to be an intensive
supervision program.

Alabama

Alabama has 3 reporting agencies:  1 State and 2
local.  Alabama's state agency, which represents
76% of all Alabama's probationers, estimated all
data.  One local agency did not provide data. 
The December 31, 1997 population count was used
as an estimate of the January 1, 1998 and
December 31, 1998 population counts.

"Other" offense type includes driving under 
the influence of alcohol cases.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision and electronic monitoring.

Alaska

All data are estimated.

Data exclude 668 absconders.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision.

Arizona

Arizona has 2 reporting agencies:  1 State 
and 1 local.  The local agency estimated all 
data. 

The State agency's probation population on
December 31, 1998 includes an additional 1,251
interstate compact cases supervised for other
States.  

The probation population on December 31, 1998
excludes an unknown number of persons under
the supervision of Limited Jurisdiction courts
(includes municipal and other courts).  The
active probation population of the Limited
Jurisdiction courts is estimated to have been
less than 500; no estimate is available for the
inactive population under the supervision of
such courts, though it is known to be much
larger.

The State agency reported that "other"
supervision status includes 7,789 indirect
service cases for which Arizona is legally
responsible but which are not under active
supervision. 

"Total" entries are estimated as reported by 
the State.

The State also reported that "other" discharges
include an unspecified number of transfers to
various locations. 

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander"
probationers as reported by the State agency. 

It was also reported by the State that "other"
offense type includes an unspecified number of
the State's driving while intoxicated or under
the influence of alcohol cases. 

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, and 
jail. 

Arkansas

All data are estimated.

"Split sentence" refers to probationers
incarcerated in a substance abuse treatment
program as a condition of probation.

"Other" supervision status includes transfers 
to other counties.

"Successful completion" includes early 
discharges and administrative closures. "Other
unsuccessful" discharges include probationers
who completed their sentence but still owe 
fines.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 495
Hispanics probationers of unknown race.

California

All data are estimated.

Colorado

Colorado has 9 reporting agencies: 1 State and
8 local.  Colorado's State agency, which
represents approximately 79% of all Colorado's
probationers, and one local agency estimated 
all data.

Missing local agency data were imputed based on
the ratio of entries to the January 1, 1998
population among local agencies in Colorado
which were able to provide data.  Exits were
imputed from the requirement that the beginning
of year population, plus entries, minus exits,
must equal the end of year population.

Total population on December 31, 1998 excludes
1,376 probationers in an intensive supervision
program.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 2,840
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, and jail.

Connecticut

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 8,505
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for electronic
monitoring.

Delaware

Total population on January 1, 1998 is
estimated.

"Total" entries are estimated.  Data for 
"total" entries and exits exclude "Attorney 
General probation" and "pretrial diversion" 
cases "Attorney General probation" includes 
persons with charges which have been adjudicated, 
but the disposition was withheld.  Successful
completion results in dismissal of charges. 
"Pretrial diversion" includes persons who have
not been found guilty, but who have been placed
on supervised probation by the court pending
disposition of their charges.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 661
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

District of Columbia

"Other" offense type includes 653 domestic
violence civil protection orders and 536
domestic violence deferred sentences.

The intensive supervision and electronic
monitoring program are combined.  There are 
105 probationers in an intensive supervision 
program who are also on electronic monitoring.

Florida

Florida has 14 reporting agencies: 1 State and
13 local.

Approximately 21% of the local agencies in
Florida estimated all of the data. In addition,
approximately 21% of the localities in Florida
estimated one or more characteristics of the
total population on December 31, 1998. 

Missing local agency data were imputed based 
on the ratio of entries to the January 1, 1998
population among local agencies in Florida which
were able to provide data.  Exits were imputed
from the requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.

Total population on December 31, 1998 excludes
313 probationers in an intensive supervision
program and 226 probationers in an electronic
monitoring program in 2 local agencies.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 85
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, and jail.

Georgia

Georgia has 3 reporting agencies: 1 State and 2
local. 

Inclusion of an additional local agency added
1,530 persons to the January 1, 1998 probation
population, and 2,321 to the December 31, 1998
probation population.

It was reported by the State agency that "other"
entries include out-of-State probationers.  

"Other unsuccessful" discharges include
probationers whose supervision was revoked and
they were returned to prison as reported by the
State.  

The State agency reported race in two
classifications, "white" and "non-white", and
included "non-white" under "Black or African
American". 

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision.

Illinois

"Other" offense type includes 41,365
administrative offenses, 17,729 driving under
the influence of alcohol offenses, and 2,406
traffic offenses.

Indiana

"Other" probation status includes "shock"
probationers, probationers sentenced to
probation in lieu of prosecution, and others.

Iowa

Total population on December 31, 1998 excludes
an unspecified number of misdemeanor cases
from two districts whose records for inactive
misdemeanor cases are maintained on paper only.

"Active" and "inactive" probationers could not
be separated.  Active counts include an
undetermined number of inactive probationers.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 671
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Kansas

Total probation population on December 31, 
1998 excludes an additional 345 persons under
pretrial diversion supervision.

Data exclude 6,869 absconders and 591
probationers supervised out-of-State.

"Other" entries include transfers from other
jurisdictions.

"Other" discharges include transfers to
Community Corrections programs.

"American Indian or Alaska Native" includes 
an unspecified number of "Asian" probationers.

"Other" offense type includes driving under the
influence of alcohol and other traffic offenses.
  
Louisiana

The probation population on December 31, 1998
includes an unspecified number of interstate
compact cases supervised for other jurisdictions.

"Successful completion" includes probationers
with court orders and overturned sentences.

Maine

Imputation of entries was based on the ratio of
entries to the January 1, 1998 population among
similar States.  Exits were imputed from the
requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.  

Maryland

"Other" supervision status includes 981
probationers "delinquent in custody".

"Other unsuccessful" discharges include 3,793
probationers with outstanding warrants.

Probationers confined in local jails or State
and Federal prisons could not be separately
counted.

Massachusetts

Total probation population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional unspecified number of
persons, who because of the offense they were
accused of, were placed under supervision prior
to arraignment.  The December 31, 1998
population also excludes an additional 729
probate and family cases. 
     
Michigan

Michigan has 131 reporting agencies: 1 State and
130 local.  

A total of 18 additional local agencies, created
through changes in authority and fragmentation
of District Court probation agencies in
Michigan, were included in the 1998 survey. 
Inclusion of these agencies added 11,183 persons
to the January 1, 1998 probation population, and
11,261 to the December 31, 1998, probation
population.

Two local agencies in Michigan did not provide
data.  For these agencies, the December 31,
1997 population count was used as an estimate 
of the January 1, 1998, and December 31, 1998
counts.

Approximately 39% of Michigan's local agencies
estimated all of their data.  In addition,
approximately 18% of Michigan's localities
estimated one or more characteristics of the
total population on December 31, 1998.

Imputation of entries was based on the ratio of
entries to the January 1, 1998 population among
similar States.  Missing local agency data were
imputed based on this same ratio among local
agencies in Michigan which were able to provide
data.  Exits were imputed from the requirement
that the beginning of year population, plus
entries, minus exits, must equal the end of year
population.

Total population on December 31, 1998 excludes
an unspecified number of probationers in an
electronic monitoring program.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 181
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, jail, 
and prison.

Mississippi

Data exclude 6,456 persons on inactive
supervision, 864 probationers supervised
out-of-State, and 44 absconders. 

"Other" discharges include 858 probationers
whose sentences were held in abeyance.

Missouri

Missouri has 2 reporting agencies: 1 State and 
1 local. Missouri's State agency, which represents
approximately 99% of all Missouri's
probationers, estimated all data.

The State agency's probation population on
December 31, 1998 excludes an additional 1,165
interstate compact cases supervised for other
States.

"Other" offense type includes ordinance
violations.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision and electronic monitoring.

Montana

All data are estimated.

Imputation of entries was based on the ratio of
1997 entries to the January 1, 1997 population
in Montana.  Exits were imputed from the
requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.

Total probation population on December 31, 
1998 excludes an unspecified number of
probationers in an intensive supervision and
electronic monitoring program.

Nevada

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Successful completion" includes an unspecified
number of deaths.  "Other unsuccessful"
discharges include 750 issued warrants and an
unspecified number of revocations.

New Hampshire

"Other" supervision status includes probationers
on bail supervision.

New Jersey

Total population on December 31, 1998 excludes
1,149 probationers in an intensive supervision
program.

"Total" entries are estimated.  "Other" includes
approximately 12,000 probationers in a pretrial
intervention or conditional discharge program,
approximately 8,500 probationers in a community
service program, and approximately 6,000
probationers supervised for collections.

"Total" exits are estimated.  "Other
unsuccessful" includes 3,225 probationers who
violated probation.  "Other" includes 7,788
probationers in a community service program. 

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 15,721
Hispanics probationers of unknown race.

New Mexico

New Mexico has 2 reporting agencies:  1 State
and 1 local. 

The local agency estimated "total" entries.
     
New York

"Other" probation status includes an unspecified
number of persons on local conditional release
and other unknowns.

Ohio
                         
Ohio has 53 reporting agencies:  1 State and 52
local. 

Inclusion of an additional local agency added
355 persons to the January 1, 1998 probation
population, and 380 persons to the December 31,
1998 probation population.

Approximately 16% of Ohio's local agencies
estimated all of their data.  Additionally,
approximately 18% of Ohio's localities estimated
one or more characteristics of the total
population on December 31, 1998.

Missing local agency data were imputed based on
the ratio of entries to the January 1, 1998
population among local agencies in Ohio which
were able to provide data.  Exits were imputed
from the requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.

Total probation population on December 31, 1998
excludes 53 probationers in an intensive
supervision program and 94 probationers in an
electronic monitoring program in 2 local
agencies.   

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 519
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, jail, and
prison.
 
Oklahoma

Oklahoma has 3 reporting agencies: 1 State and
2 local.  Oklahoma's State agency, which 
represents approximately 95% of all Oklahoma's
probationers, estimated all data.

The State agency's probation population on
December 31, 1998 excludes 2,181 probationers in
an intensive supervision program.  

The State reported that "other" probation status
includes 85 probationers with a delayed
sentence.

"Other" supervision status includes 269
probationers on hearing status. 

"Total" exits are estimated.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 30
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for jail.

Oregon

"Successful completion" includes seven 
offender appeals.  "Other unsuccessful" 
discharges include 453 probationers with 
an expired absconder status. 

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 
3,422 Hispanic probationers of unknown 
race.

Pennsylvania

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Total" exits are estimated.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 4,807
Hispanic probationers of unknown race. 
"American Indian or Alaska Native" and "Asian"
include State data only.

"Felony," "misdemeanor," and "driving while
intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol"
include county data only.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision and jail.  Data for the intensive
supervision and electronic monitoring programs
include county data only.  The State operated 
an intensive supervision program and an 
electronic monitoring program but the number 
of probationers in the programs was unknown.

Rhode Island

Total population on December 31, 1998 is
estimated.

"Total" exits are estimated.  "Other" discharges
include 2,000 administrative closures.  
South Carolina

"Other" offense type includes 11,765
unclassified offenses for which a majority 
are minor offenses.

South Dakota

Data exclude 160 probationers supervised
out-of-State.
          
Tennessee

Tennessee has 3 reporting agencies:  1 State 
and 2 local.  One local agency estimated all 
data.

Total probation population on December 31, 
1998 excludes 52 probationers in an electronic
monitoring program.

The State agency reported that "other"
discharges include 933 internal transfers and
160 interstate compact cases.  

The State also reported that "Asian" includes 
an unspecified number of "Native Hawaiian or
Other Pacific Islander" and "unknown or not
reported" race includes 373 Hispanic probationers 
of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision and jail.

Texas 

Total probation population on December 31, 
1998 excludes an additional 616 probationers 
on civil probation.
 
The characteristics of gender, race, Hispanic
origin, and specific offense are unknown for the
10,039 persons on pretrial supervision.

"Active" includes interstate transfers to Texas. 
"Other" supervision status includes indirect
supervision cases of the following types: 
persons deported or waiting to be deported from
an Immigration and Naturalization Service
detention center whose cases have not been
officially closed, persons in Federal prison
whose cases have not been officially terminated,
persons in a Substance Abuse Felony Punishment
Facility who have been released to a
Transitional Treatment Center, persons
incarcerated in another State with a case
pending in Texas, persons appealing the
revocation of their probation, and others.

"Other" discharges include 14,431 pretrial
terminations and 10,638 administrative 
closures. 

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 149,937
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Utah

"Other" entries include 40 reinstatements and
five court orders.

"Other unsuccessful" discharges include 173
revocations.  "Other" includes 28 probationers
deported, ten released on court orders, and six
appeals.

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander"
probationers.

Virginia

"Unknown or not reported" race includes an
unspecified number of "Asian," "Native Hawaiian
or Other Pacific Islander," and probationers of
other races.

"Other" offense type includes an unspecified
number of driving while intoxicated offenses and
unknowns.

Washington

Washington has 38 reporting agencies:  1 State
and 37 local.  Washington's State agency, which
represents 59% of all Washington's probationers,
estimated all data.

A total of 15 additional local agencies, created
through the growth and fragmentation of
probation agencies in Washington, were included
in the 1998 survey.  Inclusion of these agencies
added 14,596 persons to the January 1, 1998
probation population, and 15,960 to the December
31, 1998 probation population.  In addition, one
office with 625 probationers on December 31,
1997 has been deleted because the probation
department had been eliminated.

Missing local agency data were imputed based on
the ratio of entries to the January 1, 1998
population among local agencies in Washington
which were able to provide data.  Exits were
imputed from the requirement that beginning
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.

The probation population on December 31, 1998
includes an additional 2,835 interstate compact
cases supervised for other jurisdictions.  

Approximately 30% of the local agencies in
Washington estimated all data.  In addition,
approximately 16% of the local agencies in
Washington estimated one or more characteristics
of the total population on December 31, 1998.

Total probation population on December 31, 1998
excludes 59 probationers in an electronic
monitoring program.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 664
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Detailed data are estimated for intensive
supervision, electronic monitoring, jail, and
prison.

West Virginia

All data are estimated.

Imputation of entries was based on the ratio of
entries to the January 1, 1998 population among
similar States.  Exits were imputed from the
requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.  

Wisconsin

"Other" probation status includes 199
probationers with a deferred sentence.

"Other" supervision status includes 1,086
probationers with a violation warrant. 

"Successful completion" includes probationers
released on court orders.

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander"
probationers.

Wyoming

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 291
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

Chapter 5:  Prisoners 
Explanatory notes

Federal prisons

Movement data were provided but, when added to
the population for January 1, 1998, minus the
releases, do not equal population on December
31, 1998.

Other releases and admissions:  Include
miscellaneous and unknown admission types.

Inmates with a year or less sentence:  Include
inmates whose sentence length is unknown.

Other deaths:  All deaths are reported in the
"Unspecified cause" category because they are
unable to breakdown categories by gender.  The
death totals for each category are:  Executions-
0; Illness/natural causes- 186; AIDS- 19;
Suicides- 12; Accidental injury to self- 3;
Death caused by another person- 3; Other 
deaths-0.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders. 

Alabama

Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include inmates returned from
supervised release under Act 754 and split
sentence/probation with and without new
sentences. 

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other admissions:  Unspecified in the Alabama
data system, but include other conditional
release violators with no new sentence.

Deaths:  Alabama's data system does not
distinguish cause of death, except by execution
and AIDS-related deaths. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.
            
Alaska

Admissions and releases:  Alaska is unable to
determine if movements are longer than 30 days. 
All movements are considered estimates since
Alaska's fields do not exactly match NPS
categories.

Jurisdiction and custody counts:  Include
inmates in prisons and jails, which form an
integrated system in Alaska. 
            
Other releases, unconditional and conditional: 
Court-ordered releases and other releases. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Alaska's "Hispanic" race
category. 

Arizona

Population, admissions and releases: Based on
custody data.

Total jurisdiction population:  Excludes 183
male and 14 female inmates housed in local 
jails solely to ease prison crowding.
      
Other unconditional releases: Court-ordered
releases.

Other conditional releases:  Include supervised
early releases, provisional releases, supervised
work furloughs, earned credit releases and
releases to home arrest program.

Other releases:  Include early releases to
detainer and persons returned to prison pending
revocation hearing where no revocation occurred
and the inmate was returned to supervision.

Cause of death:  Type of death pending
investigation at time of data collection.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders: Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Arizona's "Other" race category.  

Arkansas

Other admissions:  Consists of 37 returns from
Department of Community Punishment (DCP), a
separate agency.  These inmates were returned to
the Arkansas DOC because of a violation or were
sent to DCP by mistake.  This item also includes
an adjustment residual to balance the movement
data with the December 31, 1998 jurisdiction
population.
      
Other conditional releases:  Persons released
under the provisions of Arkansas' Acts 378, 814,
and Boot Camp to some form of community
supervision.

Other releases:  Consists of persons released 
to Department of Community Punishment (DCP), a
separate agency.

Jurisdiction population, inmates with a sentence
of a year or less:  Includes 71 male and 6
female inmates incarcerated in the county jail
awaiting transfer to Department of Correction
for whom the Arkansas DOC does not know the
sentence.

Custody population:  Includes 69 male and 4
female inmates transferred from the county jail
for whom the Arkansas DOC is awaiting complete
sentence data.

Unknown race:  Includes Arkansas' "Cuban" race
category.

California

Sentencing information:  Reported population
with a sentence of more than 1 year include some
inmates with a maximum sentence of 1 year or
less.

Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  May include some parole violators
with new sentences and returns from supervised
mandatory release with new sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators only, no new
sentences:  May include some parole violators
without new sentences.  Also includes supervised
mandatory and parole releases returned pending a
revocation hearing.

Escapees returns:  Include AWOL returns, with or
without new sentences.

Unconditional releases, expirations of sentence: 
Include some court-ordered releases.

Conditional releases, supervised mandatory
releases:  Include some court-ordered releases
and parole releases.

Other releases, escapes from confinement: 
Include inmates that are AWOL.

Other releases:  Consists of releases to
appeal/bond and an adjustment residual to
balance the movement data with the December 
31, 1998 jurisdiction population.  These are 
most likely temporary releases to courts, 
jails, and hospitals, who had not been 
returned to prison as of December 31, 1998.

Cause of death:  Not specified, or drug
overdose. 

Jurisdiction population, unsentenced inmates: 
Include civil narcotic addict commitments and
county diagnostic cases.

Unknown race and not known Hispanic origin: 
Include some Asians and Pacific Islanders, and
Hispanic inmates admitted to California prisons
prior to January 1990 (when these categories
were added to the California computer system). 
Also includes California's "Hispanic/Mexican"
category. 

Colorado

Sentencing information:  Reported populations
with sentences of more than 1 year include a
small number of inmates with a maximum sentence
of 1 year or less.
      
Transfers from other jurisdictions:  Include
admissions through interstate compact
agreements.
      
Escapee and AWOL prisoners:  Numbers are
estimates.
      
Other releases:  Court-ordered releases not
determinable as conditional or unconditional.

Race and Hispanic origin:  Numbers are
estimated.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders. 

Connecticut

Jurisdiction population:  The 1998 jurisdiction
counts for Connecticut includes inmates in its
Community Program (Transitional Supervision).

Other admissions:  Type of admission is unknown. 
Includes adjustment residuals to balance the
movement data with the December 31, 1998
jurisdiction population. 
      
Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
discharges.
      
Other conditional releases:  Releases to home
jurisdiction and community releases, or
discharge from Connecticut supervision.

Other releases:  Type of release is unknown. 
Include adjustment residuals to balance the
movement data with the December 31, 1998
jurisdiction population.

Total inmate population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and
jails, which form an integrated system in
Connecticut. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Connecticut's "Hispanic"
category.

Delaware

Parole and other conditional release violators
with new sentences:  Include parole violators
both with and without new sentences.
      
Other admissions:  Include persons whose status
changed from a jail sentence of less than 1 year
to  prison sentences of more than 1 year. 

Other releases:  Include releases to a state or
local hospital and persons serving weekend
sentences.

Unconditional releases, expirations of sentence: 
Include some releases to probation.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Total inmate population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and 
jails, which form an integrated system in
Delaware. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Includes 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

District of Columbia

Population, admissions, and releases:  The
January 1, 1998 jurisdiction counts differ 
from the December 31, 1997 jurisdiction counts. 
Movement data were provided; however when
admissions are added to the population for
January 1, 1998 and releases are subtracted, 
the total does not equal the December 31, 1998
population. 
      
Sentencing information, partially suspended
sentences:  Populations and movements of inmates
given partially suspended sentences (part served
in prison, part under probation) are included
with the "Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence" only if the prison portion of the
sentence exceeds one year.  As a result, the
"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence"
populations and movements are understated and
the "Inmates with a year or less maximum
sentence" are overstated.
      
Transfers to and from other jurisdictions: 
Include transfers from and to mental hospitals,
other State and Federal facilities.

Unconditional releases, expirations of sentence: 
Include some inmates with partially suspended
sentences (part served in prison, part under
probation) released subject to conditions of
probation.

Other conditional releases:  Emergency Power Act
releases.

Number of deaths:  The District of Columbia is
unable to provide number of deaths by sex. 
Therefore, all deaths have been reported under
"males."  As a result, total male counts are
overcounted and female releases are slightly
undercounted.  Total male and female inmate
populations will be similarly affected.

Total jurisdiction population:  Include male 
and female District of Columbia code violators
housed in Federal Bureau of Prison facilities
and male inmates housed in other state
facilities.  Of these, an undetermined number
are being housed solely to ease District of
Columbia prison crowding.

Total inmate population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and
jails, which form an integrated system in the
District of Columbia. 

Unsentenced inmate populations:  Jurisdiction
and custody counts include unsentenced inmates
held in the District of Columbia jail or
Detention Center

Racial composition is estimated.  Estimates
assume that 96% of the male and female inmate
populations is black.

Race, Asians, and Pacific Islanders: Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians 
and other Pacific Islanders.

Florida

Population, admissions, and releases:  Based on
custody data.
      
Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include control release violators
with new sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators without new
sentences:  Include conditional medical returns,
conditional medical violators, provisional
release violators, conditional release
violators, and supervised community release
violators without new sentences.
      
Transfer from other jurisdictions:  Include
admissions through interstate compact agreements
both with and without new sentences and inmates
returning from concurrent sentences served
elsewhere.

Other admissions:  Consists of returns from
court with new sentences and adjustment
residuals to balance the movement data with 
the December 31, 1998 custody population.

Other unconditional releases: Include sentences
vacated by the court.

Other conditional releases:  Include provisional
releases, conditional pardons, control releases
with supervision, conditional medical releases,
conditional releases, reinstatements, supervised
community releases, mandatory conditional
releases, and releases by Florida Parole
Commission order.
                    
Transfers to other jurisdictions:  Include
interstate and out of state transfers. 
Interstate transfers are those inmates that have
been sentenced in Florida but go directly to
another state or Federal prison to serve their
sentence. 

Other releases:  Include inmates who are
releases from custody, discharges, discharges
from provisional supervision, discharges from
parole, and an adjustment residual to balance
the movement data with the December 31, 1998
custody population.

Race:  Racial categories may include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Includes 980 male and 96 female
inmates from Florida's "Latin" category.

Georgia

The January 1, 1998 jurisdiction counts differ
from the December 31, 1997 jurisdiction counts
due to delayed data entry.

Population, admissions, and releases:  Based on
custody data.
      
Parole violators with new sentences:  May
include a small undetermined number of other
conditional release violators with new
sentences.

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other conditional releases:  Consists of special
reprieves and supervised reprieves which are
conditional releases controlled by Georgia's
Parole Board.

Other deaths:  Cause of death is unknown.

Jurisdiction population:  Excludes an
undetermined number of inmates awaiting pick-up
from local jails.

Unknown race:  Include inmates who identify 
race categories other than those specified.  
May include an undetermined number of Native
Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders.
                    
Hawaii

Category estimates:  Hawaii's total jurisdiction
and custody figures are actual counts.  However,
the movement data, race, and ethnicity
compositions are estimates based on information
from Hawaii's Correctional Information System
(CIS).
 
New court commitments:  Consists of new
admissions and status change admissions.

Other unconditional releases:  Dismissals and
suspended sentences.

Other conditional releases:  Consists of
conditional releases and conditional discharges.

Other releases:  Include emergency releases,
supervised releases, releases to own
recognizance (ROR), temporary ROR,
administrative releases, releases to other
individuals/agencies, status change releases,
other releases and an adjustment to balance 
the movement data with the December 31,1998
population..

Total inmate population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and
jails, which form an integrated system in
Hawaii. 

Unknown race:  Include inmates who identified
themselves with more than one racial category,
except for individuals who are part-Hawaiian. 
Prisoners of part-Hawaiian ancestry are counted
as "Asians/Pacific Islanders."

Hispanic origin:  Hawaii's "Puerto Rican"
category.
      
Idaho

Other admissions:  Department receives report
that now has only 2 categories - "Timers" and
"those sentenced to retained jurisdiction". 
"Timers" are persons sentenced to prison. 
"Sentenced to retained jurisdiction" are persons
assigned by a judge to a 120 day assessment/
treatment program and then the judge will 
sentence the person to prison or release
them to probation.  Also consists of an
adjustment in admissions to balance the 
movement data with the December 31, 1998 
jurisdiction population.

Releases:  Department now releases report that
has only 3 categories - Probation, Parole, and
Expiration of sentences.

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Jurisdiction population, sentenced to more 
than 1 year:  Counts for inmates with over 1 
year maximum sentence are estimates based on
historical averages.

Race and Hispanic origin:  Numbers are
estimates. 

Illinois

Population, admissions, and releases: Based on
custody data.
      
Sentencing information:  Inmates with sentences
of more than 1 year include some inmates with a
1 year maximum sentence.
      
Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include some parole violators with
new sentences.

Other conditional release violators only, no 
new sentences:  Include some parole violators
without new sentences.

Escapees:  Illinois reports the movement of
escapees using the Offender Tracking System. 
This accounts for part of the increase in the
number of escapes and returns from escape,
because all the Community Correctional Centers
and Electronic Detention Centers are now
included.  Three males and zero females escaped
from prison. 

Other releases:  Includes the net difference
between long-term admission and release
movements not reported in other categories
(e.g., transfers, writs, and medical furloughs)
in order to balance end-of-year populations. 
Also includes an undetermined number of
transfers to other jurisdictions.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.
            
Unknown race:  Illinois' "Hispanic" race
category.

Indiana

New court commitments:  Include probation
violators, both with and without new sentences
because numbers can not be differentiated.
            
Other unconditional releases:  Terminations of
sentence determined by Parole Board.
      
Other deaths:  Includes all deaths except death
by execution because cause of death was not
recorded during 1998.
      
Iowa

Population, admissions, and releases:  Based on
custody data.

Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include persons remanded prior to formal
revocation hearing.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
discharges.

Conditional releases, paroles:  Include returns
to parole of persons remanded to prison prior to
a formal revocation hearing and inmates released
to parole by Conditional Communication Orders.

Other conditional releases:  Releases to a 
work release program.

Transfers to another state:  Consists of 100
women prisoners transferred to a Virginia
correctional facility to relieve crowding.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Iowa's Hispanic race category. 

Kansas

New court commitments:  May include a small
undetermined number of returns from appeal/bond
and includes all probation violators, both with
and without new sentences, who may have
previously spent time in prison.
 
Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.
      
Other admissions:  Type unknown at time of 
data collection.
      
Paroles:  Include releases to "post release
supervision". 

Other conditional releases:  Kansas'
"Conditional Release" to supervision.  It is
similar to parole.

Transfers:  Kansas inmate transfers were not
counted in 1998.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Kentucky

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Kentucky's data
system does not distinguish AWOLs from escapes.

Other admissions:  Consists of court-ordered
returns to prison.

Other releases:  Consists of court-ordered
releases not determinable as conditional or
unconditional.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Consists 
of an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians 
and other Pacific Islanders and inmates whose 
race cannot be classified elsewhere.
                          
Louisiana

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.
      
Other admissions:  Consists of admissions to
treatment programs from Probation and Parole
Districts.

Expiration of sentence:  Includes good-time
releases.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Consists of
court-ordered releases.  

Deaths:  Deaths are not categorized anymore.

Other releases:  Consists of inmates released 
in error.

Jurisdiction population, sentenced to more 
than 1 year:  Includes the 12,018 males and 
1,193 females housed in local jails through
Cooperative Endeavor Agreements and
Partnerships.

American Indians or Alaska Natives:  American
Indians only.

Unknown race:  Includes Latinos, Native 
Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders and 
Louisiana's "Other" race category.
                    
Hispanic origin:  Louisiana's data system 
does not include ethnicity.

Maine

Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include probation violators with 
new sentences.

Other conditional release violators only, no 
new sentences:  Include probation violators 
with no new sentences.

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other unconditional releases:  Consists of
releases by expiration of hold orders.

Other conditional releases:  Consists of
releases by custody detainer or warrant.

Other releases:  Contains inmates with an
erroneous release code.

Race:  Numbers by gender are estimates. 
Categories may include Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Consists of inmates of "mixed"
race.

Maryland

Category estimates:  The number of inmates with
over one year maximum sentence for the
population and movement categories is estimated
by taking the percentages for over-one-year-
maximum-sentence inmates from the automated data
and applying these percentages by category to
the manual data totals.  The manual data provide
actual movement counts but includes inmates with
a year or less maximum sentence, whereas the
automated data makes it possible to distinguish
inmates with over one year maximum sentences.
      
New court commitments:  May include a small
undetermined number of returns from appeal/bond.
      
Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.
      
Other admissions:  Consists of interstate
compact admissions.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases and a small undetermined number of
releases to appeal/bond.

Other conditional releases:  Inmates paroled
from the Patuxent Institution to work release.

Other releases:  Include a small number of
interstate compact releases and releases of new
admissions that had been double counted on the
admissions side.

Other deaths:  Includes 5 deaths for which the
cause is unknown.

Race, Asian, and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Hispanic origin:  Maryland's data system does
not include ethnicity.

Massachusetts

Sentencing information:  Population totals are
actual counts, however, sentence lengths are
estimated for approximately 42 cases for the
jurisdiction and custody populations, while
there are 342 sentences estimated for the
admissions and releases sections (these may
include multiple moves for an individual with
missing sentence information).
      
Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include parole violators with no new sentences
and parole violators with new sentences.
 
Expirations of sentence:  Include an
undetermined number of releases to probation.
 
Other unconditional releases:  Include
court-ordered releases.

Releases and jurisdiction population: Population 
counts may include a small, undetermined number 
of inmates who were remanded to court, transferred 
to the custody of another state, Federal, or 
county system, and subsequently released.
      
Jurisdiction and custody population:  The
jurisdiction and custody population on December
31 are actually the January 4, 1999 counts.

Jurisdiction population:  By law, offenders in
Massachusetts may be sentenced to terms of up to
2 years in locally-operated jails and
correctional institutions.  Such populations are
excluded from the state jurisdiction count, but
are included in published population counts and
rates for local jails and correctional
institutions.  There are approximately 6,200
male inmates in the county system serving a
sentence of over 1 year. 

Jurisdiction population, unsentenced inmates: 
Include inmates housed in state facilities
awaiting trial and civil commitments as well as
125 males awaiting trial for the state housed in
county facilities.

State prison overcrowding:  Other states housing
Massachusetts inmates include Connecticut,
Maine, New Mexico, Ohio, Vermont, Virginia and
Pennsylvania.

Unknown race:  Massachusetts' "Hispanic" race
category.

Michigan

Population, admissions, and releases: Michigan's 
movement and population counts are based on custody 
data plus 1,317 inmates housed in beds leased from 
the Virginia DOC.  Counts exclude 208 male inmates 
housed in local jails solely to ease prison crowding. 
      
Admissions and releases:  Michigan is unable to
determine if movements are longer than thirty
days.
      
Transfers from and to other jurisdictions: 
Include transfers from and to mental hospitals,
and Federal and other states' facilities.

Escapes:  Consist predominantly of zero
tolerance escapes from community residential
programs.

Returns from and admissions to appeal/bond:  The
net difference of all movements to and from the
courts.  The length of time out to court is not
available.

Other admissions:  Include returns from county
jail and administrative returns from parole
status.   

Other releases:  Consists of inmates temporarily
sent to a county jail and administrative returns
to parole status.

State prison crowding:  Michigan is unable to
distinguish gender of prison inmates housed in
jails; therefore, all inmates are reported as
males. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  May include
a small undetermined number of Native Hawaiians
and other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Include Mexican Americans and
Michigan's "Other" race category.

Hispanic origin:  Mexican Americans.
      
Minnesota

Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include supervised mandatory release
and work release violators with new  sentences.

Other conditional release violators only, no new
sentences:  Include supervised mandatory release
and work release violators with no new 
sentences.

Transfers, escapes, AWOL prisoners, and
admissions/returns from appeal/bond:  Minnesota
does not consider AWOLs, escapes, transfers,
releases to appeal/bond as prison releases;
therefore returns from these statutes are not
considered admissions.

Other unconditional releases:  Include inmates
discharged by court/executive order and may
include an undetermined number of commutations
and overturned convictions.

Other conditional releases:  Include inmates on
supervised release and intensive supervised
release.  May also include inmates on
conditional release, intensive community
supervision and work release.

State prison crowding:  Consists of 50 males in
an in-state private correctional facility and 12
males in county jail.

Unknown race:  Includes 374 Hispanic males and
11 Hispanic females because Minnesota classifies
"Hispanic" as a race.  Also includes inmates
reported in Minnesota's "Other" race category.

Mississippi

New court commitments:  Include an undetermined
number of probation violators both with and
without new sentences. 

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other admissions:  Include inmates awaiting a
revocation hearing and returns from appeal/bond,
as well as inmates whose admission category had
not yet been keyed at the date of submission. 
Also includes an adjustment residual to balance
the movement data with the December 31, 1998
population.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Other releases:  Consists of a small number of
releases to appeal/bond and returns to community
supervision after a revocation hearing where no
revocation occurred.

State prison crowding:  Include inmates housed
in regional jails, county jails, and private
prisons.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders.
 
Unknown race:  Mississippi's "Hispanic"
category.
      
Missouri

Missouri revised its December 31, 1997
jurisdiction population count.

Admissions, releases, and population data: 
Starting in the 1998 report year, Missouri
changed the classification of the Electronic
Monitoring Program (EMP) and the Residential
Treatment Facility (RTF). The new computer
system does not allow analysis of EMP and RTF
(inmates are considered to be under Parole Board
supervision).  Previously a certain number of
offenders in EMP and RTF were classified as
state prison inmates and were included in the
NPS-1 report, therefore the data for 1997 and
1998 are not comparable.

Other conditional releases violators returned,
with and without new sentences:  Include
admissions from Electronic Monitoring Program
(EMP) and Residential Treatment Facility (RTF).

Other admissions:  Include parole board
holdovers (offenders arrested by local
authorities who are returned to DOC custody,
instead of to the local jail's custody, as was
customary in the past) and return of inmates
erroneously released.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases and cases with reversed or remanded
sentences.

Other conditional releases:  Conditional
releases to custody/detainer, parole board
holdover releases, and releases to EMP/RTF.

Other releases:  Erroneous releases.
                    
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Montana

Montana revised its December 31, 1997 female
jurisdiction population count.
      
Population, movement, and releases:  Inmates
with a sentence of more than 1 year include a
small undetermined number of inmates with a
maximum sentence of 1 year or less.
      
Admissions and releases:  Include admissions to
and releases from the Intensive Supervision
Program (ISP). 

Unknown race:  Montana's "Hispanic" category.

Nebraska

Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include an undetermined number of parole
violators with new sentences.

Race and ethnicity:  Numbers are estimates.
      
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include and
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders. 

Unknown race:  Nebraska's "Other" race category.
            
Nevada

Total admissions and releases:  Include a small
undetermined number of inmates with a maximum
sentence of 1 year or less.
      
New court commitments:  May include a very small
undetermined number of returns from appeal/bond.
      
AWOL returns and AWOL releases:  Nevada does not
consider AWOLs as releases, therefore, do not
consider these returns as admissions.
      
Escapee returns and releases:  Nevada's data
system carries escapees as part of the
jurisdictional population, therefore neither
their departure or return is reported. 

Other admissions:  Inmates admitted to boot
camp, county safekeepers, and inmates in the
120-day evaluation program.  Also included is 
an adjustment residual to balance the movement 
data with the December 31, 1998 population.

Other unconditional releases:  Inmates whose
sentences were overturned by court action and
inmates who were released from boot camp and 
the 120-day evaluation program.

Custody population, inmates with a sentence of
more than 1 year:  Include 500 female inmates
currently being housed with Corrections
Corporation of America, a private prison located
in Nevada.  These inmates are counted because
this facility is located in Nevada and is
dedicated to housing only Nevada female inmates.

Custody population, inmates with 1 year or less
sentences:  Include inmates in boot camp and the
120-day evaluation program.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Race and Ethnicity:  Numbers are estimates.

Unknown race:  Nevada's "Hispanic," "Cuban," and
"Other" race categories.

Ethnic origin:  Nevada's "Hispanic" and "Cuban"
race categories.
      
New Hampshire

Parole violators only, no new sentence: Include
parole violators with a new sentence.
      
Other conditional releases:  Include parole
violators who were not revoked and were
re-released.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.
      
Other releases:  Released on court-ordered bail.

Jurisdiction population, Inmates with a sentence
of more than 1 year:  1997 data were revised to
reflect 4 corrections to the 1997 figures. 
Changes also made in race and ethnicity numbers
to reflect these changes. 

State prison crowding:  Includes 76 inmates
housed in over 20 different states.

Race:  Native Hawaiians or other Pacific
Islanders are included in item 8b(4) "Asian"
category. 

New Jersey

Sentencing information:  Inmates with sentences
of more than 1 year include an undetermined
number of  inmates with a sentence equal to one
year. 

New court commitments:  Include an undetermined
number of transfers from other jurisdictions.

Other conditional releases violators only, no
new sentences:  Returns from the Intensive
Supervision Program (an experimental program,
administered by the Administrative Office of 
the Courts, that is an intermediate form of
punishment between incarceration and probation). 
An undetermined number of these returns may have
new sentences. 

Other conditional releases:  Prisoners released
to the Intensive Supervision Program. 
            
AWOLS returns and releases:  Due to changes in
its data system which are not yet complete, New
Jersey is unable to report AWOLS/Walkaways.

Other Releases:  Release type not coded in data
system.

Other deaths:  Unknown at time of data
collection. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.
            
Unknown race:  "Hispanic" inmates who are not
classified as "White" or "Black."

New Mexico

The January 1, 1998 jurisdiction counts differ
from the December 31, 1997 jurisdiction counts
due to a delay in data entry.

Other conditional release violators only, no 
new sentences:  Include returns from community
corrections program and conditional release
violators both with and without new sentences.

Cause of death:  New Mexico's data system does
not distinguish cause of death other than death
by execution.
      
Other releases:  Releases from the Probation and
Parole Division.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders. 

New York

Admissions, releases, and population data: 
Excludes 2248 male and 40 female inmates housed
in local jails solely to ease prison crowding
because New York does not maintain movement data
for these inmates.
      

New court commitments:  Include parole violators
with new sentences and other conditional release
violators with new sentences.

Transfers from other jurisdictions:  Transfers
to and from the jurisdiction of the Department
of Mental Hygiene for psychiatric treatment.   

Other admissions:  Consists of inmates returned
following erroneous discharge from drug
treatment.

Other releases:  Consists of inmates classified
as erroneous releases.

Unknown race:  Include an undetermined number of
Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders.

North Carolina

Sentencing information, partially suspended
sentences:  Partially suspended sentences (part
served in prison, part under probation) are only
included in the "Inmates with over 1 year
maximum sentence" counts if the prison portion
of these sentences is more than 1 year. 
Virtually all inmates with a partially suspended
sentence are included in the December 31, 1998
"Inmates with a year or less maximum sentence"
populations.  As a result, the "Inmates with
over 1 year maximum sentence" populations and
movements are understated and the "Inmates with
a year or less maximum sentence" populations are
overstated.
      
Parole violators with new sentences:  Include an
undetermined number of parole violators without
new sentences and other conditional-release
violators, both with and without new sentences.
      
Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other admissions:  Consists of an adjustment
residual to balance the movement data with the
December 31, 1998 population.

Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Paroles:  Include some supervised mandatory
releases.

Jurisdiction population:  North Carolina's
"Total inmate population" is an actual count. 
However, "Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence" and "Inmates with a year or less
maximum sentence" populations are estimated.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  North Carolina's "Other" race
category.

Hispanic origin:  North Carolina does not
collect ethnicity information.

North Dakota

Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include some parole violators with new
sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators only, 
no new sentences:  Include an undetermined 
number of conditional-release violators with 
new sentences.
      
Other conditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Ohio

Sentencing information:  Inmates with maximum
sentences of more than 1 year include some
inmates with sentences of 1 year or less.  As a
result, the "Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence" populations and movements are
overstated and the "Inmates with a year or less
maximum sentence" populations are understated.

Parole violators, with new sentences:  Include
supervised mandatory release violators with new
sentences.

Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include supervised mandatory release violators
with no new sentences.

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Ohio's data system
classifies all unauthorized absences as escapes.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Consists of
sentences vacated by the court.
      
Paroles:  Include an undetermined number of
releases from transitional control to intensive
supervision.

Racial and ethnic composition:  Numbers are
estimates.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Oklahoma

Sentencing information:  Inmates with maximum
sentences of more than 1 year includes a  small
number of inmates with a one year sentence.
      
New court commitments:  Include probation
violators with and without new sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators, with and
without new sentences:  Include returns from 
the probation part of a split sentence.
            
Other unconditional releases:  Legislative CAP
releases (Senate Bill 445).

Other conditional releases:  CAP releases
(Senate Bill 445) to probation supervision.

State prison crowding:  Consists of 4522 male
and 767 female inmates in private prison
facilities in Oklahoma that are included in
Oklahoma's jurisdiction population (Item 5a). 
These inmates  have been given a new code of
"70" to reflect they are housed in private
prisons within state.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  "Other" races not specified.

Unknown race:  Includes Hispanics.

Oregon

Transfers from and to other jurisdictions: 
Oregon cannot distinguish transfers from any
other admission or release category.  Transfers
may be included in any admission or release
category.  
      
Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Oregon classifies
all unauthorized absences as escapes.
      
Other admissions:  Includes 65 male and 6 female
inmates whose admission reason was unknown at
time of data collection. 
            
Other unconditional releases:  Type of
unconditional release unknown at time of data
collection.

Other conditional releases:  Consists of 128
male and 8 female inmates released to local
control status, and 56 male and 6 female inmates
recorded as "unspecified other" releases.

Other releases:  Consists of 3 male inmates
admitted in error, and 2 female inmates whose
type of release was unknown at time of data
collection.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Pennsylvania

Other admissions:  Type of admission unknown at
the time of data collection.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.
      
Other releases:  Detentioners who were released.

Other deaths:  Unknown cause of death at time 
of data collection. 

Unknown race:  Pennsylvania's "Hispanic" race
category.  Also includes an undetermined number
of Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders.

Rhode Island

Sentencing information, partially suspended
sentences:  In Rhode Island, populations and
movements of inmates given partially suspended
sentences (part served in prison, part under
probation) are included with the "Inmates with
over 1 year maximum sentence" only if the prison
portion of the sentence exceeds one year.  As a
result, the "Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence" populations and movements are
understated and the "Inmates with a year or less
maximum sentence" populations are overstated.
 
Other admissions:  Consists of returns from
erroneous release.
      
Other conditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases to drug and/or alcohol treatment
programs.
      
Other releases:  One erroneous release.

Jurisdiction and custody population, unsentenced
inmates:  Includes 11 males held on civil
contempt of court for not paying child support.

Total inmate population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and
jails, which form an integrated system in Rhode
Island. 

Unknown race:  Rhode Island's Hispanic race
category.

South Carolina

Other admissions and releases:  Include
resentenced inmates who are released from a
Youthful Offender Act sentence and readmitted 
to begin serving the adult portion of their
sentence.
      
Other unconditional releases:  Inmates released
by court order or payment of fine and inmates
ordered by the court to be remanded to the
county jail to await retrial.

Other conditional releases:  Inmates released
under "community supervision" after serving 85%
of sentence under "Truth in Sentencing".
      
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  South Carolina's "Other" race
category, which includes Hispanic inmates as
well as other races.  

South Dakota

Admissions, releases, and population data: 
Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence
include a small undetermined number of inmates
with a maximum sentence of 1 year or less.
            
Other admissions:  Includes 33 male inmates
admitted to a relapse group (a program for
parole violators who voluntarily recommit
themselves for substance abuse treatment 
after a violation).

Unconditional releases, expirations of 
sentence: Includes commutations and pardons.
      
Ethnic origin:  South Dakota's data system 
does not include ethnicity.

Tennessee

Sentencing information:  Inmates with maximum
sentences of 1 year are included in the movement
and population counts of "Inmates with over 1
year maximum sentence."  As a result, the
"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence"
populations and movements are overstated and the
"Inmates with a year or less maximum sentence"
populations are understated.
      
Parole violators with new sentences:  Include 
a small undetermined number of parole violators
with no new sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators with new
sentences:  Include some probation and community
correction program violators returned with no
new sentences. 

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Tennessee's data
system does not distinguish AWOLs from escapes.

Paroles:  May include a small number of
supervised mandatory releases.

Other conditional releases:  Releases to
community correction programs.

Total jurisdiction population:  Population
counts include 1,865 males and 254 females
housed in local facilities to ease crowding 
in state prison facilities but exclude 3,700 
felons sentenced to serve their time in local
facilities (the state pays to house these 
3,700 felons, but the local court maintains
jurisdiction).

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders: Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Tennessee's "Other" race category
which consist of Hispanics.

Texas

Admissions, releases, and jurisdiction
population:  Includes 3,516 male inmates and
1,131 female inmates in a substance abuse
program with a year or less maximum sentence who
cannot be removed from the appropriate admission
and release categories.
      
Parole violators with and without new sentences: 
Texas' data system does not distinguish parole
violators with new sentences from those without
new sentences.
      
Other conditional release violators with and
without new sentences:  Texas' data system does
not distinguish other conditional release
violators with new sentences from those without
new sentences.

Other conditional release violators, with new
sentences:  "State jail" felons who had their
probation revoked and were returned to a "state
jail" facility.

Escapees and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a
single category.

Other admissions and releases:  Offenders with
unclear or incomplete admission or release
information.

Other deaths:  Unknown cause of death at time 
of data collection.

Custody population, inmates sentenced to less
than 1 year:  Inmates in a substance abuse
program.

Unknown race:  All racial groups that are not
white or black as well as Texas' "Hispanic"
category.
      
Utah

Other unconditional releases:  Inmates whose
sentences were terminated prior to expiration
and no supervision was required following their
release.

Custody population, sentencing:  Include parole
violators whose parole has not officially been
revoked. These parole violators that generally
total around 500 offenders are included in
Utah's custody population not their jurisdiction
population. 

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.
      
Vermont

Other admissions:  Readmission of furlough
violators.
 
Other conditional releases:  Releases to
furlough.
            
Other releases:  Inmates where type of release
was unknown.

Total inmates population:  Jurisdiction and
custody counts include inmates in prisons and
jails, which form an integrated system in
Vermont. 

Race, Asians, and Pacific Islanders:  Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Ethnicity:  Vermont's data system does not
record ethnicity.

Virginia

Other unconditional releases:  Include unconditional 
administrative releases and an undetermined number 
of commutations and releases by court order.
      
Conditional releases, supervised mandatory
releases, and paroles:  Include releases to
detainer and transfers to other jurisdictions.
      
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Virginia's "Hispanic", "Chinese",
and "Other" race categories.

Washington

Total population, admissions, and releases: 
Includes 2 male and 5 female inmates with a year
or less maximum sentence who cannot be removed
from the appropriate admission and release
categories.

Escapee and AWOL prisoners:  Counted as a single
category.
      
Other admissions and releases:  An adjustment
residual to balance the movement data with the
December 31, 1998 population.

Other unconditional releases:  Vacated
sentences.
      
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Inmates of mixed racial origins.

West Virginia

Admissions, releases, and jurisdiction
population:  Includes 17 male and 2 female
unsentenced inmates held for diagnostic purposes
(testing for mental capacity before sentencing)
who cannot be removed from the appropriate
admission and release categories.

Wisconsin

Wisconsin changed its jurisdiction population,
racial and ethnic composition counts for
December 31, 1997.

Admission, releases, and jurisdiction
population:  Jurisdiction population was
determined independently of admissions and
releases due to the way the older data have been
stored.  An undetermined number of admissions
and releases are not reported, therefore the
admissions when added to the population count
for January 1, minus the releases, do not equal
the December 31, 1998 jurisdiction population. 

Other admissions:  Include returns of
alternative to revocation (561 males and 33
females), who are persons temporarily returned
to an institution without a formal revocation. 
Includes returns pending revocation hearing
(1,683 males and 115 females), returns from
probation and parole as special placements (17
males and 16 females), and erroneous admissions
(2 males and 1 female).
       
Other unconditional releases:  Court-ordered
releases.

Other conditional releases:  Include early
releases.           

Other deaths:  Unknown cause of death at time of
data collection.

Other releases:  Include releases of alternative
to revocation admissions (754 males and 89 females) 
who are persons who can be temporarily returned to 
an institution without a formal revocation.  
Includes releases from probation and parole special 
placements (19 males and 16 females), releases from 
holds pending revocation hearing (775 males and 45
females), inmates erroneously released (3 males
and 2 females), and releases to mental health
facilities under Wisconsin's predator law (9
males).

State prison crowding:  Inmates housed in other
facilities under contract with the WI. Dept. of
Corrections include Texas County Jail Contract: 
699 males; Corrections Corp. of America(CCA): 
TN facilities:  1256 males, OK facilities:  612
males; Federal Contracts:  MN facilities:  310
males, WV facilities:  152 females.

Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders:  Include an
undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Wisconsin's "Other" race
category.

Wyoming

New court commitments and expirations of
sentence:  May include a small undetermined
number of administrative turnovers (starts 
and expirations of consecutive sentences).

Parole violators only, no new sentences: 
Include an undetermined number of parole
violators with new sentences.
      
Race, Asians and Pacific Islanders: Include 
an undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders.

Unknown race:  Wyoming's "Hispanic" category.

Chapter 6:  Parole 
Explanatory notes

Because many jurisdictions update their
population counts, the January 1, 1998, 
numbers may differ from those previously 
published for December 31, 1997.

Federal

Data for the Federal system are from the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts as
provided to the BJS Federal Justice Statistics
Program.  Parole includes supervised release,
parole, military parole, special parole, and
mandatory release.  Definitional differences
exist between parole reported here and in other
BJS data series.

"Other" discharges include cases for which
specific codes were not assigned.  Includes 
such cases as closings at chief's discretion,
closings because of revocation in another case,
and withdrawing of warrants after expiration. 

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander" parolees. 

Although no formal intensive supervision 
program exists at the national level, some 
individual parole offices that use electronic 
monitoring may regard such a program to be an 
intensive supervision program.

Alabama

Alabama has two reporting agencies:  One State
and one local.  Alabama's State agency estimated
all data.

Alaska

All data are estimated.

Arizona

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 440 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Other" entries include 245 interstate compact
cases accepted in Arizona.

The intensive supervision and electronic
monitoring programs are combined.  The 97
parolees in an intensive supervision 
program are also on electronic monitoring.

Arkansas

All data are estimated.

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 313 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 
Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

California

California has two reporting agencies: 
Department of Corrections and the California
Youth Authority (CYA).  California's Youth
Authority estimated race and Hispanic origin.

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 4,230 civil narcotic
addict outpatients and interstate compact cases
supervised for other States by California's
State agency.

California State data excludes 19,883 absconders.

CYA's "returned to prison or jail, other"
includes parolees committed to other
jurisdictions.  "Other unsuccessful" discharges
include parolees placed on probation or
sentenced to jail as a result of a new offense. 
"Other" discharges include parolees released on
a pending court action and others.

CYA's "unknown or not reported" race includes an
unspecified number of Hispanic parolees and
unknowns.   

"Mandatory" release from prison includes a small
number of life imprisonment parolees that
received a discretionary release from prison.

Colorado

Growth in the parole population may have been
the result of a State law which mandates a
period of parole supervision for all persons
sentenced to prison for crimes committed on or
after July 1, 1993.

"Total" entries include 249 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 1,598
Hispanics of unknown race.

Intensive supervision and electronic monitoring
are a combined program.  An unknown number of
the 529 parolees in an intensive supervision
program are also on electronic monitoring.

"Other" release type includes interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

Connecticut

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 314
Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

Delaware

Entries were imputed from the requirement that
the beginning of year population, plus entries,
minus exits, must equal the end of year
population.

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 21
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.

District of Columbia

"Total" entries are estimated.  "Other" includes
grants to consecutive sentences, detainers, and
parolees classified under administrative status.

"Returned to prison or jail, other" includes
parolees classified under warrant executed
status.

Florida

"Successful completion" includes 189 parolees
who were pardoned, deported, or being held by
the Immigration and Naturalization Service.

Georgia

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 741 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Total" entries and exits include an unspecified
number of interstate compact cases which Georgia
supervises for other States.

Georgia reported race in two classifications,
"White" and "non-White," and included "non-
White" under "Black/African American".

The intensive supervision program and the
electronic monitoring program cannot be
separated.  The 790 parolees in electronic
monitoring program are included in the 856
involved in an intensive supervision program.

Hawaii

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 30 interstate compact
cases supervised for another State.

Illinois

"Other" entries include transfers from other
States and others.

"Other" discharges include transfers (not
discharged) to the Apprehension Unit and 
others. 

Illinois Department of Corrections also had 349
parolees in a Day Reporting Center and 426 in a
Community Drug Intervention Program on December
31, 1998.

"Other" release type includes parolees
identified as "Sexually Dangerous Persons".

Indiana

Data exclude 400 absconders and 300 parolees
supervised out-of-State.

"Other" entries include transfers from other
States.

"Other" release type includes releases from
other States. 

Iowa

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 70
Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

Kansas

Data exclude 614 absconders.

The Kansas Sentencing Guidelines Act with 
its determinate sentencing structure became
effective July 1, 1993.  Previously, Kansas had
indeterminate sentencing.  As a result, a number
of entries and exits to parole (reported in
these tables) involve offenders with "guidelines" 
or "new law" sentences (which have determinate
periods of post-incarceration supervision).  For
purposes of these tables, it is not feasible to
differentiate movements of "old law" versus "new
law" offenders.  For example, releases to post-
incarceration supervision (for a determinate
period under new law) are included with the
regular parole releases (for an indeterminate
period under old law) in "discretionary release
from prison" (table 6.4).  Both of these groups
of releases are under the same type of post-
incarceration supervision by parole officers and
are subject to return to prison, as always, for
violation of the conditions of release.

"Other" entries include releases from pre-
revocation and administrative hold.

"Returned to prison or jail, other" includes 110
parolees on pre-revocation confinement, 65
parolees on administrative hold, and one parolee
released to a Community Corrections program. 
"Other unsuccessful" discharges include 109
cases closed by an issued warrant.  "Other"
discharges include 158 cases involving out-of-
State offenders and others. 

"Asian" includes an unknown number of "Native
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander" parolees.

Maximum sentence to incarceration of  "more than
a year" includes a relatively small but
undetermined number for whom the incarceration
portion of the sentence is "a year or less";
Kansas considers all of these to be felons.

Louisiana

"Other" entries include parolees who were
returned after absconding.

"Other" discharges include parolees whose court
order sentences were vacated.

Maine

Total population on December 31, 1998, is
estimated.

Maryland

As a result of a change in State law in May
1997, prisoners sentenced to a period of
incarceration of a year or less are now
classified as having an "expired sentence" 
and are no longer placed under the
supervision of the Division of Parole and
Probation.  This has accounted for decreases 
in both the number of entries to post-prison
supervision by mandatory release and in the
number of successful discharges (such persons
generally had short periods of post-prison
supervision) during 1997 and 1998.

"Other" supervision status includes parolees
delinquent in custody.

Massachusetts

"Unknown or not reported" race includes an
unspecified number of Hispanic parolees and
other parolees of unknown race.

Michigan

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 755 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

Minnesota

"Other" supervision status includes offenders
held in local jails for absconding and issuance
of a warrant, or held on a detainer or pretrial
status for a new offense.

"Other" entries include offenders released to
intensive supervision programs and on
conditional medical release.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes Asian
parolees, and Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

Mississippi

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 523 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

Data exclude 781 parolees on inactive
supervision, 270 parolees supervised out-of-
State, and two absconders.

Missouri

All data are estimated.

Montana

All data are estimated.

Imputation of entries was based on the ratio 
of 1997 entries to the January 1, 1997
population in Montana.  Exits were imputed 
from the requirement that the beginning of year
population, plus entries, minus exits, must
equal the end of year population.  

Nebraska

"Other" supervision status includes detainers.

Nevada

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 336 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Successful completion" includes an unspecified
number of "deaths."  "Other unsuccessful"
discharges include parolees discharged after 
the issuance of a warrant.

New Hampshire

"Other" supervision status includes parolees on
administrative home confinement.

"Other" release type includes parolees released
from administrative home confinement.

New Jersey

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Total" exits are estimated.
     
New Mexico

Data include parolees in the Community
Corrections Program, a therapeutic program with
a high needs caseloads.

"Other" discharges include "Special Actions".

New York

"Other" entries include 657 cases which were
judicially sanctioned.

"Other" discharges include 307 board actions and
11 court orders.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 21,107
Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

"Special conditional" releases include parolees
released by the Parole Board prior to their
eligibility date due to a terminal illness and
certain "non-violent" parolees released due to
participation in a six month treatment program. 
"Other" release type includes 1,543 cases which
were judicially sanctioned.

North Carolina

The active population includes 327 post-release
offenders.  Post-release supervision is defined
by North Carolina as a reintegrative program for
serious offenders who have served extensive
prison terms.  This form of supervision was
created by the Structured Sentencing Act of 1993
to replace parole supervision for offenders who
had served long prison sentences and needed
assistance in re-adjusting to life outside of
the correctional institution.

North Dakota

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 41 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

Oklahoma

Total population on December 31, 1998, is
estimated.

"Other" supervision status includes nine
parolees awaiting transfer to incarceration.

"Total" exits are estimated.

Oregon

"Other" entries include 219 transitional leave
parolees.

"Successful completion" discharges include eight
dismissals.  "Other" discharges include an
inmate appeal.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 1,882
Hispanic parolees of unknown race.

Pennsylvania

"Total" entries are estimated.

"Total" exits are estimated.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 4,177
Hispanic probationers of unknown race. 
"American Indian/Alaska Native" and "Asian"
include State data only.

Data for the intensive supervision and
electronic monitoring programs include county
data only.  The State operated an intensive
supervision and electronic monitoring program
but an unknown number of probationers were
involved in both programs.

Release type of "mandatory release from prison"
includes State data only.
     
Rhode Island

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional unspecified number of
interstate compact cases supervised for other
States.

Supervised "out-of-State" includes four parolees
serving out-of-State sentences.  "Other"
supervision status includes 40 persons
supervised by U.S. Immigration and
Naturalization Service,  22 inmates held in the
Rhode Island Adult Correctional Institution on
detention warrants issued by the parole board,
six persons serving a U.S. sentence, one person
held on a U.S. detention warrant, and one person
in the Federal Witness Program.

"Reinstatement" includes persons placed on "re-
parole" after revocation because either (a)
there were no new sentences or (b) all new
sentences were six months or less to serve.                               
          
"Returned to prison or jail, other" includes
parolees who completed parole through parole
time expiration while held on detention
warrants.  "Absconder" includes four parolees
who absconded from Home Confinement Parole and
13 who absconded from other parole.  As of May
5, 1999, 10 of the 17 absconders had been
returned to prison; seven were still at large. 
"Other" discharges include one parolee whose
parole supervision date expired while still at
the Rhode Island Department of Corrections
awaiting discharge to Immigration authorities.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes 79
Hispanic probationers of unknown race.
     
Tennessee

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 450 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Returned to prison or jail, other" includes
detainers.  "Successful completion" includes 
571 parolees with expired sentences.

Texas

All data are estimated.

"Total" entries include an unspecified number 
of parolees from out-of-State jurisdictions.

"Total" exits include and unspecified number 
of parolees from out-of-State jurisdictions. 
"Other" discharges are an adjustment needed
because interstate compact cases could not be
eliminated from entries and exits.

The 1,576 parolees in an electronic monitoring
program are also included in the 3,528 parolees
in an intensive supervision program.

Utah

"Other" discharges include 110 parolees whose
sentence expired or was terminated and one
parolee who was deported.
          
"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander" parolees.

Washington                         

All data are estimated.

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 630 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Unknown or not reported" race includes parolees
of mixed races.

Wisconsin

Total parole population on December 31, 1998
excludes an additional 264 interstate compact
cases supervised for other States.

"Other" entries include mental health
conditional release parolees.

"Returned to prison or jail, other" includes 
one parolee voluntarily housed in a minimum 
security facility.

"Asian" includes an unspecified number of
"Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander" parolees.

"Other" release type includes mental health
conditional release parolees.  These include
persons found not guilty by reason of mental
disease or defect and who were placed under the
supervision of a non-DOC State agency.  When
released on parole, they are supervised by
Wisconsin's DOC.  The population also includes
"sexual predators" that completed their sentence
but were placed under the care of a non-DOC
State agency after being declared "sexual
predators".

Wyoming

"Total" entries are estimated.

Chapter 7:  Capital Punishment
Explanatory notes
                 
The statistics reported for capital punishment
may differ from data collected by other
organizations.  The differences occur for 
a variety of reasons:

*  Inmates under sentence of death are
originally added the National Prisoner
Statistics (NPS) counts when they enter
correctional facilities rather than when 
judges pronounce sentence.

*  Following the year when prisoners are first
counted, their admissions or releases as a
result of court order are attributed to the year
for the sentence or court order.  For example, 
a prisoner sentenced in November 1996 entering
prison custody in January 1997 would be counted
as an admission in the 1997 report; the 1997
report would count him or her as being under
sentence of death at yearend 1996.  Similarly, 
a prisoner whose sentence is overturned in 1995
but who remains in the count until 1997 when 
the court's decision is reported would be 
subtracted from the 1995 and 1996 reports.

*  NPS counts of persons under sentence of 
death are always for the last day of a calendar 
year and will differ from more recent counts.

*  Some figures shown for yearend 1997 are
revised from those reported in Correctional
Populations in the United States, 1997.  The
revised figures include 18 inmates who either
were reported late to the NPS program or were
not in custody of the State correctional
authorities at yearend 1997:

Alabama (1)
Arizona (1)
California (2)
Florida (1)
Illinois (2)
Kentucky (1)
Louisiana (1)
Mississippi (1)
Nevada (2)
Ohio (2)
Texas (3)
Wyoming (1).

Twenty-seven inmates had sentences to death
removed in 1997 but were not reported:
Alabama (1)
Arizona (1)
Federal Bureau of Prisons (1)
Florida (4)
Georgia (7)
Louisiana (1)
Mississippi (3)
Nevada (3)
Ohio (4)
Texas (2)

*  The data for 12/31/97 also include 2 inmates
who were listed erroneously as being removed
from death row:  Connecticut (1) and
Pennsylvania (1).

*  Race has been changed from that previously
reported for 7 inmates:  3 in Pennsylvania (from
white to "other") and 1 each in Delaware, North
Carolina, Texas, and Arizona (from white to
black).

Chapter 8:  U.S. military corrections
Explanatory notes

In 1994 the U.S. Department of Defense
Corrections Council established an annual
military confinement report.  The council,
comprising representatives from each branch 
of military service, adopted a standardized
questionnaire with a common set of definitions. 
With the Corrections Council, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics produced a series of tables
that provide a unified profile of persons in 
the custody of U.S. military authorities.

The annual confinement report provides yearend
counts of persons in U.S. military confinement
facilities inside and outside the continental
United States, by branch of service, gender,
race, and Hispanic origin, conviction status 
and sentence length, and offense. It also 
provides counts of the number of persons admitted 
to confinement and the number released during 
the calendar year, by branch of service, type 
of commitment, and type of release.  The
confinement report also includes the number 
of facilities and their design and rated
capacities, by level.

Information on Air Force confinement facilities
was reported for the first time in 1997.  With
the full participation of all military services,
the annual confinement report now provides a
complete enumeration of U.S. military
confinement facilities, both inside and outside
the continental United States. 

End of file
06/26/02