U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report
                       
Characteristics of Suspected Human Trafficking Incidents,
2007-08

January 2009, NCJ 224526
------------------------------------------------------ 

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cshti08.htm.
------------------------------------------------------- 

By Tracey Kyckelhahn, Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., 
and Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (TVPA) and its
2003, 2005, and 2008 reauthorizations are the first
comprehensive federal legislation to combat human trafficking
and to assist trafficking victims. Under the TVPA, human
trafficking has occurred if a person was induced to perform
labor or a commercial sex act through force, fraud, or
coercion. Any person under age 18 who performs a commercial
sex act is considered a victim of human trafficking,
regardless of whether force, fraud, or coercion were present.

The Trafficking of Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of
2005 (P.L. 109-164) requires biennial reporting on human
trafficking, using available data from state and local
authorities. In response to this requirement, the Department
of Justice (DOJ) funded the creation of the Human Trafficking
Reporting System (HTRS). The system was designed by the
Institute of Race and Justice at Northeastern University
(NEU) and the Justice Policy Center at the Urban Institute
(UI). It provides data on human trafficking incidents
investigated between January 1, 2007, and September 30, 2008.

This report fulfills the requirements under Title II, Sec.
201 (a) (1) of the Act. It is the first in a series that will
describe the number and characteristics of suspected human
trafficking investigations and their outcomes in the U.S.
Data in  this report represent a snapshot of the
investigations opened by 38 federally funded human
trafficking task forces. Because these task forces were not
selected to be statistically representative, the data do not
represent all incidents of human trafficking nationwide. (See
Methodology for a map of participating task forces.) While
attempts were made to collect complete data from all federal
task forces, many task forces began collecting data only
recently and were able to provide only partial counts of
human trafficking cases for the specified period. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is working with the
NEU and UI to improve the quality of reported data and to
collect data on investigations by law enforcement agencies in
areas not covered by federal task forces. The HTRS is dynamic
rather than static. Key findings in this report will be
revised and updated as existing records are updated and new
cases are added to the system.

HTRS tracks incidents of suspected human trafficking

The HTRS is an incident-based data collection system. 
An incident is defined as--

Any investigation into a claim of human trafficking or any
investigation of other crimes in which elements of potential
human trafficking were identified. 

An investigation is any effort in which the task force spent
at least one hour investigating (e.g., collecting
information, taking statements, and writing reports) an
incident. Each incident is uniquely identified by date (date
of occurrence) and number. Once entered into the system, an
incident may or may not be determined to involve human
trafficking. Regardless, all incidents are retained in HTRS.

In January 2008, task forces began entering data in HTRS.
Information on all human trafficking incidents, arrests,
prosecutions, and incarcerations that occurred in 2007 was
collected by NEU and UI staff. As of September 30, 2008,
nearly 83% of the 1,229 reported incidents involved sex
trafficking, 12% involved labor trafficking, and 5% involved
other or unknown types of human trafficking (table 1). 

Only a small subset of all reported investigations (9%) had
reached a point of review to determine that the case involved
a confirmed human trafficking violation. Even fewer
investigations yielded information about whether an arrest
had been made, the case prosecuted, or the suspect convicted.

Subsequent tables and accompanying text summarize the number
and characteristics of these alleged incidents.
Characteristics of victims and suspects are provided as a
subset of incidents in which investigations produced relevant
information. (See Methodology for a description of key items
and data reporting.)

Separate tables and text are also provided for confirmed
human trafficking incidents. To be confirmed as human
trafficking under HTRS, the case must have led to an arrest
and been subsequently confirmed by law enforcement, or the
victims must have had a continued presence requested on their
behalf or have received an endorsement for a t or u Visa
application.***Footnote 1 Congress created the t and u
non-immigrant Visa classifications with the passage of the
TVPA, 2000. The t non-immigrant status was created to provide
protection to victims of severe forms of human trafficking.
The u non-immigrant status was designated for victims of
certain crimes who had suffered mental or physical abuse, and
who were willing to assist in the investigation of human
trafficking activity.****

Number of alleged and confirmed human trafficking incidents
reported by federally funded task forces

*Between January 1, 2007, and September 30, 2008, task forces
reported investigating 1,229 alleged incidents of human
trafficking. About 78% of these incidents were still under
investigation at the end of the reporting period.
Investigations were completed and closed during the 21-month
reporting period for the remaining 22%.

*Less than 10% of alleged human trafficking incidents
reported by task forces were confirmed as human trafficking,
10% were pending confirmation, and 23% had been determined
not to involve any human trafficking elements (table 2). The
remaining cases (58%) lacked information on whether the
alleged incident was a confirmed human trafficking case.

*Sex trafficking accounted for 83% of the 1,229 alleged
incidents of human trafficking reported by task forces. The
remaining incidents involved allegations of either labor
trafficking (12%) or other/unknown forms of human trafficking
(5%). 

*Of the 1,018 alleged sex trafficking incidents reported by
task forces, 391 (38%) involved allegations of child sex
trafficking. The other 627 (62%) incidents involved
allegations of adult sex trafficking, such as forced
prostitution or other sex trafficking crimes. 

*Forced prostitution (46%) and child sex trafficking (30%)
represented the largest categories of confirmed human
trafficking incidents. Allegations of forced or coerced adult
prostitution accounted for 63% of human trafficking
investigations that were ultimately found not to involve
human trafficking elements. 

Number of suspects, victims, and agencies in alleged human
trafficking incidents, 2007-08

*A total of 871 suspects were involved in alleged human
trafficking incidents reported by task forces, with an
average of 1.8 suspects per incident (not shown in table). 

*Information on the number of suspects was available for 475
alleged human trafficking incidents. Among these incidents,
62% had only one suspect, 34% had two to five suspects; and
4% had six or more suspects. Labor trafficking incidents were
more likely to involve more than one suspect (47%), compared
to sex trafficking incidents (37%) (table 3).

*A total of 1,442 victims were involved in alleged human
trafficking incidents reported by task forces, with an
average of 2.1 victims per incident (not shown in table). 

*The number of victims were available for 665 alleged human
trafficking incidents. Among those incidents, 71% had one
victim, 23% had two to five victims, and 6% had six or more
victims. A little over a quarter of alleged sex trafficking
incidents contained multiple victims, while nearly half of
labor trafficking incidents had more than one victim.

*For the 1,160 alleged human trafficking incidents for which
the type of investigating agency information was available,
83% involved a state or local law enforcement entity as the
lead agency. Federal agencies were the lead investigating
agency in about 16% of alleged human trafficking incidents,
while victim service providers were the lead agency in 1% of
human trafficking incidents. Federal agencies were the lead
agency in 36% of alleged labor trafficking incidents,
compared to 12% of alleged sex trafficking incidents.

*Fifty-seven percent of alleged human trafficking incidents
were investigated by one agency, 32% by two or three
agencies, and 12% by four or more agencies. Nearly 80% of
alleged labor trafficking incidents involved more than one
investigating agency, compared to 37% of sex trafficking
incidents.

Number of suspects, victims, and agencies in confirmed human
trafficking incidents, 2007-08

*Of the 871 suspects in alleged incidents, 222 suspects were
in incidents that had been confirmed (not shown in table).
These confirmed incidents averaged 2.4 suspects per incident
(table 4). 

*Information on the number of suspects was available for 92
confirmed human trafficking incidents. Among these confirmed
incidents, 48% reported one suspect, 42% reported two to five
suspects, and 10% reported six or more suspects. Over half
(55%) of confirmed sex trafficking incidents and about 44% of
confirmed labor trafficking incidents had more than one
suspect.

*A total of 328 victims were involved in confirmed human
trafficking incidents reported by task forces, with an
average of 3.0 victims per incident (not shown in table).
 
*The number of victims was available for 108 confirmed human
trafficking incidents. Among these confirmed incidents, 66%
reported one victim, 26% reported two to five victims, and 8%
reported six or more victims. About a third of confirmed sex
trafficking incidents included multiple victims, while half
of labor trafficking incidents had more than one victim. 

*For the 111 confirmed human trafficking incidents in which
the type of investigating agency was available, 71% reported
the lead investigating agency as either a state or local law
enforcement entity. Federal agencies were the lead
investigators in about 28% of confirmed human trafficking
incidents, while victim service providers were the lead
investigators in 1% of human trafficking incidents. Federal
agencies were the primary investigator in half of the 18
confirmed labor trafficking incidents, compared to less than
a quarter of the 70 sex trafficking incidents. 

*Approximately two-thirds of confirmed human trafficking
incidents were investigated by multiple agencies, and nearly
a third involved four or more agencies. Multiple agencies
were involved in nearly 90% of confirmed labor trafficking
incidents, compared to 63% of confirmed sex trafficking
incidents.

Characteristics of suspects in alleged human trafficking
incidents, 2007-08
*
Task forces reported information on the characteristics of
543 suspects in 322 alleged human trafficking incidents.
Nearly 8 in 10 suspects in alleged human trafficking
incidents were male. In labor trafficking incidents, about a
third (31%) of the suspects were female. More than a fifth
(21%) of the suspects in sex trafficking incidents were
female (table 5). 

*Among the 438 suspects for whom information on race and
Hispanic origin was reported, blacks represented the largest
category (36%), followed by Hispanics (31%). Whites and
Asians accounted for 13% and 16% of human trafficking
suspects, respectively. Asians constituted the largest
category of labor trafficking suspects (37%), while blacks
accounted for the largest percentage of sex trafficking
suspects (44%). 

*Age was reported for 460 suspects in alleged human
trafficking incidents. About 40% of suspects were age 35 or
older, while 28% were age 18 to 24. Nearly two-thirds of sex
trafficking suspects were under age 35. Half of child
trafficking suspects were age 18 to 24. Nearly two-thirds of
labor trafficking suspects (65%) were age 35 or older. 

*Task forces reported on the citizenship status of 313
suspects in alleged human trafficking incidents. U.S.
citizens (66%) accounted for the largest percentage of all
suspects, followed by undocumented aliens (18%) and permanent
residents (7%). Nearly three-quarters of sex trafficking
suspects were U.S. citizens (74%), compared to more than a
third of labor trafficking suspects (33%). About 40% of
suspects in labor trafficking incidents were undocumented or
qualified aliens.
 
Characteristics of suspects in confirmed human trafficking
incidents, 2007-08

*Task forces reported information on the characteristics of
149 suspects in 73 confirmed human trafficking incidents
(table 6). About three-fourths (74%) of these suspects were
male. Females made up nearly half (46%) of suspects among the
24 confirmed labor trafficking incidents. Males were nearly
80% of suspects in confirmed sex trafficking incidents. 

*For the 140 suspects for whom race and Hispanic origin
information was available, Hispanics (39%) and blacks (33%)
accounted for the majority of suspects in confirmed human
trafficking incidents. Fewer than a quarter of suspects in
confirmed human trafficking incidents were Asian (13%) or
white (10%). Among sex trafficking incidents, 80% of suspects
in confirmed incidents were Hispanic or black. For confirmed
labor trafficking incidents, 50% of suspects were Asian. 

*Age was reported for 131 suspects in confirmed human
trafficking incidents. Thirty-eight percent of all suspects
were age 35 or older, while 31% were age 18 to 24. About
two-thirds of sex trafficking suspects were under age 35. In
comparison, the majority of labor trafficking suspects (68%)
were age 35 or older. For child trafficking suspects, 55%
were age 18 to 24.
 
*Task forces reported on the citizenship status of 112
suspects in confirmed human trafficking incidents. Overall,
56% of suspects in these incidents were U.S. citizens, 21%
were undocumented aliens, and 11% qualified aliens. U.S.
citizens (64%) constituted the largest percentage of suspects
in confirmed sex trafficking incidents. Among the 16 suspects
in confirmed labor trafficking incidents, 8 were qualified
aliens and 2 were undocumented aliens.
 
Characteristics of victims in alleged human trafficking
incidents, 2007-08

*Task forces reported information on the characteristics of
776 victims in 429 alleged human trafficking incidents (table
7). Over 90% of victims in alleged human trafficking
incidents were female. Nearly 40% of victims in labor
trafficking incidents were male, while 99% of victims in sex
trafficking incidents were female. 

*Among the 695 alleged human trafficking victims for whom
information on race and Hispanic origin was reported,
Hispanics accounted for the largest percentage (40%). Nearly
equal percentages of victims were white (23%) or black (21%).
Over half (56%) of labor trafficking victims were Hispanic.
Asians represented 10% of sex trafficking victims and 31% of
labor trafficking victims. 

*Age was reported for 751 victims in alleged human
trafficking incidents. Approximately two-thirds of human
trafficking victims were either age 17 or younger (27%) or
age 18 to 24 (38%). Twelve percent of human trafficking
victims were age 35 or older. Among sex trafficking victims,
nearly a third (30%) were age 17 or younger and 41% were age
18 to 24. Labor trafficking victims tended to be older than
other human trafficking victims. Almost 70% of all labor
trafficking victims were age 25 or older. Of these victims,
28% were age 35 or older. 

*Task forces reported on the citizenship status of 569
victims in alleged human trafficking incidents. Slightly over
half (55%) of human trafficking victims were U.S. citizens,
while the remainder were either undocumented (38%) or
qualified (6%) aliens. Sixty-three percent of all sex
trafficking victims, compared to 4% of labor trafficking
victims, were U.S. citizens. Undocumented and qualified
aliens accounted for 96% of labor trafficking victims.

Characteristics of victims in confirmed human trafficking
incidents, 2007-08

*Task forces reported information on the characteristics of
269 victims in 88 confirmed human trafficking incidents
(table 8). Overall, 94% of victims in confirmed human
trafficking incidents were female. Nearly 40% of victims in
the 36 confirmed labor trafficking incidents were male. For
confirmed sex trafficking incidents, almost all of the
victims were female.

*Among the 261 victims in confirmed human trafficking
incidents for whom information on race and Hispanic origin
was reported, the majority (62%) of victims were Hispanic.
Whites comprised 20% of human trafficking victims, Asians,
9%, and blacks, 7%. Almost two-thirds of sex trafficking
victims were Hispanic (67%). Over half (18 of 35) of labor
trafficking victims were Asian.

*Age was reported for 267 victims in confirmed human
trafficking incidents. Almost 60% of human trafficking
victims were either age 17 or younger (23%) or age 18 to 24
(34%). Eleven percent of human trafficking victims were age
35 or older. A quarter of all sex trafficking victims were
age 17 or younger, while more than a third (37%) were age 18
to 24. More than half (56%) of labor trafficking victims were
age 35 or older.

*Task forces reported on the citizenship status of 250
victims in confirmed human trafficking incidents. Over
two-thirds of victims in all confirmed human trafficking
incidents were either undocumented (64%) or qualified (6%)
aliens. U.S. citizens accounted for the remaining 30% of
victims in these confirmed incidents. Undocumented or
qualified aliens accounted for nearly two-thirds of sex
trafficking victims and for all of the victims in confirmed
labor trafficking incidents.

Comparison of suspect and victim characteristics in alleged
human trafficking incidents, 2007-08

Gender

*Of the 232 incidents for which both suspect and victim
information was available, a majority (65%) involved only
male suspects and female victims (table 9).

*Of the 32 incidents in which there was no difference between
the gender of the suspects and victims, 27 involved female
suspects and female victims only.

Citizenship

*Of the 142 incidents with suspect and victim information on
citizenship status, 69% involved only citizens. Nineteen
incidents involved noncitizen suspect and victims only.

*Seventeen incidents had only citizen suspects and only
noncitizen victims.

Race/Hispanic origin

*In 58% of the 187 incidents, suspects and victims were of
the same race.

Age

*In 143 (68%) of the 212 incidents with available data on the
ages of suspects and victims, all suspects and victims were
in different age categories. Of these incidents, 125 involved
at least one suspect age 35 or older and at least one victim
age 17 or younger (not shown in table).

*In 35 of the 212 incidents, all of the suspects and victims
were in the same age category. Over half (51%) of these
suspects and victims were age 18 to 24 (not shown in table).

Arrest and adjudication of suspects in alleged human
trafficking incidents, 2007-08

*Task forces reported arrest information for 216 of the 543
suspects in alleged human trafficking incidents. Sixty-eight
percent of these suspects were arrested at the state level;
26% were arrested at the federal level.

*Task forces provided the details on charges filed against
140 human trafficking suspects. Among those suspects charged
with human trafficking, 64% were charged in state courts and
a third were charged in federal courts. Four suspects had
charges filed against them in both state and federal court
systems.

*Task forces reported court adjudication information for 113
human trafficking suspects. For these suspects, over half (61
of 113 suspects) were convicted of some offense, 6 suspects
had their case dismissed, and 46 suspects were awaiting
adjudication (table 10).

*Sentencing information was reported for 45 human trafficking
suspects. During the reporting period, 16 of these suspects
(36%) were sentenced to probation, time served, or to prison
or jail for less than one year, and 29 (64%) were sentenced
to prison or jail for one year or more. Five suspects were
sentenced to prison for more than 10 years.

Methodology

As of September 30, 2008, NEU and UI had enrolled 38
federally funded human task forces to report monthly on
incidents, suspects, and victims identified and investigated
by their task force. The task forces include representatives
from federal, state, and local law enforcement, prosecutors,
labor regulators/inspection services, victim service
providers, other non-governmental agencies, and mental health
providers.

The task forces involve partnerships with varying coverage
areas, including entire states/territories (6) and regions,
multiple counties, single counties, and metropolitan areas
(32). Combined, the task forces represented areas that
covered nearly 25% of the nation's resident population at
midyear 2008. Although the task forces are not representative
of the entire nation, they are widely dispersed
geographically (figure 1). 

The number of incident reports submitted by each task force
varied widely, ranging from 1 to 348. However, 12 (32%) of
the participating task forces reported fewer than 10 cases of
suspected human trafficking. Four task forces reported 50 or
more cases. 

---------------------------------------------------
Number of alleged cases       Number of 
of human trafficking          task forces
-------------------------------------------  
    Fewer than 5                7  
     5-9                        5  
     10-19                     13  
     20-49                      9  
     50 or more                 4  
---------------------------------------------------

Among the 38 task forces that reported data, 23 reported at
least one confirmed case of human trafficking, with nine
reporting five or more confirmed cases. The remaining task
forces (15) reported only incidents of potential human
trafficking. 

The distribution of sex and labor trafficking cases varied
among task forces, which reflected different organizational
characteristics and variations in criminal activity in areas
covered by the task forces.

Collection procedures 

Each task force designated a person for data collection and
reporting. Reporters were responsible for adding new human
trafficking incidents on a monthly basis, updating
information for existing records with new activity, and
submitting data automatically through an online data portal.
Reporters were provided training and follow-up technical
assistance via phone or onsite, as needed, by NEU and UI
staff.

Task forces began entering data in January 2008. NEU and UI
staff collected retrospective information on all human
trafficking incidents, arrests, prosecutions, and
incarcerations that occurred in 2007.

Once an investigation produced information about potential
suspects or victims, task force reporters were instructed to
enter this information into the HTRS. Information for each
suspect and each victim was then added by completing
automated data entry screens identified as a Suspect
Information Form or a Victim Information Form. Specific
screens included basic suspect information, arrest
information, prosecution information, basic victim
information, victim contact, victim services, and victim
current location. As more information became available, task
force reporters were asked to update the information on each
screen. (For additional detail, see Human Trafficking
Reporting System User's Manual,
http://www.humantraficking.neu.edu.)

Items collected and reported data 

Task force reporters enter information about investigations
into the HTRS if they have spent at least one hour of
investigation time on a potential trafficking case. At the
time that data are originally entered into the system, many
investigations are still ongoing. As investigations proceed,
additional information may become available or the original
information may be updated. As a result, the HTRS provides a
snapshot of information currently known and reported. 
  
A listing of key items and their coverage provides a snapshot
of the investigations as of September 30, 2008 (table 11).
Among the numerous items collected in the HTRS, information
on the status of the investigation (whether open or closed)
was provided for all cases (100%). Items related to the type
of human trafficking (97%) and identification of the lead
investigating agency (94%) had the highest levels of reported
data; items related to the number of known victims (54%),
location of the incident (52%), confirmed HT status (42%),
and number of known suspects (39%) had the lowest.

Information about characteristics of victims was reported for
slightly more than half of the 1,442 victims known to the
task forces. Gender (100%) and age (97%) had the highest
levels of reported data, while citizenship status (73%) had
the lowest.

Information was reported for 543 of the 871 known suspects
(62%). Among suspects for whom data were known and reported,
gender was nearly always reported (542 suspects). Age (85%)
and race/Hispanic origin (81%) were reported less often. 

A total of 216 suspects were reported to have been arrested.
Of those arrested, 81% were reported to have had charges
filed against them. The status of the case (whether
convicted, dismissed, or pending) was reported for 52% of the
suspects who had been arrested.

Incident status

Many incidents believed to involve human trafficking cannot
be confirmed by authorities. Because task forces enter
information about all incidents that could potentially
involve human trafficking, there are some cases in HTRS that
may not involve human trafficking. Other cases may remain
unconfirmed for an extended period due to their complexity.

While task forces are instructed to update information about
the status of investigations monthly, many cases lack
complete information. As of September 30, 2008, 78% of the
1,229 incidents reported in the HTRS were still under
investigation. Nine percent of all incidents had been
confirmed as human trafficking, 10% were pending
confirmation, and 23% had been determined to not involve
human trafficking. The remaining cases (58%) lacked any
information. 

To be confirmed as human trafficking, the case must have led
to an arrest and been subsequently confirmed by law
enforcement or the victims in the case must 1) have had a
"continuing presence" requested on their behalf, or 2) have
received an endorsement for a t or u visa application. 

Of the 271 closed cases, 213 cases (79%) had "not been
confirmed" as human trafficking. The task forces reported
that victims refused or failed to cooperate with the
investigation in 98 of these cases (46%). In 42 cases (20%),
there was an indication of criminal activity other than human
trafficking. This activity included prostitution, smuggling,
domestic violence, and child abuse. In 54 cases (25%), the
accusations were determined to be unfounded, false upon
investigation, or lacking sufficient evidence. The remaining
cases (9%) were closed for other or unknown reasons. 

Reported data and year of occurrence

Incident characteristics and the amount of information
reported differed by when the incidents were known to have
occurred. Among cases that occurred in the first nine months
of 2008, nearly 90% involved an allegation of sex trafficking
(table 12). Allegations of forced prostitution accounted for
nearly 60% of incidents in 2008, compared to 36% of the
reported incidents that occurred in 2007 or earlier.
Incidents that occurred in 2008 were also more likely (27%)
than incidents that occurred in earlier years (19%) to have
been not confirmed.

Consistent with the ongoing nature of many human trafficking
investigations, reports of incidents that occurred in 2008
were less likely (33%) to include information on the number
of known suspects than incidents reported in earlier years
(46%). Also, detailed information on suspect characteristics
was reported for 55% of known suspects in 2008, compared to
69% of known suspects in earlier years.

In contrast, the amount of reported information on victims
did not vary by when the alleged incident occurred. The
number of known victims was reported for slightly more than
half of the incidents in 2008 (55%) and in earlier years
(54%). Detailed information on these victims was reported for
55% of the known victims in 2008, compared to 52% of victims
in earlier years.

Improving and expanding HTRS

For purposes of enhancing data quality, UI in collaboration
with NEU monitors the data entered by the task forces and
provides BJS with a quarterly report on data quality. These
reports offer suggestions for potential modifications to the
web-based system, target follow-up technical assistance with
selected task forces, and provide recommendations for
maintaining, improving, and expanding HTRS in the future.

Based on data collected between January 1 and September 30,
2008, improvements under consideration include-- 

*adding a data field to determine if the task force had any
new HT incidents during the period (to require active
reporting of no new incidents);

*increasing the number of required fields and adding unknown
or to be determined options to existing fields (to address
the lack of completeness in optional fields);

*encouraging task forces to complete "suspect" or "victim"
screens and related topical screens (to obtain more complete
case information);

*introducing constraints on data entry (to prevent data entry
errors through on-line logic checks).

During 2009 and 2010, UI and NEU staff will continue to
provide feedback to the task forces and to introduce
modifications to the HTRS to enhance data quality. While the
first two years of data collection have concentrated on those
cases identified by human trafficking task forces, HTRS will
be expanded to included cases outside of task force areas.
Researchers at UI and NEU will review state legislation to
identify law enforcement agencies that may already be
tracking human trafficking cases, survey state statistical
analysis centers, and then develop a detailed plan for
expanded coverage. The expansion is expected by January 2010.

Definitions

For purposes of the HTRS, human trafficking is defined as--

The recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or
obtaining of a person for one of three purposes:

Labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or
coercion for the purposes of subjection to involuntary
servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery

A commercial sex act through the use of force, fraud, or
coercion

Any commercial sex act, if the person is under 18 years of
age, regardless of whether any form of coercion is involved.

The HTRS is an incident-based data collection system. 
An incident is defined as--

Any investigation into a claim of human trafficking, or any
investigation of other crimes in which elements of potential
human trafficking were identified. 

An investigation is any effort in which members of the task
force spent at least one hour investigating 
(e.g., collecting information, taking statements, and 
writing reports).

Each incident is uniquely identified by an incident date
(date of occurrence) and incident number. Once entered into
the system, an incident upon further investigation may or may
not be determined to involve human trafficking. All
incidents, regardless of outcome, are retained in HTRS.

---------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director. 

This BJS Special Report presents the first release of
findings from the Human Trafficking Reporting System (HTRS)
data collection program. 

Tracey Kyckelhahn, Allen J. Beck, and Thomas H. Cohen wrote
the report. Donald Farole verified the report.

The Institute on Race and Justice at Northeastern University
(NEU) and the Justice Policy Center at the Urban Institute
(UI) designed and implemented the Human Trafficking Reporting
System (HTRS). Amy Farrell, Jack McDevitt, and Stephanie Fahy
designed and presently operate the system and William Adams,
Seri Irazola, and Colleen Owens at the Urban Institute
provided assistance, ongoing technical support, and data
quality management.

Jill Duncan and Georgette Walsh edited the report. 
Tina Dorsey produced the report and Jayne E. Robinson
prepared the report for final printing, under the supervision
of Doris J. James.

January 2009, NCJ 224526           
-----------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site: 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cshti08.htm>.

----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------

January 13, 2009/JER




