U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

April 2011, NCJ 233732

Characteristics of Suspected Human
Trafficking Incidents, 2008-2010

by Duren Banks and Tracey Kyckelhahn, BJS Statisticians

---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=2372

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=67
    
-----------------------------------------------------------   
        
Federally funded human trafficking task forces opened
2,515 suspected incidents of human trafficking for
investigation between January 2008 and June 2010
(figure 1). Most suspected incidents of human trafficking
were classified as sex trafficking (82%), including more than
1,200 incidents with allegations of adult sex trafficking and
more than 1,000 incidents with allegations of prostitution or
sexual exploitation of a child. Eleven percent of the
suspected incidents opened for investigation were classified
as labor trafficking, and 7% had an unknown trafficking type.

Data in this report are from the Human Trafficking Reporting
System (HTRS), which was designed to measure the performance
of federally funded task forces. HTRS is currently the only
system that captures information on human trafficking
investigations conducted by state and local law enforcement
agencies in the United States. This report is the second in a
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) series about the
characteristics of human trafficking investigations,
suspects, and victims. It reports about case outcomes,
including suspect arrests and the visa status of confirmed
victims, and describes the characteristics of incidents
entered into the HTRS prospectively by the task forces
beginning in 2008. The Methodology details the HTRS data
collection procedures and data quality issues.

--------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*Federally funded task forces opened 2,515 suspected
incidents of human trafficking for investigation between
January 2008 and June 2010.

*About 8 in 10 of the suspected incidents of human
trafficking
were classified as sex trafficking, and about 1 in 10
incidents
were classified as labor trafficking.

*Federal agencies were more likely to lead labor trafficking
investigations (29%) than sex trafficking investigations
(7%).

*Among the 389 incidents confirmed to be human trafficking
by high data quality task forces--

-- There were 488 suspects and 527 victims.

-- More than half (62%) of the confirmed labor trafficking
victims were age 25 or older, compared to 13% of
confirmed sex trafficking victims.

-- Confirmed sex trafficking victims were more likely to be
white (26%) or black (40%), compared to labor trafficking
victims, who were more likely to be Hispanic (63%) or
Asian (17%).

-- Four-fifths of victims in confirmed sex trafficking
incidents
were identified as U.S. citizens (83%), while most confirmed
labor trafficking victims were identified as undocumented
aliens (67%) or qualified aliens (28%).

-- Most confirmed human trafficking suspects were male
(81%). More than half (62%) of confirmed sex trafficking
suspects were identified as black, while confirmed labor
trafficking suspects were more likely to be identified as
Hispanic (48%).

*Among trafficking incidents opened for at least one year,
30% were confirmed to be human trafficking, 38% were
confirmed not to be human trafficking, and the remaining
incidents were still open at the end of the study period.

*The confirmed human trafficking incidents open for at least
a year led to 144 known arrests.
--------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------
The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 is the first 
comprehensive federal law to combat human trafficking
and help victims.

Under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000
(TVPA, 2000), human trafficking is defined as the
recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or
obtaining of a person for one of three purposes:
***Footnote1Victims of Trafficking and Violence 
Protection Act of 2000. Pub. L. No. 106-386, 114 Stat. 
1464. 

*Labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or
coercion for the purposes of subjection to involuntary
servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery.

*A commercial sex act through the use of force, fraud, or
coercion.

*Any commercial sex act, if the person is under 18 years
of age, regardless of whether any form of coercion is
involved.

The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of
2005 (TVPRA, 2005) requires biennial reporting on the
scope and characteristics of human trafficking in the U.S.,
using available data from state and local authorities.
***Footnote 2 Trafficking Victims Protection 
Reauthorization Act of 2005, Pub. L. No. 109-164, 
119 Stat. 3566.***As part of an effort to meet these 
congressional  mandates, the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS), in partnership with the Bureau of Justice Assistance 
(BJA), Northeastern University (NEU), and the Urban 
Institute (UI), developed the Human Trafficking Reporting 
System (HTRS).

The HTRS system is designed to capture information on
human trafficking incidents investigated by federally
funded task forces, and is the first to focus specifically
on state and local human trafficking investigations in
the U.S. BJA provides support for state and local law
enforcement to work more collaboratively with victim
services organizations, federal law enforcement, U.S.
Attorneys' Offices, and the Civil Rights Division of the U.S.
Department of Justice in the identification and rescue of
human trafficking victims who are in the United States.
This report is based on information collected from these
BJA-funded task forces through the HTRS.

The first report developed from HTRS information,
Characteristics of Suspected Incidents of Human Trafficking,
2007-2008, described characteristics of cases entered into
the system between January 1, 2007, and September 30,
2008.***Footnote 3 In this report, case, incident, and
investigation are used interchangeably.***

Since 2008, HTRS has captured information from 42
jurisdictions covering nearly 25% of the U.S. resident
population at midyear 2010. Although the task forces are
not representative of the entire nation, they are widely
dispersed geographically.

The HTRS is an incident-based data collection system:

*An incident is any investigation into a claim of human
trafficking, or any investigation of other crimes in
which elements of potential human trafficking were
identified.

*An investigation is any effort in which members of the
task force spent at least one hour investigating (e.g.,
collecting information, taking statements, and writing
reports).

Each incident is uniquely identified by an incident date
(date of occurrence) and incident number. Once entered
into the system, an incident upon further investigation
may or may not be determined to involve human trafficking. 
All incidents, regardless of outcome, are retained in 
the HTRS.

To be confirmed as human trafficking--

*The case must have led to an arrest and been
subsequently confirmed by law enforcement, or

*The victims in the case must 1) have had a "continuing
presence" requested on their behalf, or 2) have received
an endorsement for a T or U visa application. *** Footnote 
4 Congress created the T and U nonimmigrant  classifications
with the passage of the TVPA, 2000. The T  nonimmigrant
status was created to provide protection to  victims of
severe forms of human trafficking. The U nonimmigrant status
was designated for victims of certain crimes who had suffered
mental or physical abuse and who were willing to assist in
the investigation of human trafficking activity.
-------------------------------------------------------

Most suspected incidents of human trafficking
involved allegations of prostitution of an adult or child

Federally funded human trafficking task forces opened a
total of 2,515 suspected incidents of human trafficking for
investigation between January 1, 2008, and June 30, 2010.
These suspected incidents include allegations that, through
subsequent investigation, may or may not be determined to
meet the definition of human trafficking according to the
TVPA, 2000. (See box on page 2.)

Nearly half of all incidents investigated between January
1, 2008, and June 30, 2010, involved allegations of adult
prostitution (48%). Forty percent involved prostitution of
a child or child sexual exploitation (table 1). Elements of
sexualized labor, including exotic dancing and unlicensed
massage parlors, were found in 6% of the incidents reported.
Fourteen percent of cases contained allegations of labor
trafficking, including 9% with suspected labor trafficking in
potentially unregulated industries, such as day labor, drug
sales, forced begging, roadside sales, or domestic workers
(e.g., nannies). Approximately 5% of the incidents involved
suspected labor trafficking in more commercial industries,
such as hair salons, hotels, and bars.

Nine percent of incidents involved allegations of an
unknown human trafficking type or allegations that could
not be defined as either labor or sex trafficking, such as
mail order brides, child selling, and unspecified Internet
solicitations.

Task forces may have entered multiple types of human
trafficking per incident. Among the incidents described
in this report, up to six different types of trafficking were
identified per incident, although most (77%) incidents
involved allegations of one type of human trafficking.

Cases were classified by whether they included allegations of
sex trafficking or labor trafficking. Cases that had elements
of both sex and labor trafficking (72 cases, or 3% of the
total)were classified as sex trafficking cases for analysis
purposes. Cases that did not include allegations that could
be defined as sex or labor trafficking were classified as an
unknown trafficking type and reported in total statistics
throughout the report. Most investigations were classified as
suspected sex trafficking (82%), followed by 11% as suspected
labor trafficking and 7% unknown (table 2).

The types of trafficking cases differed between task forces
located in a vice unit and those located in another type
of unit within the law enforcement agency. (Vice units
in law enforcement commonly pursue crimes related to
prostitution, pornography, gambling, alcohol, and drugs.)
Task forces classified as located in vice were in units
either dedicated solely to investigating vice crimes or in
units focused on vice and other crimes, such as sexual
assault or domestic violence. Those task forces not located
in vice units were located in divisions specializing in human
trafficking, intelligence units, or units dedicated to
investigating organized crime. Eighty-nine percent of
incidents reported by task forces located in a vice unit were
incidents of suspected sex trafficking, compared to 73% of
incidents reported by task forces located outside of vice
units.

Federal agencies were more likely to lead labor trafficking
investigations (29%), compared to sex trafficking
investigations (7%)

A law enforcement agency was identified as the lead agency
for nearly all suspected sex trafficking cases (98%). Among
suspected labor trafficking cases, 88% had a law enforcement
lead agency, and 11% had a victim advocacy lead agency
(table 3).

In sex trafficking cases, 92% involved a lead agency
identified as a state, local, or territorial level government
agency, while 7% of lead agencies were identified as federal
agencies, such as the FBI, U.S. Attorneys' Offices, or
Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Labor trafficking
investigations were more likely to have a federal lead agency
(29%) than sex trafficking investigations (7%).

The number and type of task force agencies involved in
suspected human trafficking incidents varied more for
labor trafficking cases than for sex trafficking cases. Among
suspected labor trafficking incidents, 82% involved multiple
agencies as part of the task force team; 49% of suspected sex
trafficking incidents involved multiple agencies.

In a review of all types of agencies involved in the case,
99% of sex trafficking cases included a law enforcement
agency, and 16% included a victim advocacy agency. Most labor
trafficking incidents also included a law enforcement agency
in the case (91%); however, labor trafficking incidents were
more likely to include a victim advocacy agency (40%) and
a regulatory agency (10%), such as a code enforcement or
professional licensing agency, when compared to suspected
sex trafficking cases.

-----------------------------------------------------
Data quality and consistency in reporting

The HTRS project team identified a number of data quality
issues despite efforts to ensure consistent and complete
reporting.

The most significant issues were--

*Missing individual-level information about suspects and
victims, and

*Failure to update cases as the investigations progressed.

The type of trafficking suspected and the agencies involved
were entered into the system because this information was
typically available at the outset of an investigation (figure
2). The availability of information on case confirmation,
victims, and suspects was not necessarily a function of the
length of time the case was open, and was missing for a
significant number of the incidents (table 4).

Cases observed for 12 or more months generally had more
valid data about whether the incident was confirmed
to be human trafficking. Among all cases opened for
investigation between January 2008 and June 2010,
confirmation of the outcome was pending for 39% of the
incidents at the conclusion of the study period (June 2010).
Among cases open for at least 12 months in task forces
that consistently updated case information and provided
individual-level data, 38% had not reached a confirmation
outcome at the conclusion of the study period. However,
83% of the cases that ultimately reached an outcome were
able to do so within 12 months.

Identifying the characteristics of individuals involved in
human trafficking was problematic overall. The quality of
the data was associated more with the task force itself than
with the date the case was opened or the type of suspected
trafficking. Valid suspect and victim data were clustered in
certain task forces identified as providing high data
quality.

*High data quality task forces (18 of 42) met three criteria:
1) regularly entered new cases into the system, 2)
provided individual-level information for at least one
suspect or victim, and 3) updated case information on a
regular basis. Individual-level information for at least one
suspect was available for 75% of the confirmed human
trafficking investigations open for at least one year in
selected task forces.

*Low data quality task forces (24 of 42) did not meet any
of the three criteria listed above.

Case confirmation outcomes and individual-level statistics
are therefore restricted to data provided by selected task
forces (18 of the 42). These task forces regularly entered
new cases into the system, provided individual-level
information for at least one suspect or victim, and updated
case information on a regular basis.

Confirmed victims of labor trafficking were more likely
to be male, older, and foreign than confirmed victims
of sex trafficking

Federally funded high data quality task forces entered 389
confirmed incidents of human trafficking during the study
period. These cases had consistently complete reporting on
case outcome and individual-level information. The selected
task forces identified 527 confirmed human trafficking
victims in the 389 confirmed incidents. Confirmed sex
trafficking victims were overwhelmingly female (94% of
victims with known gender). Of the 63 confirmed labor
trafficking victims, 20 were male and 43 were female (table
5).

Confirmed labor trafficking victims were more likely to
be older than confirmed sex trafficking victims. Sixty-two
percent of confirmed labor trafficking victims were
identified as 25 years of age or older, compared to 13% of
confirmed sex trafficking victims, based on victims with
known age.

In addition, confirmed labor trafficking victims were more
likely to be identified as Hispanic (63% of victims with
known race) or Asian (17%) compared to sex trafficking
victims, who were more likely to be white (26%) or black
(40%). Four-fifths of victims in confirmed sex trafficking
cases were identified as U.S. citizens (83%), while most
confirmed labor trafficking victims were identified as
undocumented aliens (67%) or qualified aliens (28%).

More than half of confirmed sex trafficking suspects
were black, while confirmed labor trafficking suspects
were more likely to be Hispanic

Overall, individual information was collected for 488
suspects in confirmed human trafficking incidents in high
data quality task forces (table 6).

Most confirmed human trafficking suspects were male
(81%), while 19% were female. Based on cases in which
race was known, nearly two-thirds (62%) of confirmed sex
trafficking suspects were identified as black. Confirmed
labor trafficking suspects were more likely to be identified
as Hispanic (48%). Most suspects in confirmed sex trafficking
incidents were between the ages of 18 and 34 (77%) and
were U.S. citizens (86%).

Analysis of case outcomes was restricted to incidents
opened by high data quality task forces and observed
for one year

Seventy-six percent of human trafficking cases had reached a
confirmation outcome at the conclusion of the study period,
including 88% of cases opened in high data quality task
forces and 67% in the remaining task forces (figure 3).
-----------------------------------------------------       

Victim service providers report serving more labor 
trafficking victims than sex trafficking victims.

The HTRS collects information on human trafficking
cases opened for investigation by state and local law
enforcement agencies that received federal funding
to support task force activities. The data described in
this report reflect the information that was available to,
and entered by, these state and local law enforcement
agencies, which receive support from the Bureau of Justice
Assistance (BJA) in the Office of Justice Programs, U.S.
Department of Justice.

The Office for Victims of Crime (OVC), also in the Office of
Justice Programs, provides grant funding to victim service
agencies in many of the BJA-funded task force locations.
The OVC funds support comprehensive services to human
trafficking victims. Between January 2008 and June 2009,
OVC awarded grants to 32 task force agencies to provide
services to foreign national victims of human trafficking.

OVC data are compiled through the Trafficking Information
Management System (TIMS). Between 2003 and June 2009,
the OVC initiative provided services to a total of 2,699 
precertified foreign national suspected victims of
trafficking. TIMS data consistently show that the majority of
victims served are classified as labor trafficking victims.
Between January 2008 and June 2009, 64% of the victims served
by OVC-funded service providers were identified as victims of
labor trafficking only, 22% as victims of sex trafficking
only, and 10% as victims of both labor and sex trafficking.

Among confirmed victims of human trafficking identified
by high data quality task forces in the HTRS, approximately
43% of undocumented aliens and qualified aliens were
victims of labor trafficking, compared to 64% of the foreign
national suspected victims of human trafficking served by
the OVC task forces.

OVC expanded the victim services initiative to include U.S.
citizens who are miniors beginning in late 2009, and in 2010
began to include all victims of trafficking, regardless of
citizenship or age. In 2010, BJA and OVC began joint support
of an enhanced collaborative task force model that included
support for victim service agencies and law enforcement
agencies to take a comprehensive approach to investigating
all trafficking crimes and providing services to trafficking
victims regardless of citizenship or age.
---------------------------------------------------------

Cases that were ultimately confirmed to be human trafficking
in high data quality task forces were open for a median of
five months before the case was confirmed. Cases that were
ultimately confirmed not to be human trafficking in these
selected task forces were open for a median of 3 months
before the allegations were determined to be unfounded
(figure 4).

Most (83%) of the cases that ultimately reached an outcome
were able to do so within 12 months of observation (not
shown in table). Statistics about the outcomes of cases are
therefore restricted to incidents observed for at least 12
months in the study period, and opened by task forces that
reliably updated information.

Approximately a third of cases opened for investigation were
confirmed to be human trafficking Among cases opened for at
least one year in selected task forces, 30% were confirmed to
be human trafficking and 38% were confirmed not to be human
trafficking as defined in the TVPA, 2000. Nearly a third of
the cases had a pending confirmation outcome (table 7).

Any commercial sex act if the person is under 18 years of
age, regardless of whether any form of coercion is involved,
is defined as human trafficking by the TVPA, 2000. (Adult
prostitution is not considered human trafficking unless it is
proven that the victim was coerced.) Of cases confirmed to be
human trafficking, 64% involved allegations of prostitution
or sexual exploitation of a child, and 42% involved
allegations of adult prostitution. Most cases confirmed not
to be human trafficking (64%) or pending confirmation status
(66%) involved allegations of adult prostitution (table 8).

About a quarter of foreign nationals confirmed as
victims received U.S. visas

Nearly 90 victims identified in confirmed human trafficking
incidents open for at least a year were described as
undocumented or qualified aliens. Of these 87 foreign
victims, 21 received T visas, while 46 visa applications were
still pending or had an unknown status. (See footnote 4 on
page 2.) Most confirmed victims in cases open for at least
a year were described as U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, or
permanent U.S. residents (67%)(not shown in table).

Nearly 150 arrests were reported by law enforcement
agencies in confirmed human trafficking incidents

Law enforcement agencies in the selected task forces
reported arresting 144 suspects in confirmed human
trafficking incidents open for at least a year during the
study period, including 139 sex trafficking suspects and 5
labor trafficking suspects (table 9). Most sex trafficking
arrests occurred at the state level (114), while all 5 labor
trafficking arrests occurred at the federal level.

The HTRS relies primarily on local law enforcement to
update information about arrests. Local law enforcement
may not always have current or complete information about
arrests made by other agencies. (See Methodology.)

Methodology

This report relies on information from task forces receiving
federal support from the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA).
Since the Human Trafficking Reporting System (HTRS)
was implemented in 2008, a total of 45 jurisdictions have
received funds from BJA to provide support for state and
local law enforcement to work more collaboratively with
victim services organizations, federal law enforcement, U.S.
Attorneys' Offices, and the Civil Rights Division of the U.S.
Department of Justice in the identification and rescue of
human trafficking victims who are in the United States. The
HTRS was designed to facilitate incident-level management
and tracking of human trafficking investigations opened by
BJA-funded task forces.

Between January 1, 2008, and June 30, 2010, 42 of the 45
federally funded human trafficking task forces reported at
least one human trafficking incident in the HTRS. The task
forces involve partnerships with varying coverage areas,
including entire states/territories and regions, multiple
counties, single counties, and metropolitan areas. Combined,
the task forces operated in jurisdictions that were home to
nearly 25% of the nation's resident population at midyear
2010. Although the task forces are not representative of the
entire nation, they are widely dispersed geographically.

Collection procedures

Each task force designated a person for data collection
and reporting. Reporters were responsible for adding new
human trafficking incidents on a monthly basis, updating
information for existing records with new activity, and
submitting data automatically through an online data portal.
Reporters were provided training and follow-up technical
assistance via phone or onsite as needed by Northeastern
University (NEU) and Urban Institute (UI) staff. Task forces
began entering data in January 2008.

Task force reporters enter information about investigations
into the HTRS if they have spent at least one hour of
investigation time on a potential trafficking case. At the
time that data are originally entered into the system, many
investigations are still ongoing. As investigations proceed,
additional information may become available or the original
information may be updated. As a result, the HTRS provides
a snapshot of information currently known and reported.

Once an investigation has progressed to the point of having
information about potential suspects or victims, task force
reporters are instructed to enter this information into the
HTRS. Information for each suspect and each victim is then
added by completing automated data entry screens identified
as a Suspect Information Form or a Victim Information Form.
As more information becomes available, task force reporters
are asked to update the information on each screen. (For
additional details, see the Human Trafficking Reporting
System User's Manual at
https://www.humantrafficking.neu.edu.)

Data quality

Every effort was made to ensure consistency and
completeness in task force reporting to the HTRS. NEU and
UI developed a detailed HTRS Users' Guide to introduce
the platform to task forces and promote consistency in
reporting. Training and onsite technical assistance was
provided to all task forces. An advisory board made up of
task force representatives helped guide the development
and implementation of the data management system. Three
sites were also funded to provide immersion training to task
forces that did not update the HTRS regularly. NEU and
UI also conduct random data quality audits and provide
quarterly data quality reports to BJS.

Finally, random audits are conducted to compare paper files
from closed human trafficking investigations with the data
that are reported to the HTRS. BJS and its partners continue
to implement enhancements to the HTRS to improve data
reliability and consistency in reporting.

Despite these efforts, consistency and completeness in
reporting vary across task forces (see text box on page 5).
The statistics described in this report should be examined
in light of this variability. Although all task forces
received federal funding during the study period from BJA,
the ability to collect and report data varied by task force.
Some task forces indicated that they were unable to provide
individuallevel information due to the sensitivity of the
information, and others stated that they did not have access
to many of the case outcome measures collected through HTRS.
The volume of incidents reported varied between task forces
(ranging from 1 to 483). Seven of the participating task
forces reported fewer than 10 cases of suspected human
trafficking between January 2008 and June 2010, while six
task forces reported 100 or more cases during this same
period.

Task forces that were classified as having high data quality
(18 of 42) regularly entered new cases into the system,
provided individual-level information for at least one
suspect or victim, and updated case information on a regular
basis. Task forces classified as having low data quality did
not meet any of these three criteria. High and low data
quality task forces reported similar information with respect
to human trafficking type, lead investigative agency level,
and lead investigative agency type. High quality task forces
were more likely to be located in criminal intelligence,
organized crime, or human trafficking-dedicated units (56%)
than low quality task forces (34%). Low quality task forces
were typically in vice units (66%) compared to high quality
task forces (44%). High data quality task forces also
reported a greater percent of cases that involved multiple
agencies, had at least one victim identified, had at least
one suspect identified, and were confirmed to be human
trafficking (table 10). Analyses that included any data on
victims, suspects, or confirmed cases were restricted to
information provided by selected task forces.

As of June 30, 2010, the HTRS included information on more
than 3,100 cases of suspected incidents of human trafficking.
However, this report covers cases opened in January 2008 to
minimize variations in reporting over time due to changes
in data collection methodology. The HTRS project team
collected retrospective case information on investigations
opened prior to the launch of the system in 2008.

Analyses of the retrospective data collected by the project
team prior to 2008 found that this information was not
consistently updated by the task forces once prospective
data collection began. Therefore, the characteristics of
these incidents (652) are fully described in the previous
report, Characteristics of Suspected Human Trafficking
Incidents, 2007-2008. There is an overlap of cases opened
between January 2008 and September 2008 between the previous
report and the current report, as many of these incidents
were entered prospectively by the task forces, and were
updated following the release of the previous report.

During the first year (2008) of prospective voluntary data
collection, task forces opened at least 250 suspected cases
of human trafficking for investigation in each quarter. This
volume of new cases continued well into 2009, yet dropped
to less than 150 new cases per quarter in 2010 (figure 5).

Modifications designed to help alleviate many of the data
quality issues described in this report went into effect in
October 2009. Participation in HTRS became a requirement
of continued federal funding from BJA. Several HTRS
fields were converted from "non-required" to "required"
data elements. Additionally, a task force is unable to close
a case unless individual-level information about victims
and suspects is entered for those incidents with identified
numbers of victims and suspects in investigation records.
Open cases that have not been updated during the previous
six months are now automatically flagged for task forces
whenever they log into the system. Not only does this new
feature facilitate the updating of open investigations for
task forces, it also helps project staff track the number of
open but inactive cases for each task force, which could
affect the quality of data extracted from the HTRS.

The requirement to update cases once they have been
entered into the system may in part explain the decrease
in new cases entered in quarters one and two of 2010. In
addition, six of the 42 task forces had let their funding
expire as of December 31, 2009. The project team continues to
work with these task forces to update information on cases
already entered into the HTRS, but no new cases were entered
into the HTRS from these six task forces as of January 1,
2010.

------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov
-------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is 
the director.

This report was written by Duren Banks and Tracey 
Kyckelhahn. Ron Malega verified the report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, 
Tina Dorsey and Barbara Quinn produced the report, 
and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final printing,
under the supervision of Doris J. James.

April 2011, NCJ 233732

This report in portable document format and in ASCII 
and its related statistical data and tables are available
at the website:
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2372.
-----------------------------------------------------------
April 18,2010, JER, 3:49PM