U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Compendium of State Privacy
and Security Legislation:
1999 Overview

July 2000, NCJ  182294

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without many of the tables. 
A spreadsheet (.wk1) of the Summary of State statutes by State
and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cspsl99.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cspsl
-------------------------------------------------------------------



Current status of the law

Summary of State statutes
     By category
     By State


Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

This report was prepared by SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics, Kenneth E. Bischoff,
Chairman, and Gary R. Cooper, Executive Director. The
project director was Sheila J. Barton, Deputy Executive
Director. Paul L. Woodard, Senior Counsel, and Eric C.
Johnson, Policy Research Analyst, prepared the report. Twyla
R. Cunningham, Manager, Corporate Communications, and
Michele J. Dawson, Writer/Researcher, edited the report.
Jane L. Bassett, Publishing Specialist, and Terri E. Nyberg,
Special Assistant to the Executive Director, provided layout
and design assistance. The project was conducted under the
direction of Carol G. Kaplan, Chief, Criminal History
Improvement Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement No.
96-BJ-CX-K010 awarded to SEARCH Group, Incorporated, 7311
Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California 95831.
Contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the
views or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the
U.S. Department of Justice.

Copyright (c) SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, 2000

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to
reproduce, publish, translate, or otherwise use all or any
part of the copyrighted material in the publication with the
exception of those items indicating that they are
copyrighted by or reprinted by permission of any source
other than SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics.

Foreword

This updated version of the Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation: 1999 Overview is the eleventh in the
series of Bureau of Justice Statistics' publications
referencing and analyzing State laws, administrative
regulations and attorneys general's opinions relating to the
security, confidentiality, accuracy, and completeness of
criminal history records. The first Compendium was published
in 1974 in conjunction with the development and issuance by
the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration of the
Department of Justice regulations on privacy and security of
criminal history record information. Subsequent editions
have been published in 1978, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989,
1992, 1994, 1997, and now the current 1999 edition.

The purpose of the volumes continues to be assistance to
legislators, planners, administrators, legal analysts, and
other researchers in reviewing and contrasting the varying
approaches the States have taken to issues concerned with
the maintenance and use of criminal records. With such
information available, States are able to take a more
enlightened approach to criminal record policymaking.

It is the hope of the Bureau of Justice Statistics that this
report will be a resource for policymakers in improving and
promoting the Nation's criminal history records. The
efficient operation of complete and accurate records systems
serves to benefit us all.


Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director 


Contents

Introduction   
The Compendium series    
Scope of this Compendium 
How to use the Compendium     

Section 1: Review and analysis     
A. Current status of the law  
B. Analysis of critical issues     
1. Data quality     
2. Access to criminal history records for noncriminal
justice purposes    

Section 2: Classification category definitions    

Section 3: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by
classification category  
A. Survey comparison of changes in State
statutes and regulations by classification category    
B. Summary of State statutes and regulations by
classification category
1. State regulatory authority 
2. Privacy and security council    
3. Dissemination regulations  
4. Inspection  
5. Right to challenge    
6. Judicial review of challenged information 
7. Purging nonconviction information    
8. Purging conviction information  
9. Sealing nonconviction information    
10. Sealing conviction information 
11. Removal of disqualifications.  
12. Right to state nonexistence of record    
13. Research access 
14. Accuracy and completeness 
15. Dedication 
16. Civil remedies  
17. Criminal penalties   
18. Public records  
19. Separation of files  
20. Regulation of intelligence collection    
21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination 
22. Security   
23. Transaction logs     
24. Training employees   
25. Listing of information systems 
26. Freedom of Information Act 
(including criminal justice information)     
27. Freedom of Information Act 
(excluding criminal justice information)     
28. Central State repository  
29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted
     

Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by
State     
State code titles   
Alabama   
Alaska    
Arizona   
Arkansas  
California     
Colorado  
Connecticut    
Delaware  
District of Columbia     
Florida   
Georgia   
Hawaii    
Idaho     
Illinois  
Indiana   
Iowa 
Kansas    
Kentucky  
Louisiana 
Maine     
Maryland  
Massachusetts  
Michigan  
Minnesota 
Mississippi    
Missouri  
Montana   
Nebraska  
Nevada    
New Hampshire  
New Jersey     
New Mexico     
New York  
North Carolina 
North Dakota   
Ohio 
Oklahoma  
Oregon    
Pennsylvania   
Puerto Rico    
Rhode Island   
South Carolina 
South Dakota   
Tennessee 
Texas     
Utah 
Vermont   
Virgin Islands 
Virginia  
Washington     
West Virginia  
Wisconsin 
Wyoming



The full text (approximately 1,500 pages, order No.
NCJ-000000) 
of legislation cited in this document 
is available in microfiche for $2 
or in hard copy for $184 from:

Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse
P.O. Box 179
Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179
1-800-732-3277

Introduction

The Compendium series

This Compendium is the latest in a series of 11 U.S.
Department of Justice publications that reference and
analyze State laws and regulations relating to privacy and
security of criminal history record
information.***Footnote1: The term "criminal history record
information" is defined in the Department of Justice
regulations to include "information collected by criminal
justice agencies on individuals consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, detentions,
indictments, informations, or other formal criminal charges,
and any disposition arising therefrom, sentencing,
correctional supervision, and release." 28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.3(b)
(1993).*** These compendia include: (1) compilations of
State laws and administrative regulations, and (2) analyses
of findings and trends reflected in that body of law and
policy documents. The purpose of these compendia is to
assist legislators, planners, administrators, legal
analysts, and others interested in reviewing State statutes
and regulations governing the maintenance and use of
criminal records, and in analyzing national trends in this
important area. Comparing and contrasting the various
approaches reflected in the many State laws and regulations
cited in these documents should assist planners and
administrators in developing effective and fair policies for
their jurisdictions. By facilitating such comparisons and by
furthering research in this area, the compendia are intended
to promote the evolution of enlightened privacy and
information policy.

The first compendium was published by the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (LEAA) in 1974 as part of its
efforts connected with the promulgation of regulations
covering the privacy and security of criminal history record
information. ***Footnote 2: U.S. Department of Justice, Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, Office of General
Counsel, Compendium of State Laws Governing the Privacy and
Security of Criminal Justice Information (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1974).*** A second compendium,
published in 1978, documented the growth of State privacy
and security laws subsequent to the earlier survey.
***Footnote 3: U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration, National Criminal Justice
Information and Statistics Service, Privacy and Security of
Criminal History Information, Compendium of State
Legislation (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
January 1978).*** At that time, LEAA also published a
companion document that provided an overview of the
significant changes in State laws that had occurred, largely
as a result of the impact of the Federal regulations, and
analyzed policy issues in specific areas of privacy and
security law. ***Footnote 4: U.S. Department of Justice, Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, Privacy and Security
of Criminal History Information: An Analysis of Privacy
Issues (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1978).*** Updating supplements to those compendia were
published in 1979 by the LEAA and in 1981 by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS), covering State legislation and
regulations up to July 1981. ***Footnote 5: U.S. Department
of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration,
National Criminal Justice Information and Statistics
Service, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Legislation, 1979
Supplement, by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1979); U.S. Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Privacy and Security
of Criminal History Information: Compendium of State
Legislation, 1981 Supplement, by SEARCH Group, Inc.
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1982).*** The
1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994, and 1997 volumes - all of
which were published by BJS - replaced all of the earlier
volumes in the series and referenced all State laws and
regulations up to their publication dates. ***Footnote 6: 
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information:
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1984
Edition: Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, September 1985); Privacy and
Security of Criminal History Information: Compendium of
State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1987 Overview, by
SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, August 1988); Privacy and Security of Criminal
History Information: Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation, 1989 Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc.
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, April 1990);
Criminal History Record Information: Compendium of State
Privacy and Security Legislation, 1992, by SEARCH, The
National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1992);
Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information:
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1994
Overview, by SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, January 1995); Compendium of State Privacy
and Security Legislation: 1997 Overview by SEARCH, The
National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, May 1998).***

Scope of this Compendium

This Compendium is an up-to-date and complete document that
replaces all of the earlier volumes in the series. It
references all current State laws through July 1999, as well
as regulations, executive orders, and opinions of State
attorneys general, where applicable. It also includes a
review and analysis section containing a general overview of
State laws and regulations and a discussion of trends and
conclusions concerning two especially important information
policy issues: (1) requirements imposed on criminal justice
agencies to maintain record quality, and (2) dissemination
and use of criminal history information for noncriminal
justice purposes.

Since this volume compiles the material from previous
compendia, as well as more recent enactments, the sheer bulk
of this body of material precludes reproducing the complete
text of the State laws and regulations. The complete set of
statutes is available on microfiche or in hard-copy format
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse in
Annapolis Junction, Maryland. (A fee applies for either
format. See page vii for ordering information.) A full,
hard-copy library of these laws, regulations, and other
materials is maintained by SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics, at its offices in
Sacramento, California. Copies of specific enactments may be
ordered by mail or telephone. ***Footnote 7: SEARCH is
located at 7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento,
California 95831, (916) 392-2550.***

This Compendium contains four sections. Section 1 sets out
an overview of State criminal history record laws and an
analysis of State requirements relating to data quality and
noncriminal justice access and use. Section 2 defines the 29
subject-matter categories into which the laws and
regulations are classified in the Compendium tables. These
categories are the same as those used in previous volumes.
Section 3 sets out summary tables showing trends and
developments in criminal justice information law and policy
by classification category. Section 4 sets out summary
tables of criminal justice information statutes and
regulations by State, along with a list of the titles of the
State codes (see page 53) from which the citations were
extracted. All of the tables in sections 3 and 4 set out
complete citations to the official State codes or other
State compilations where the full text of the laws and
regulations may be found. These citations should be used
when ordering copies of particular provisions from BJS or
SEARCH.

The methodology used in compiling the Compendium included a
survey of State officials concerned with criminal record
programs and policy, followed by extensive research in the
State codes to verify and augment survey responses. The
survey and research compiled the laws of 53 jurisdictions:
the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and
the Virgin Islands. In the Compendium, all of these
jurisdictions are referred to as "States."

How to use the Compendium

Because this volume is a complete compilation of all prior
compendia and supplements, it will not be necessary to
consult prior volumes.

To facilitate use of this volume, the laws and regulations
have been classified into 29 subject-matter categories that
are defined in section 2. Numerous tables are included in
sections 3 and 4 to assist readers in finding laws dealing
with particular subjects, or to determine which aspects of
information policy are addressed by particular States. The
summary tables in section 3 list citations to all State
statutes and regulations under each of the 29 classification
categories. For example, the table for the category "State
regulatory authority" (see page 18) indicates which States
have provisions establishing or designating an agency to
promulgate statewide regulations governing criminal history
records and provides the legal citations to the provisions.
In addition to finding particular citations, the reader is
able to quickly identify the concentration of States
addressing a particular policy area.

Another view of State privacy and security trends is
reflected in the table on page 16 titled "Survey comparison
of changes in State statutes and regulations by
classification category." At a glance, the table indicates
the degree of attention that a particular area of
information policy has received in the States over the past
25 years, as reflected by surveys and research conducted in
1974, 1978, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994, 1997,
and 1999.
A summary table for each State is included in section 4.
These tables use the 29 classification categories relating
to criminal history record information privacy and security
and set out citations to all of the laws and regulations of
particular States. If no entry appears under one or more
classification categories for a particular State, it means
that the State has no law or regulation addressing that
policy area, or that research has failed to discover any.

The State summary tables presented in section 4 include
subdivisions of four classification categories:
* Category 3, "Dissemination Regulations," is subdivided to
show whether the States authorize or prohibit access by
various types of groups or individuals (criminal justice
agencies, governmental noncriminal justice agencies, and
private agencies or individuals) to various types of
information (conviction, nonconviction, and arrest
information).
* Category 4, "Inspection," is subdivided to show whether
the States permit an individual to inspect his criminal
history record; inspect his record and take notes; or
inspect his record and obtain a copy of information
contained in that record.
* Category 14, "Accuracy and Completeness," is subdivided to
permit statutes to be classified as relating to disposition
reporting, auditing, or other accuracy and completeness
requirements.
* Category 22, "Security," is subdivided to enable statutes
to be classified as relating to physical, administrative, or
computer security.
These classification subdivisions should present a more
accurate and detailed view of State legislative and
regulatory activity in these four important policy areas,
and will make the Compendium a more useful research tool.

Section 1: Review and analysis


A. Current status of the law

In the early 1970s, at a time when public concern about
privacy, automation, and mushrooming information systems was
at its height, Congress considered several legislative
proposals that would have imposed a uniform nationwide
information management scheme for State and local handling
of criminal history record information. Although Congress
did not enact comprehensive legislation, in 1973 it did
amend the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968. ***Footnote 8: Now Sec. 812(b), Justice Assistance Act
of 1984; Pub. L. 98-473.*** The amendment provided in
general terms that all criminal history record information
collected, maintained, or disseminated by State and local
criminal justice agencies with financial support made
available under the Act must be kept complete and secure,
must be made available for review and challenge by record
subjects, and must be used only for law enforcement and
other lawful purposes. ***Footnote 9: The amendment does not
cover investigative and intelligence information.***

In 1976, the U.S. Department of Justice's Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (LEAA) issued comprehensive
information systems regulations to implement the amendment.
***Footnote 10: "Criminal Justice Information Systems
Regulations," 28 C.F.R. Part 20.***

These regulations, usually referred to as the Department of
Justice (DOJ) regulations, are applicable to all State and
local criminal justice agencies that have used Federal
funding for the support of criminal history record systems.
The regulations impose minimum general requirements for
criminal history information management, leaving the
development of specific programs and procedures to State
legislation and policymaking. information systems
regulations to implement the amendment. ***Footnote 11:
Wanted person information, original records of entry, court
records, or traffic offense records are specifically
exempted from coverage of the Department of Justice
regulations.*** As intended, the regulations have been
instrumental in stimulating many States to enact their own
laws to comply with the requirements of the Federal
government. In addition, the regulations triggered a
reassessment of existing State privacy and security laws
that has gone beyond mere compliance, as evidenced by the
fact that about half of the States have enacted
comprehensive criminal history laws, some of which are in
some respects stricter than the requirements of the
regulations.

Today, virtually all of the States have enacted legislation
governing at least the dissemination of criminal history
records. Although the approaches differ considerably,
virtually all of the States have followed the lead of the
DOJ regulations in distinguishing between information
referring to convictions and current arrests, on the one
hand, and nonconviction data on the other (information
referring to cases without recorded dispositions or with
dispositions favorable to the accused). Most States have
placed stricter limits on the release of nonconviction data
for noncriminal justice purposes, such as background
screening for employment and licensing purposes. Virtually
all of the States also have established procedures to permit
record subjects to review their records and to institute
procedures to correct inaccuracies. Finally, virtually all
of the States have established security procedures complying
generally with the requirements of the regulations. In these
areas, as in other areas of record management, the
regulations do not require the enactment of legislation, so
long as adequate operational procedures are implemented by
regulation, agency rule, or other appropriate means. Thus,
the number of State statutes in these areas cited in this
volume do not fully reflect the significant progress made in
these areas of privacy protection.           

Two areas of criminal history record information management
merit special analysis: (1) data quality, and (2)
dissemination of criminal records for noncriminal justice
purposes.

B. Analysis of critical issues          

1. Data quality

As noted earlier, the broad language of the 1973
Congressional amendment provided the basis for comprehensive
regulations issued by LEAA in 1976 covering all State and
local criminal history record systems supported in whole or
in part by Federal funding. Among other things, the
regulations require all covered agencies to implement
operational procedures designed to ensure that criminal
history record information is complete and accurate.
***Footnote 12: 28 C.F.R.Sec. 20.21(a)(1993).***

The regulations state that to be complete, a record of an
arrest must contain information concerning any disposition
occurring within the State within 90 days after the
disposition has occurred. In order to promote the
dissemination of complete criminal history records, the
regulations require that State and local agencies establish
procedures to query the State central repository prior to
disseminating information unless the agency is assured that
it is disseminating the most up-to-date disposition data, or
time is of the essence and the repository is technically
incapable of responding within the necessary time period.
***Footnote 13: [28 C.F.R. Sec. 20.21(a)(1)(1993).***

The provisions of the regulations dealing with accuracy
define accuracy literally to mean that "no record containing
criminal history record information shall contain erroneous
information." ***Footnote 14: 28 C.F.R. Sec.
20.21(a)(2)(1993).*** In order to promote accuracy, two
types of operational procedures are required: (1) a process
of data collection, entry, storage, and systematic audit
that will minimize the possibility of recording and storing
inaccurate information; and (2) procedures for sending
correction notices to all criminal justice agencies known to
have received inaccurate information. As a practical matter,
this provision requires agencies to create and maintain
dissemination logs so corrections can be sent to recipients
of erroneous information.

Finally, the regulations require agencies to give criminal
record subjects an opportunity, upon request, to review
their criminal history record information for purposes of
ensuring accuracy and completeness. ***Footnote 15: 28
C.F.R. Sec. 20.21(g)(1993).***

State statutory provisions

As noted earlier, the DOJ regulations do not require the
States to enact legislation dealing with accuracy and
completeness. Many States, however, have chosen to deal with
the problem through State law. In 1974, just prior to
publication of the regulations, only 14 States had adopted
statutory data quality safeguards. By 1978, 2 years after
the adoption of the LEAA regulations, 41 States had added
data quality provisions of one kind or another to their
criminal history record statutes. That number increased to
45 States in 1979, to 49 States in 1981, to 51 States in
1984, and to 52 States in 1991 through 1997. ***Footnote 16:
As used in the Compendium, the term "State" includes the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
All except the Virgin Islands have enacted data quality
provisions.***

Although the regulations do not expressly require that the
States establish State central criminal record repositories,
the Commentary published with the regulations noted that the
provisions on accuracy and completeness were written with
State central repositories in mind. Indeed, the provisions
of the regulations dealing with completeness state that
complete records "should" be maintained in State central
repositories. ***Footnote 17: 28 C.F.R. Sec.
20.21(a)(1)(1993).*** Today every State, as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, have established State
central repositories and most of them conform generally to
the model described in the Commentary. In all of those
States, pursuant to statute, regulation, or established
practice, criminal justice agencies throughout the State are
required to report arrest and disposition data to the State
repositories for all serious offenses (usually felonies and
serious misdemeanors). All of the States have statutory
provisions expressly requiring the reporting of arrest
information. In most cases, arrest information is reported
on arrest fingerprint cards, which include the subject's
name and identification information, arrest event
information (date, place, etc.), arrest charges, and inked
fingerprint impressions. (Automated fingerprint systems are
assuming these functions in a growing number of States.)

All 52 of the jurisdictions with data quality provisions
also have adopted legislation that imposes some form of
disposition reporting requirement on some types of State and
local agencies. ***Footnote 18: "Disposition" is used here
to mean post-arrest case processing information, including
information relating to prosecution, court adjudication,
sentencing, and correctional status.*** Many of these
statutes are quite specific as to the types of data to be
reported, the responsible agency or official, time
requirements, and sanctions. Others, however, merely state a
general reporting requirement with little or no detail as to
how or by whom reporting is to be accomplished, leaving
these particulars to be spelled out in regulations.

Even in those States with more detailed reporting laws, not
all types of information are covered. Only 31 States
specifically require the reporting of prosecutor information
to the central repository ***Footnote 19: The 31 States are:
Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, District of Columbia, Georgia,
Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, Vermont,
Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming.*** and in
only a few of these States are prosecutors required to
report to the repository all of the charges that were filed,
modified, or dropped. Forty-five State statutes require the
courts (customarily the court clerks) to report disposition
information to the central repository. ***Footnote 20: The
45 States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District of
Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.*** Forty-five States
require correctional agencies to report correctional
information, such as inmate reception, release, parole,
escape, or death. ***Footnote 21: The 45 States are:
Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Texas,
Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming.***

Other problems with many of the disposition reporting laws
include the failure of States to impose time limits for the
reporting of disposition data and the lack of meaningful
penalties for failure to comply. Only 30 States prescribe
statutory time limits for the reporting of disposition data,
***Footnote 22: The 30 States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona,
California, Delaware, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,
North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South
Carolina, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and
Wisconsin.*** and many of these apply only to certain types
of data. Twenty-three States have adopted statutory
provisions that expressly prescribe administrative, civil,
or criminal sanctions for violations of disposition
reporting requirements, ***Footnote 23: The 23 States are:
Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia,
Kansas, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota,
Montana, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Utah, Vermont,
and West Virginia.*** but research has failed to discover a
single reported decision in which a criminal justice
official has actually been penalized for failing to comply
with disposition reporting requirements. ***Footnote 24:
See, SEARCH Group, Inc., Liability for Mishandling Criminal
Records (Sacramento, California: SEARCH Group, Inc., April
1984). There are reported decisions, however, penalizing
officers for failing to file other types of reports, and one
decision penalizing an agency for failing to make a required
entry in a dissemination log.***

Statutes that impose transaction log requirements are the
most common type of data quality provision other than
disposition reporting. Thirty-three States have adopted
statutory provisions that require criminal justice agencies
to maintain logs identifying the recipients of criminal
history record information and the dates of the
disseminations. ***Footnote 25: Twenty-three of the 33
States that maintain dissemination logs have specific and
relatively detailed transaction log requirements. Those 23
States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, California,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, South
Carolina, Vermont, Virginia, and Washington.***

Statutes in 35 States require the central repositories to
conduct some type of audit. ***Footnote 26: The 35 States
are: Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa,
Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Texas, Virginia, Washington, and Wyoming.*** Auditing is
generally viewed as one of the most effective data quality
procedures. Statutes in 28 of these States require the
central repository to conduct continuing or periodic audits
of State and local agencies that submit records to the
repository. ***Footnote 27: The 28 States are: Alaska,
Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, North
Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico,
South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and
Wyoming.*** The scope of this kind of local agency audit
usually includes: (1) adherence by the local agency to
Federal and State regulations; (2) completeness and accuracy
of criminal history record reporting; (3) adherence to
dissemination standards; (4) implementation of appropriate
security safeguards; and (5) compliance with mandated
subject-access and review provisions. Seventeen States
require the repository to conduct an in-house audit of its
own records, usually on an annual basis.***Footnote 28: The
17 States are: Alaska, Arizona, California, Illinois,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri, New Hampshire,
North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming. (Alaska requires
in-house audits every 2 years. Arizona's law requires
"periodic" in-house audits.)*** In general, the scope of
these audits parallels the scope of the audits of local
agency systems. However, statutes in some of these States
expressly require that the in-house audit also attempt to
identify case cycles with dispositions that are likely to
have occurred but that have not been reported. Statutes in
15 of the States require both an in-house repository audit
and audits of contributing agencies. ***Footnote 29: The 15
States are: Alaska, Arizona, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland,
Missouri, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas,
and Wyoming.***

Finally, statutory provisions adopted in a few States impose
other kinds of data quality requirements:

* Statutes in 14 States require State and local criminal
justice agencies to query the central repository prior to
disseminating criminal history record information in order
to assure that the most up-to-date disposition information
is being used. ***Footnote 30: The 14 States are: Alaska,
Arizona, Georgia, Hawaii, Louisiana, Maine, Missouri,
Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Puerto Rico, South Carolina,
Virginia, and Washington.***

* Thirteen States have added provisions to their statutes
that require the repository to implement some kind of
delinquent disposition monitoring system (for example, a
system designed to periodically identify arrest entries for
which dispositions are probably available but not reported).
***Footnote 31: The 13 States are: Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and
Washington.***

* Six States have adopted statutory provisions that
specifically impose training requirements on personnel
involved in entering data into criminal history record
systems. ***Footnote 32: The six States are: Alabama,
Alaska, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Wyoming.***

* Seven States have adopted statutory provisions that
address the use of automated programs to provide systematic
editing procedures for the purpose of detecting missing or
nonconforming data.***Footnote 33: The seven States are:
Alaska, Connecticut, Hawaii, Kentucky, Nebraska, South
Carolina, and Virginia.***

Of course, in almost every State, the bulk of data quality
requirements is expressed in regulations or administrative
policies and procedures, rather than in legislation.
However, the extent to which State legislation addresses
data quality issues is a reflection of a State's concern
about data quality.

It is clear, however, that the enactment of legislation and
the issuance of regulations are not enough to solve the
problem of data quality. While 52 States have adopted at
least some standards for accuracy and completeness that
reflect standards in the DOJ regulations, there is little
question that the quality of criminal history data in this
Nation falls short of satisfactory. Disposition reporting -
or the lack of reporting - remains the most serious
deficiency, especially in terms of court disposition
reporting. Next in importance is auditing. Numerous States
have statutory provisions requiring ongoing systematic
audits and annual in-house audits; in practice, however,
many States have not made data quality auditing a priority
sufficient to comply with existing standards.

The issue is commitment: The States must be committed to put
into place - and practice - procedures to collect and
maintain complete and accurate data, and to scrupulously and
regularly conduct systematic audits to ensure compliance
with those procedures.

2. Access to criminal history records for noncriminal
justice purposes                             

Background

Reversing a trend that began after issuance of the DOJ
regulations, criminal history record information is
increasingly becoming available outside of the criminal
justice system. Even nonconviction information is now being
made more available to noncriminal justice agencies.
Twenty-three States have adopted open record or freedom of
information statutes that cover some types of criminal
history record information. (See the survey comparison table
on page 16.) This does not mean that criminal history record
information is publicly available in these States in all
circumstances, but it does mean that some types of
information are more available than before.

As a part of this trend, a majority of the States now permit
access to some criminal history records by at least some
types of noncriminal justice agencies and private entities.
For example, special access rights are increasingly accorded
to governmental agencies with national security missions,
and to licensing boards and some governmental and private
employers screening applicants for sensitive positions, such
as those involving public safety, supervision of children,
or custody of valuable property.

The Congressional efforts of the 1970s to enact Federal
legislation setting nationwide dissemination standards for
State criminal history record systems failed. In addition,
the LEAA regulations on criminal history record systems
issued in 1976 did not undertake to set a uniform policy on
noncriminal justice access, but instead essentially left the
matter up to the legislatures and governors of the
individual States. Section 20.21(b)(2) of the regulations
provides that noncriminal justice access and use is
permitted if "authorized by statute, ordinance, executive
order, or court rule, decision or order as construed by
appropriate State or local officials or agencies."

This approach, though laudable from the standpoint of
States' rights, has resulted in a great diversity of
statutory schemes in the States. It has also resulted in a
steadily increasing volume of authorized noncriminal justice
use. A national survey conducted in 1998 determined that
roughly 35 percent of the fingerprint cards submitted by
States to the FBI and processed in Fiscal Year 1997 were for
noncriminal justice purposes, and that nine States -
Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida, Idaho,
Massachusetts, Nevada, New Jersey, Oregon, and Washington -
submitted more fingerprint cards during that period for
noncriminal justice rather than criminal justice purposes.
***Footnote 34: Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S.
Department of Justice, Survey of State Criminal History
Information Systems, 1997, by SEARCH, The National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, NCJ 175041,
April 1999).***  A similar study in 1993 found that only
around 9 percent of the fingerprint cards received by the
FBI from States that year were for noncriminal justice
purposes, and no States submitted more fingerprints for
noncriminal justice than criminal justice purposes.
***Footnote 35: Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S.
Department of Justice, Survey of Criminal History
Information System, 1993, by SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, NCJ 148951, January 1995).*** In
many of these States, every session of the legislature in
recent years has resulted in new statutory authority for
noncriminal justice agencies and groups to obtain criminal
record checks for such purposes as public and private
employment, occupational licensing, and the issuance of
various permits, certifications, and clearances.

As a result, it is probably safe to say that, in most
States, present laws and policies on noncriminal justice
access and use consist of a patchwork of statutory and
regulatory provisions resulting from independent lobbying
efforts by particular groups rather than from a
comprehensive review of the issues and development of a
consistent, balanced, statewide policy. It is literally true
that no two State statutes on noncriminal justice access are
identical. The following analysis of State statutory
provisions confirms these observations.

State statutory provisions                        

State statutes governing dissemination of criminal history
records for noncriminal justice purposes are so varied as to
defy classification. A few States have no statutory
provisions setting statewide policies on noncriminal justice
access; in these States, the DOJ regulations control access
and use. In a few other States, the statute does nothing
more than delegate to a designated official the authority to
issue rules and regulations on noncriminal justice
dissemination. In States that do have laws dealing with the
subject, the statutory approaches vary from those of
Florida, Wisconsin, and other "open record" States, where
anyone can obtain access to criminal history records for any
purpose, to that of Tennessee, which prohibits noncriminal
justice access and use except for limited purposes
specifically authorized by statute and which makes it a
criminal offense to release criminal history records for
unauthorized purposes. The other States fall somewhere in
between, with statutory approaches that differ greatly as to
what types of noncriminal justice agencies may have access
to particular types of records for particular purposes.

There are, however, some patterns and similarities, due to
the influence of the DOJ regulations. The regulations do not
place any restrictions on the dissemination of conviction
records or open arrest records (arrest records with no
recorded disposition) less than 1 year old. Nonconviction
records (favorable dispositions, including decisions not to
refer or prosecute charges and indefinite postponements, and
open arrest records over a year old and not actively
pending) may be disseminated for any purpose authorized by
statute, ordinance, executive order, or court ruling. Most
of the States have followed this approach of treating
conviction records differently from nonconviction records.
Commonly, the States place few or no restrictions on the
dissemination of conviction records and a number of States
also do not restrict the dissemination of open arrest
records less than a year old. Nonconviction records are
restricted to a greater degree and in some States may not be
disseminated at all for noncriminal justice purposes, or may
be disseminated only for particular purposes under specified
circumstances.

Another similarity among many States is that the statutory
provisions do not specifically identify particular
noncriminal justice agencies or organizations that may
obtain criminal history records. Instead, they define
classes or types of agencies or organizations that may
obtain certain types of records for specified purposes.
Out-of-State or Federal agencies may be included, in
addition to in-State, private, and governmental agencies.
The statutes may define permitted purposes in specific or
more general terms. For example, some States authorize the
use of criminal history records for any occupational
licensing or employment purpose, while others authorize such
use only for screening applicants for high-risk occupations,
such as those involving the public safety, supervision of
children, or custody of cash, valuable property, or
information.

Many of the laws also require that certain agencies or
organizations must be able to show specific legal authority
under other statutory provisions to obtain criminal records
or that the need for the record must be approved by a
designated board, council, or official. The statutory
provisions that require separate legal authority for certain
types of agencies vary considerably from State to State. The
requirement may simply provide that the requestor must be
"authorized by law" or must have "legal authority" or that
the records must be necessary for a "lawful purpose." Such
provisions are interpreted in some States as authorizing the
dissemination of criminal records for employment and
occupational licensing purposes where the employing or
licensing agencies are required by law to screen out
applicants who are not of "good moral character." Other
State criminal record statutes, however, authorize the
release of records for noncriminal justice purposes only if
the requesting agency is "expressly" authorized by some
other provision of State or Federal law to obtain criminal
records for use in the course of official duties. This is a
much stricter standard. Still stricter provisions authorize
the release of criminal records only pursuant to statutory
provisions that expressly refer to criminal conduct or to
criminal records and contain requirements, exclusions, or
limitations based upon such conduct or records.

Where prior approval by a council, board, or designated
official is required for the release of criminal records for
noncriminal justice purposes, the designated standard for
approval varies among the States. For example, criminal
record laws in New Hampshire and South Dakota delegate
general discretion to the director of the criminal history
record repository to determine who may have access, while
Massachusetts law provides that the Criminal History Systems
Board must find that the public interest in releasing
criminal records to particular noncriminal justice
requesters outweighs the security and privacy interests of
the record subject.

Several States require that the record subject must consent
in writing to any release of his or her criminal history
record for noncriminal justice purposes.

State dissemination policies

As evident from the discussion above, the criminal history
record laws in many States provide only the framework for
the State's policies on dissemination. Specific legal
authority for particular agencies or organizations to obtain
criminal records may be set out in separate statutory
provisions, executive orders, or even local ordinances. In
addition, the actual policies and practices of particular
States may be set out in regulations or may be based upon
written or unwritten repository policies. These policies and
practices often provide for more restrictive dissemination
approaches than the criminal record laws require them to be.
That is, usually due to lack of staff and facilities, many
State repositories do not provide records to all of the
noncriminal justice agencies and organizations that are
authorized to obtain them under their laws. In addition,
many States impose administrative requirements that may not
be required specifically by their laws. For example, some
States require that the subject's fingerprints be submitted
with all requests for noncriminal justice access, and that
records may be released only when a fingerprint comparison
positively verifies that the requested record relates to the
subject of the request. All except a handful of the States
charge fees ranging from $2 to $44 for processing record
searches for noncriminal justice purposes. ***Footnote 36:
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and West Virginia have not
statutorily established fees for noncriminal justice
requests for criminal history record information.***

Interstate dissemination

Until recently, the considerable disparity among State
dissemination laws was not perceived as a serious obstacle
to the interstate dissemination of criminal records for
noncriminal justice purposes, such as employment and
occupational licensing. This was due primarily to the fact
that there was no effective system linking the State
repositories together in such a way as to permit the
efficient exchange of records from State to State for
noncriminal justice purposes. National criminal record
checks for noncriminal justice purposes have been feasible
in the past only through use of the criminal files
maintained in the FBI's Criminal Justice Information
Services (CJIS) Division, which contain arrest and
disposition information voluntarily submitted by criminal
justice agencies throughout the country. Pursuant to Federal
laws and regulations, searches of these files are conducted
for Federal noncriminal justice agencies for such purposes
as civilian employment, security clearances, military
recruitment, alien registration, visas, and other official
purposes, and for Federal and State law enforcement agencies
for criminal justice employment purposes. Searches also are
conducted for State and local governmental employment and
licensing agencies with approved legal authority to request
such searches and for employment in federally chartered or
insured banks and designated segments of the securities and
commodities industries.

Although the criminal files of the U.S. Department of
Justice are made up primarily of arrest and disposition data
submitted by State and local criminal justice agencies,
these records are subject to Federal law and are
disseminated by the FBI pursuant to Federal laws and
regulations authorizing record checks for the agencies and
organizations noted above. Under this program, inquiring
Federal agencies are provided with all of the information
the FBI possesses on subject individuals, including
favorable dispositions and open arrest records without
regard to the age of the record. Responses provided to
banks, securities firms, and State employment and licensing
agencies include the subject's entire record with the
exception of open arrests that are over a year old and not
actively pending. Thus, because most States' dissemination
laws are more restrictive than the Federal standard, it is
possible for authorized Federal and State noncriminal
justice agencies to legally obtain State-contributed records
from the FBI for purposes for which they could not, in some
cases, obtain the records directly from the States in which
the records originated.

This system of duplicate State and Federal files is being
phased out because of concern about the expense of
maintaining and updating records at both the State and
Federal levels. The emerging system replaces the "national
repository" concept with a system based on a national index
linking State repositories. This system is known as the
Interstate Identification Index (usually referred to as
"III" or "Triple I"). When the system is fully operational
nationwide, the III index maintained at the national level
will contain personal identification data on individuals
whose criminal records are maintained in State criminal
record repositories (State offenders) and in the criminal
files of the FBI (Federal offenders), but it will not
contain any charge or disposition information. The index
will serve as a "pointer" to refer inquiring criminal
justice agencies to the State or Federal files where the
requested criminal history records are maintained. The
records will be exchanged directly between the States and
between State and Federal criminal justice agencies by means
of telecommunications lines linking Federal, State, and
local criminal justice agencies throughout the country.
Dissemination and use of the records obtained by means of
the system will be governed by the laws and policies of the
receiving jurisdictions. Each State will enforce its own
laws and policies within its borders; record dissemination
and use by Federal agencies will be governed by Federal law.

Conclusion

The absence of Federal legislation or regulations
establishing a uniform nationwide dissemination policy for
State criminal record systems has permitted the States to
develop and implement their own approaches to the release of
criminal records for noncriminal justice purposes. This has
had the laudable effect of leaving the States free to
establish their own privacy and confidentiality laws and
policies to strike a proper balance between the rights of
record subjects and the public interest. However, this has
also resulted in the evolution of widely varying State
approaches, and in laws and policies in many States that are
more restrictive than the Federal standard that governs
noncriminal justice use of the FBI's files of
State-contributed criminal history records. These factors
constitute serious obstacles to the implementation of an
"index-pointer" system for the interstate exchange of
criminal records, such as the III system now being
implemented. The ultimate success of this national program
for the interstate exchange of criminal history records for
noncriminal justice purposes will depend upon the
willingness of many of the States to modify existing
restrictions in their laws and policies in order to provide
a comparable level of service to Federal agencies and other
noncriminal justice agencies that are now authorized to
obtain records from the FBI.

It was apparent to the State and Federal officials who
developed the III concept that full participation in the
index-pointer system would eventually require most States to
modify their existing laws and policies governing the
availability of criminal history records for noncriminal
justice purposes in order to meet the proposed interstate
standard on record availability. In addition, Federal and
State officials recognized a need to formally commit the FBI
and participating State repositories to long-term
participation in a decentralized system.

These goals could possibly have been realized through the
enactment of Federal legislation in combination with uniform
State laws or independent State legislative action. However,
there was a strong consensus from the emergence of the III
concept that favored the use of an interstate/Federal-State
compact to implement the system. Such a compact must be
ratified in identical form by all parties, and no party can
unilaterally amend it after ratification. Ratifying parties
can withdraw from the compact only through the same formal
action used for ratification, a feature that provides some
assurance of long-term participation by ratifying parties.
Because the compact takes precedence over conflicting State
or Federal laws, and because the compact authorizes the
State repositories to provide record responses for all
authorized III purposes, ratification of the compact would
have the effect of providing the repositories with needed
interstate record dissemination authority in those cases
where such authority is now lacking under State law. 

The National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact, which
governs III use for noncriminal justice purposes, was
approved by the Congress on October 8, 1998, and signed by
the President on October 9, 1998. ***Footnote 37: Public Law
105-251; 112 Statutes at Large 1870. Codified at 42 USCA
Sec. 14611 et seq.] It became effective, by its terms, on
April 28, 1999, when ratified by the second State. As of
April 2000, six States - Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Iowa,
Montana, and Nevada - have ratified the compact. Based on
representations of State officials, it appears likely that
one or two more States will ratify the Compact in the year
2000 and that numerous other States will ratify it in the
next several years.

The compact binds the FBI and ratifying States to
participate in the III noncriminal justice access program in
accordance with the compact and established system policies.
Authorized users are the same as those currently authorized
to obtain records from the FBI's files. Participating State
repositories are authorized and required to make all
unsealed criminal history records available in response to
authorized noncriminal justice requests. All noncriminal
justice access to the system is through the FBI and the
State repositories and is based upon fingerprint
identification of record subjects to ensure positive
identification. Release and use of information obtained
through the system for noncriminal justice purposes is
governed by the laws of the receiving States, and the
receiving repositories are required to screen record
responses and delete any information that cannot legally be
released within the State. The compact established a Compact
Council, comprised of Federal and State officials and other
members representing user interests, to establish operating
policies for noncriminal justice uses of the III system.

Section 2: Classification category definitions

The following are definitions of the 29 subject-matter
categories into which State laws and regulations have been
classified in this Compendium, as illustrated in both the
individual classification category tables in section 3 and
the summary State tables in section 4.

1. State regulatory authority. A grant of power to a State
agency to promulgate statewide security and privacy
regulations for criminal justice information systems.

2. Privacy and security council. A State board, committee,
commission, or council whose primary statutory function is
monitoring, evaluating, or supervising the confidentiality
and security of criminal justice information.

3. Dissemination regulations. Restrictions on dissemination
of criminal history information.

4. Inspection. The right of an individual to examine his or
her criminal history record.

5. Right to challenge. The right to an administrative
proceeding in which an individual may contest the accuracy 
or completeness of his or her criminal history record.

6. Judicial review of challenged information. The right of
an individual to appeal to a State court an adverse agency
decision concerning challenged information.

7. Purging nonconviction information. The destruction or
return to the individual of criminal justice information
where no conviction has resulted from the event triggering
the collection of the information.

8. Purging conviction information. The destruction or return
to an individual of criminal history information indicating
a conviction.

9. Sealing nonconviction information. The removal of
criminal history information from active files where no
conviction has resulted from the event triggering the
collection of the information.

10. Sealing conviction information. The removal from active
files of individual criminal history information indicating
a conviction.

11. Removal of disqualifications. The restoration of rights
and privileges, such as public employment, to persons who
have had criminal history records purged or sealed.
12. Right to state nonexistence of record. The right to
indicate in response to public or private inquiries the
absence of criminal history in cases of arrest not leading
to conviction or where an arrest or conviction record has
been purged.

13. Research access. The provision for and regulation of
access to criminal justice information by outside
researchers.

14. Accuracy and completeness. A requirement that agencies
institute procedures to ensure reasonably complete and
accurate criminal history information, including the setting
of deadlines for the reporting of prosecutorial and court
dispositions.

15. Dedication. The requirement that computer configurations
be assigned exclusively to the criminal justice function.

16. Civil remedies. Statutory actions for damages or other
relief resulting from violations of privacy and security
laws.

17. Criminal penalties. Criminal sanctions for violations of
privacy and security laws.

18. Public records. Requirements that official records
maintained by public officials be open to the public.

19. Separation of files. Requirements that criminal history
information be stored separate from investigative and
intelligence information.

20. Regulation of intelligence collection. Restrictions on
the kind of intelligence information that may be collected
and retained and/or prohibition on its storage in
computerized systems.

21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination. Restrictions
on dissemination of intelligence information.

22. Security. Requirements that criminal justice agencies
institute procedures to protect their information systems
from unauthorized disclosure, sabotage, and accidents.

23. Transaction logs. Records that must be maintained by 
criminal justice agencies indicating when and to whom
criminal justice information is disseminated.

24. Training employees. Security and privacy instruction
that must be provided to employees handling criminal justice
information.

25. Listing of information systems. A mandatory disclosure
of the existence of all criminal justice information systems
describing the information contained in such systems.

26. Freedom of Information Act (including criminal justice
information). Provisions for public access to government
records that apply to criminal justice records.

27. Freedom of Information Act (excluding criminal justice
information). Provisions for public access to government
records from which criminal justice records are specifically
excluded.

28. Central State repository. Establishment of a bureau,
agency, or other entity to collect and maintain criminal
history records or criminal identification data for all
criminal justice agencies in the State.

29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted.
Enactment of the National Crime Prevention and Privacy
Compact, which authorizes the State repository to provide
record responses for all authorized III purposes.

Section 3: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by
classification category


A. Survey comparison of changes in State statutes and
regulations by classification category

The table on the following page, "Survey comparison of
changes in State statutes and regulations by classification
category," graphically depicts comparative results of
legislative survey findings for the years 1974, 1978, 1979,
1981, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994, 1997, and 1999, which
track changes in State security and privacy statutes and
regulations by classification category. The reader should
note, however, that each survey year is included in the
results of the succeeding survey, with the cumulative sum of
the legislative activity reflected in the current survey
year.

The table shows that the leveling trend detected in the 1984
survey has continued. Surveys through 1981 showed
significant increases in the number of States enacting new
laws or regulations in most categories. More recent surveys
show that legislative activity defining the criminal record
dissemination philosophies and practices of particular
States has slowed. This probably reflects two developments:

1. Most of the States have now settled on the basic approach
they favor concerning the regulation of the maintenance and
use of criminal records, and recent legislation has dealt
with refinements in existing laws rather than enactment of
new initiatives. (State legislatures have been busy in
recent years, however, dramatically expanding the number of
noncriminal justice agencies and private sector entities
that are authorized to access criminal history records for
licensing purposes and to determine employment suitability.)

2. The basic principles of security and privacy reflected in
the DOJ regulations have become widely recognized and
understood by criminal justice officials, and procedures to
prevent abuses have been established and enforced. Security
and privacy issues and concerns are not as prevalent as they
were in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the States were
beginning to wrestle with the problem of compliance with the
regulations. 

As a result, the survey comparison table shows that, in many
categories, the numbers for 1999 are the same or only
slightly higher as those for 1984 through 1997. In most of
the others, the numbers reflect new enactments by only one
or two States.


Survey comparison of changes in

State statutes and regulations by classification category*


Category                               '74  '78  '79  '81  '84  '87  '89  '92  '94  '97  '99+
1. State regulatory authority            7    38   42   46   48   48   48   48   48   48   50
2. Privacy and security council          2    10   13   22   27   26   25   23   23   23   22
3. Dissemination regulations             24   40   44   51   52   52   52   52   52   52   53
4. Inspection                            12   40   43   42   53   53   52   52   51   51   51
5. Right to challenge                    10   30   36   36   41   42   42   45   45   45   44
6. Judicial review of
      challenged information             10   20   22   17   20   21   22   24   24   24   23
7. Purging nonconviction information     20   23   28   35   38   38   38   39   39   40   42
8. Purging conviction information        7    13   19   24   26   27   27   27   27   26   27
9. Sealing nonconviction information     8    15   16   20   21   23   26   26   29   31   33
10. Sealing conviction information       7    20   21   22   25   25   26   27   29   30   30
11. Removal of disqualifications         6    22   22   27   27   24   24   24   24   23   22
12. Right to state nonexistence
      of record                          6    13   17   22   24   25   26   28   31   33   32
13. Research access                      6    12   14   21   27   28   29   29   32   33   36
14. Accuracy and completeness            14   41   45   49   51   51   51   52   52   52   52
15. Dedication                           2    3    3    2    2    2    2    2    1    1    1
16. Civil remedies                       6    22   25   33   36   37   38   36   36   36   35
17. Criminal penalties                   18   35   39   39   43   44   45   45   44   44   46
18. Public records                       9    43   42   53   53   53   53   52   52   52   53
19. Separation of files                  5    10   10   6    7    10   10   11   13   1    12
20. Regulation of intelligence
       collection                        3    10   10   12   16   18   20   20   21   21   21
21. Regulation of
       intelligence dissemination        7    24   25   18   25   23   23   24   25   26   30
22. Security                             12   26   31   32   38   40   40   40   42   43   42
23. Transaction logs                     6    11   27   28   30   34   35   33   35   35   35
24. Training employees                   4    18   23   15   22   24   26   25   27   27   27
25. Listing of information systems       1    8    8    7    6    7    7    8    8    8     5
26. FOIA (including CJI)                 **   **   18   27   28   29   30   29   26   25   23
27. FOIA (excluding CJI)                 **   **   19   22   23   23   26   28   30   29   29
28. Central State repository             **   **   **   51   52   52   52   52   52   52   52
29. National Crime Prevention and
Privacy Compact enacted***                                                                  6


*The figures presented are cumulative and may include statutes
or regulations previously enacted but excluded from prior
surveys.

**Data are unavailable for these years.

***The Compact was signed into law October 1998, and became
effective April 1999 after its ratification by two States.

+In some cases, where the total number has decreased, laws have
been repealed.


B. Summary of State statutes and regulations by classification
category

The other 29 tables in this section - titled "Summary of State
statutes and regulations by classification category" - contain
detailed matrixes summarizing State statutes and regulations
through July 1999. For easy reference, the table for each
particular classification category is organized alphabetically
by State, and the matrix references are keyed to section numbers
of the State codes.

These summary tables, and all other tables in this Compendium,
reflect the laws of 53 jurisdictions: the 50 States and the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. The
citations are to official compilations of State laws and
regulations. Only title and section numbers are set out in these
summary tables. For the full titles of the compilations to which
the citations refer, please refer to the "State Code Titles"
table in section 4, page 53.

Summary of State statutes and regulations
by classification category


1. State regulatory authority


AL   41-9-591, 594
AK   12.62.110(5), .120(a)
AZ   41-750, 2405
AR   12-12-201, 207, 211, 1003
CA   Pen. Code 11077
CO   24-33.5-401; 24-72-301
CT   54-142j
DE   11-8501, 8601, 8605
DC
FL   943.05
GA   35-3-31, 32, 33
HI   846-2.5
ID   19-5203; 67-3003
IL   20-3930/4, 7
IN   5-2-5-10; 10-1-2.5-1
IA   232.45, .148; 690.1; 692.10
KS   22-4704
KY   17.147, .150(6)
LA   15:579
ME   25-1541(4)
MD   27-746
MA   6-168
MI   28.155; 28.241 et seq.
MN   299C.01, .03
MS   45-27-7(1)(a)
MO   43.509, 515
MT   44-2-201; 44-5-105
NE   29-3516
NV   179A.080
NH   106-B:14
NJ   53:1-12
NM   29-3-1; 32A-15-4
NY   Exec. Law 837, Subd. 8; Corr. Law 29(2); Pub. Off. Law 89(1)(b)
NC   114-10.1, .5, 12, 19; 132-1.4
ND   12-60-07; Admin. Code 10-13-02-01
OH   109.57
OK   47-2-124; 74-150.4, Subd. 4.; 74-150.7, Subd. 2.; 74-150.7d
OR   181.066, .511, .521, .540, .555, .560, .575; 181.730(3); Reg. Ch. 257, Div. 10
PA   18-9152, 9161
PR   4-531
RI
SC   23-3-130
SD   23-5-5, 6; Reg. 2:02:01, 05
TN   38-6-101; 38-10-101 through 105
TX   Gov't Code 411.042
UT   53-10-201
VT   20-2051
VI   3-258
VA   9-170, 188
WA   10.97.090
WV   15-2-25
WI
WY   7-19-105; 9-1-623


2. Privacy and security council


AL   41-9-594
AK   12.62.100
AZ   41-2405(11)(i)
AR   12-12-201, 202, 203
CA
CO
CT
DE   11-8603
DC
FL   943.06, .08; Reg. 11C-5
GA   35-3-32
HI
ID
IL   20-3930/2, 7
IN   5-2-5-11
IA
KS
KY
LA   15:578
ME
MD   27-744
MA
MI   Regs. Sec. 28.5107
MN
MS   45-27-7(1)(f)
MO   43.515, 518
MT
NE   29-3505
NV   179A.080
NH   Reg. 7.C, D
NJ
NM
NY   Pub. Off. Law 89, Subd. (2)(a)
NC
ND
OH
OK   74-150.4
OR   181.540, .715; Regs. Sec. 257-10
PA
PR   4-531g
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA   9-170
WA
WV
WI
WY


3. Dissemination regulations


AL   26-1-4; 32-2-60, 61, 62; 41-9-621, 621(6), 639, 642; Reg. 003
AK   12.62.160, .160(a) except as authorized, .160(b)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8),(9), (10)
AZ   4-202.E; 8-105, 105.D, .Q; 15-512, 534; 20-142.E, 323.B; 28-414.E; 32-1524.A,2108.01; 36-883.02;
     41-1606.02, 1750.G, 1750.G.1, 1750.G.2, 1954, 1964, 2204.6; R13-1-01, 06.4
AR   6-17-410, 414; 9-13-105; 9-28-409; 12-12-211, 1008, 1009, 1010, 1011; 17-1-103;17-19-203;
     20-33-203; 20-78-602
CA   Pen. Code. 291, 291.1, .5, 11076, 11077, 11105, 11105.02, 11105.03, .2, .3, .4,13203, 13300;
     Lab. Code 432.7, .7(f)(1); Step Foundation, Inc. v. Younger (App 1979);157 Cal. Rptr. 117
CO   24-72-305, 305.3, .4, .5
CT   29-16; 54-142k, 142n
DE   3-10128(b); 11-1448A, 8511, 8513, 8514, 8516, 8561, 8571; 13-2205(a)(3)(e);16-1141; 24-904, 1329;
     29-4805(a)(16), (17), 4807(a); 31-309(d)(1), (2); 31-613(c);33-2205(a)(3)(c)
DC   1-1521 et seq.;  4-133.1; 16-5003; 23-1303(a); 1 DCMR 1004.1, .4, .5
FL   119.07; 397.451; 744.3135; 790.065; 943.053, .0535, .0542, .0575, .0585, .059;Reg. 11C-6, 7
GA   35-3-33, 34, 34(b), 35, 37(d)(5); 50-18-101; Reg. 140-2-.01, .04, .04(1),.04(1)(b), .04(1)(b)(3),
     .04(1)(c), .04(1)(e), .04(1)(f), .04(1)(g), .04(2), .04(2)(b)
HI   261-17; 333F-22; 346-19.6, 154; 352-5.5; 353C-5; 463-5 et seq.; 514A-82; 571-34;846-9, 10, 41, 42,
     43
ID   67-3008
IL   15-310/10b.1; 20-415/8b.1; 20-1605/10.1; 20-2605/55a(22), (25), (28), (32), (34);20-2630/3, 3.1,
     5, 7; 20-2635/1 et seq.; 40-5/2-156; 40-5/14-149; 40-5/15-187;40-5/18-163; 65-5/10-2.1-6.2; 105-5/10-21.9;
	 105-5/34-18.5; 225-10/4, 4.1, 4.2;225-210/2002; 225-446/75, 80; 230-5/15, 10/5(d), 10/22, 15(3);
	 230-10/22; 235-5/4-7;625-5/6-106.1, 411; 625-5/189-200; 705-405/1.7, 5-905
IN   4-30-6-3; 4-32-13-4; 5-2-5-4, 5, 5.1; 10-1-1-21; 12-17.4-4-3, 5-3; 16-27-2-4;16-28-13-4; 20-5-2-7;
     20-6.1-3-7.1; 25-36.5-1-18; 34-28-2-3
IA   216A.136; 232.71.15; 252B.9.7(h); 692.2, .2(5), .2(b)(6), .17; 692A.13; 724.10,.17; 904.602.2(g);
     Regs. 61-2-13.2(j); 441-107.8(c), 108.8(13), 109.6(b), 110-25.8(a),110.31, 113.13, 157.3(17)(b);
	 481-57.12(3)(a), 58.11(3)(a), 59.13(1)(a), 62.9(a),63.11(3)(a), 64.34(1), 65.9(a); 571-15.9(3)(f),
	 .10(3)(f); 657-6.2(4)(b); 661-4.4(5),8.104(d), 11.12 
IA   216A.136; 232.71.15; 252B.9.7(h); 692.2, .2(5), .2(b)(6), .17; 692A.13; 724.10,.17; 904.602.2(g);
     Regs. 61-2-13.2(j); 441-107.8(c), 108.8(13), 109.6(b), 110-25.8(a),110.31, 113.13, 157.3(17)(b);
	 481-57.12(3)(a), 58.11(3)(a), 59.13(1)(a), 62.9(a),63.11(3)(a), 64.34(1), 65.9(a); 571-15.9(3)(f),
	 .10(3)(f); 657-6.2(4)(b); 661-4.4(5),8.104(d), 11.12 
KS   22-4704, 4707(b); Reg. 10-11-2, 10-12-1, 10-12-2; 16-5-1(e)(2)(B); 17-20-1(c)
KY   17.150, .160, .165, .167; Reg. 500 KAR 2:020; 502 KAR 30:060; 503 KAR 1:140
LA   15:546, 547, 548, 576, 584, 587, 587.1, 587.2, 825.3; 17:15; 26:800; 36:454, 654;37:760, 918,
     1270, 1395.1, 3505; 40:61.1, 1235.2, 1236.2, 1300.52, 1379.3(k); 44:3;46:51.2, 282, 286.1;
	 Reg. LAC 22-507, 1303, 1305
ME   5-5301; 16-612(3), 612(3)(A), (B), 612(A), 613(1), 613(2), 615, 617; 20A-6101,13011, 22-3480,
     4021
MD   10-102, 103, 104; 11-506.1; 12-204, 207; 19-907; 20-305; 27-255C(e)(4); 27-749;38A-7A; 83C-132;
     Reg. 12.15.01.10, .11, .12, .13; Reg. 12.15.02.06; Fam. Law 5-560 through 5-568
MA   6-168, 172, 172B, 172C, 172E, 178A, 178I; 128A-9A; 234A-33; Reg. 803 CMR 3.02-3.06, 4.01, 4.01(3),
     4.02, 5.00 et seq., 7.03, 7.03(1)(d)
MI   15.231 et seq.;  28.243, 244; 28.5210; 256.604; 257.248f; 380.1230, 1230a;432.221; 500.249a; 722.13;
     Regs. 432.1301; Gov. Exec. Ord. 1990-10
MN   13.82; 13.82, Subd. 15; 53A.03; 122A.18; 123B.03; 148B.21; 171.3215; 221.84;241.021; 244.052;
     299C.095, .13; 364.04(1), (2), (3); Reg. 6 S.R. 269-272; Admin. Code 7400.0200; 7406.0360;
	 7411.0610; 7414.0400; 7570.0020; 7862.0010; 7863.0010; 7864.0010;9502.0345; 9555.6125
MS   43-20-8, 57; 45-27-7(1)(d); 45-31-5, 7, 12, 13; 75-67-509
MO   43.540, .543; 84.720; 610.100, .120; 660-317; Reg. CSR 30-4.070, .370, .375
MT   44-5-214, 301, 301(1)(a), 301(1)(b), 302, 303
NE   14-702; 28-1229; 29-210, 3520, 3523; 43-107, 3201; 69-2410; 71-1903; 79-8, 112,114; 83-1217, 1217.02
NV   179A.075.4(a); 179A.100, .180 through .240; 179B.250;  202.366; 239B.010;379.0077; 391.033;
     394.465; 414.290; 424.033; 425.393; 432A.175; 449.179; 482.3163;599B.115;  632.344; 648.203; 6450.180
NH   Gen. 106-B:14, 14a; 159-C:2, 3; 189:13-a; 651-B:7; Reg. 3.A.2, 3.B, 3.B.2, 3.B.3,3.B.8
NJ   52:48-5.1; 53:1-16, 17; NJAC 5:2A-5, 15; 5:12-76; 8:43I-3.1;  9:3-54.2;10:121-4.2; 11:1-28.7,
     :5-3.3; 11:1-37.17, :5-15; 13:1E-128; 13:39-3.13, :445-9.2;13:59-1.1; 13:85-3.1; 16:79-1.1;
	 17:15A-36; 18A:6-4.14, :39-19.1; 19:8-10.1, :9-5.1;26:2H-83; 27:25-15.1; 30:4-3.5, :4C-26.8;
	 39:4-197.10; 40A:12A-22.2; 45:5A-26;45:11-24.3; 53.1-20.8, .9a, .16;
NM   6-24-12; 11-13-1; 14-2-1; 14-2A-1; 28-2-3; 29-3-2, 3; 29-6-4.2; 29-10-4, 5, 6, 7;29-17-5;
     32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22; 32A-15-3; 34-2-9; 60-2E-5, 11; 74-4-4.7, 6-5.1, 9-21
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e); Corr. Law 29, Sec. 168-1(5); CPL 160.30, .50, .50(1)(c),.50(1)(d), .55(1)(c),
     .55(1)(d), 170.56(3), 330.20; Exec. Law 837(4), 837(6), 837(8-a),837-c(c), 837-n; Arts & Cul.
	 Affairs Law Sec. 61.11; Alco. & Bev. Control Law Sec. 126; Banking Law Sec.Sec. 22(a), 22(b),
	 369, 591, 591-a, 4002(a), 4002(b), 9001-a(a),9001-a(b); Civil Ser. Law Sec. 50(4)(d);
	 Soc. Serv. Law 378-a; Reg. 9 NYCRR 6052.1,6150.4; Veh. & Traffic Sec. 509-d, 1229-d;
	 Tax Law 1605(e); Fam. Court Act Sec. 306.2;Pen. Law Sec. 400.00(4); Gen. Bus. Law Sec.Sec. 69-o,
	 72, 81, 89-e, 89-i; Ch. 264, Laws of 1993; Environ. Cons. Law Sec.Sec. 27-0913, 27-1517;
	 Gen. Muni. Law Art. 9-A, Sec.481; Insur. Law Sec.Sec. 1102(e)(2), 2108(d), 6802(g), 7802(f)(4),
	 7803; Men. Hygiene Law Sec.Sec. 7.09, 9.27, 9.37, 9.39, 9.41, 9.43, 9.45; Racing, Pari-Mutuel
	 Wag. & Breed.  Law Sec.Sec. 213, 309, 407
NC   14-415.12; 48-3-309; 85B-3.2; 110-90.2; 114-10, 10.1, 19, 19.3, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6,19.7, 19.8,
     19.9, 115C-332; 131D-10.3A; 132-1.4; Reg. 10 NCAC 34.2701, .2702, .2703,.2704; 10 NCAC 41F.0813;
	 12 NCAC 2I.0203; 12 NCAC 4F.0405, .0406; 12 NCAC 9B.0102,.0103; 12 NCAC 10B.0305; 12 NCAC 70.0201,
	 .0203, .0902, .0904; 12 NCAC 11.0201; 14A NCAC 8H.0203; 16 NCAC 6C.0313; 19A NCAC 3J.0902;
	 21 NCAC 4B.0201; Reg. NCAC 4F.0401, .0402,.0403, .0407, .0408
ND   4-41-02; 5-02-02; 12-60-16.5, 16.6; 12.1-32; 14-15-11; 15-38; 43-30-06; 50-11-02,02.4, 06.8;
     50-11.1-06.2; 50-11.3-01; 50-12-03.2; 53-06.1-06; 53-06.2-05; Admin. Code 10-13-04-01;
	 93-02-01-06; 93-02-02-13; 99-01.3-02-02
OH   109.57(A), .572, .77; 311.01; 2950.03; 3734.42;  Admin. Code 109:5-1-01;4501:2-10-03
OK   10-404.1, 7004-1.5, 7209; 21.1290.12; 51-24A.2, .8; 56-1025.2; 74-150.9, .9B, .9C
OR   181.537, .538, .539, 555(1), 555(2), 560(1)(b); 326-607; 657A.030; Reg.411-009-0015, 0021; 416-540-0060; 416-800-0060
PA   3-456.4; 5-3302; 18-9121(a), (b), 9124, 9125; 23-6344; 24-1-111; 35-7131.503;42-1904, 6342;
     53-2164; 62-432; 63-674; Reg. 4-7.343; 6-11.18; 6-15.121; 22-8.2;37-21.11; 52-30.12, 30.72;
	 55-3490.125, 2380.20, 6000.22, 6000.31, 6400.21, 6500.23;365-11.3-303, 11.8-801, 11.9-901
PR   4-531, 531c; 8-69; 8(a), (c)(1)
RI   11-37.1-12; 12-1-4; 14-1-34; 15-7-11; 16-48.1-4, .1-5; 23-19.1-10; 38-2-2
SC   13-7-610; 20-7-610, 616, 635, 1640, 3097; 23-3-130; 40-35-230; Gen. 23-3-130, 140;Reg. 73-23, 23E.
SD   13-49.14.3; 23-3-15.2, 15.3; 23-5-5, 6, 11, 12, 12.1; 23-6-9, 14; Reg. 2:02:02:03;2:02:03:06
TN   8-8-102; 10-7-504(a)(2); 33-1-209; 37-1-408; 38-6-106, 109; 39-17-1351;40-15-106(b), (c)(1);
     40-32-101(b), (c)(1); 45-6-206; 62-26-201-230; 62-35-107;71-2-403; 71-3-504(4); .09(3);
	 Regs. Sec. 1395-1-1-.09, .09(3); Op. Atty. Gen. (Feb. 28,1984)
TX   Alco. Bev. Code 109.532; Educ. Code 22.082, .083, .084, 51.215; Finance Code 14.151; Gov't Code 411.081
     through .135, 466.201, 467.036; Health & Saf. Code 250.002,765.003; Hum. Res. Code 32.0322,
	 40.054, 42.056, .105; Prob. Code 698; Civ. Stat. art. 41a-1; art. 179e, Sec. 5.04; art. 179f,
	 Sec. 3; art. 4413, Sec. 39; art 45120, Sec. 17A; TRCS Art. 6252-17a; Ops. Atty. Gen. (May 14, 1976)
	 No. 127; (Sept. 24, 1976) No. 144
UT   26-8a-310; 31A-16-103; 53-5-706; 53-10-108, 108(1), 201; 58-65-302; 62A-4a-202.4;78-30-3.5;
     Admin. Code R501-14-1
VT   10-6605f; 15A-1-113; 20-2053, 2060; 33-309; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 4.10(i), 6.30(a),(b);
     CVR 80-70-001, Rule 38 VI   32-428(b)(8)
VA   9-187; 18.2.308; 19.2-389, 389.1; 22.1-296.2; 32.1-126.01, .02; 54.1-3925.2;58.1-4008;
     63.1-173.2, 189.1, 194.13, 198.1, 199, 248.7:2; 6 VAC 20-120-50
WA   10.97.030(2), .050(1) through (6); 10.98.150; 28A.400.303 through 306; 43.33A.025;43.43.745,
     .815, .830 through .845; 43.52.525; 46.72.100; 70.74.360; 71.09.115;74.15.030(2)(b); 82.36.060;
	 82.38.110; 82.42.040
WV   15-2-24(c), (d), (e)
WI   19.35(1); 134.59; 165.82, .825, .83; 939.615(6)(c)
WY   7-19-106(a), 106(k), 201; 9-1-627; 11-25-104; 21-7-401; 33-21-122(c)(viii)


4. Inspection


AL   32-2-60, 61, 62; 41-9-621, 643
AK   12.62.160(b)(11)
AZ   41-1750.G.5; R 13-1-08
AR   12-12-211, 1013
CA   Pen. Code 11122, 11124, 13320, 13323
CO   24-72-301, 303, 306
CT   54-142k
DE   11-8513
DC   1-1522; 4-135; 1 DCMR 1004.1 et seq.
FL   943.056; Reg. 11C-8;
GA   35-3-37, 37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-12; 846-14
ID   67-3007
IL   20-2630/7 (Redacted copy)
IN   5-2-5-8; 5-14-3-3
IA   692.5; Regs. 661-11.4, .5, .15
KS   22-4709, 4711; Reg. 10-13-2
KY   17.150; 61-874, 884; Reg. 502 KAR 30:070
LA   15:588; Reg. LAC 22-701 et seq.
ME   16-620(1)
MD   27-751; Reg. 12.15.01.05
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.02, .05, .05(5), .06
MI   15.233, .235
MN   13.03(3); 13.04, Subd. 3
MS   45-27-11
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT   44-5-214
NE   29-3520, 3525
NV   179A.150
NH   91-A:4; Reg. 3.B.9
NJ
NM   14-2-1 et seq.; 14-2A-1; 29-10-6, 8; 32A-2-26, 32; 32A-3B-22
NY   CPL 160.50(1)(d), .55(1)(d); Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.1
NC   Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND   12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules; Admin. Code 10-13-07-01
OH
OK   51-24A.5
OR   181.540(1)(b)
PA   18-9151, 9152; Reg. 37-195.4
PR   4-531c; Reg. 9(a)
RI   38-2-3
SC   Reg. 73-25
SD   1-11-13; 23-5-12, 13; 23-6-9, 11, 14; Reg. 2:02:03:01, 06
TN   10-7-506, 507; 40-15-106; 40-32-101; 40-35-313; Regs. 1395-1-1-.08(1)(k)
TX   Gov't Code Sec. 552.023, .230; Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT   53-10-108(8); Admin. Code 722-2-3
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.10, 8.20
VI   3-881(b)
VA   9-192, 193; 19.2-389; 6 VAC 20-120-50, 60
WA   10.97.080; 43.43.730; Reg. WAC 446-20-090
WV   29B-1-3
WI   19.35(1)
WY   7-19-109


5. Right to challenge


AL   41-9-645
AK   12.62.170(b)
AZ   R 13-1-08.D
AR   12-12-211, 1013
CA   Pen. Code 11126, 13324
CO   24-72-307
CT   54-142l
DE   11-1448A,  8506(e), 8560
DC
FL   943.056; Reg. 11C-8
GA   35-3-37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-24; 846-14
ID   67-3007
IL   20-2630/7; 20-3930/7(h)
IN   5-2-5-8(b), 10(b)
IA   692.5; Regs. 661-11.4
KS   22-4709, 4711
KY   Reg. 502 KAR 30:070
LA   15:588; Reg. LAC 22-903
ME   16-620(2), (3)
MD   19-908; 20-306; 27-752; Reg. 12.15.01.05, .06, .07
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07, 6.08
MI
MN   13.04, Subd. 4
MS   45-27-11
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT   44-5-215
NE   29-3525, 3526
NV   179A.150
NH   Reg. 7
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(b)
NM   29-10-8
NY   Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.2
NC   Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND   12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK
OR   181.540(1)(b)
PA   18-9151, 9152; Reg. 37-195.5
PR   4-531n; Reg. 9(b)
RI
SC   Reg. 73-25
SD   Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN
TX   Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT   53-10-108(8)(b)(i); Admin. Code R722-2-5
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.30
VI
VA   9-192; 6 VAC 20-120-70
WA   10.97.080; 43.43.730; Reg. WAC 446-20-120
WV
WI
WY   7-19-109


6. Judicial review of challenged information


AL   41-9-645
AK   12.62.170(c)
AZ
AR
CA   Pen. Code 11126
CO   24-72-307
CT
DE   11-1448A
DC
FL
GA   35-3-37(c); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-25
ID
IL
IN
IA   692.5; Regs. 661.11.6
KS
KY   17.150(5); Reg. 502 KAR 30:070, Sec. (6)
LA   Reg. LAC 22-917
ME   16-620(4)
MD   27-753(c); Reg. 12.15.01.05, .07
MA   6-176
MI
MN   13.04, Subd. 4; 14-63 et seq.
MS   45-27-11
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM   29-10-8
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR   Reg. 257-010-0035(5)
PA   18-9152(e)
PR   4-531o
RI
SC
SD   Reg. 2:02:05:01
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA   9-192
WA   43.43.730
WV
WI
WY   7-19-109


7. Purging nonconviction information


AL   41-9-625
AK   12.62.190
AZ
AR
CA   Pen. Code 851.8; H. & S. Code 11361.5
CO
CT   54-142a
DE   11-8506(c)
DC
FL   943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA   35-3-37(c)
HI   831-3.2; 853-1(e)
ID   67-3004
IL   20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/5; 705-405/5-915
IN   35-38-5-1
IA   661-8.305.1; 692.16, .17
KS
KY
LA   15:586; 44:9
ME
MD   27-736, 737
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI   28.243
MN   152.18; 299C.11; 609A.03
MS   45-27-9(2), (4)
MO   610.123, 124, 125, 126
MT   44-5-202(8), 212
NE   29-3523
NV   179A.075.3c; 179A.160
NH   Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21; 32A-20-1
NY   CPL 160.50; Family Court Act Sec. 354.1
NC   15A-146; 90-96(b), (d); Reg. NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND   Admin. Code 10-13-11-02
OH   109.60; 2951.04.1
OK   22-18, 19, 305.4, 991cv1, cv2
OR   137.225
PA   18-9122
PR
RI   12-1-12, 12.1
SC   17-1-40; Reg. 73-27
SD   23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN   40-15-106; 40-32-101
TX   Code Crim. Proc. Art. 55.01
UT   53-10-108; 77-18-10(1)
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA   9-190
WA   10.97.060
WV   15-2-24(h)
WI   165.84(1)
WY


8. Purging conviction information


AL
AK   12.62.190
AZ
AR
CA   Pen. Code 1203.45; H. & S. Code 11361.5
CO
CT   54-142a
DE   11-8506(c)
DC
FL   943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA   35-3-37(c)
HI
ID
IL   705-405/5-915 (juvenile only, class B and below)
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI
MN   152.18; 364.04; 609A.03
MS   45-27-9(10), 11
MO
MT   44-5-202(8), 212
NE
NV   179A.160
NH   Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM
NY   CPL 160.55; Family Court Act Sec. 354.1
NC   15A-145; 90-96; Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND   Admin. Code 10-13-11-01
OH
OK   22-991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225
PA   18-9122
PR   4-531g
RI   12-1.3-1
SC   22-5-910; 56-5-750(F); Reg. 73-27
SD   23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN
TX
UT   77-18-11
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA
WA   9.94A.230; 10.97.060
WV
WI
WY   7-13-301; 14-6-241; 35-7-1037


9. Sealing nonconviction information


AL
AK   12.62.180(b)
AZ   13-4051
AR   16-90-904, 905
CA   Pen. Code 851.8, .85
CO   24-72-308
CT   29-16; 54-142a
DE   11-4372
DC   SCR-Crim. 118
FL   943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA   42-8-62
HI   831-3.2
ID
IL   20-2630/5; 705-405/5-915
IN   35-38-5-1
IA
KS   12-4516a; 21-4619
KY   17.142
LA   44:9
ME
MD
MA   276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI   333.7411; 750.350a(4); 762.14; 769.4a
MN   152.18; 299C.11; 609A.02(1)
MS
MO   610.100, 105, 120
MT   44-5-202(8)
NE
NV   179.255, .275
NH
NJ   2C:36A-1, :52-6
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26
NY   CPL 160.50(1)(c), 170.56, 720.15, 725.15
NC
ND
OH
OK   22-18, 19, 991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(1)(b)
PA
PR
RI   12-1-12.1
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT   77-18-10(1)
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA   9-190; 19.2-392.2; 6 VAC 20-120-80
WA   13.50.050
WV   5-1-16a
WI
WY


10. Sealing conviction information


AL
AK   12.62.180(b)
AZ   13-907
AR   16-90-904, 905
CA   Pen. Code 1203.45
CO   24-72-308
CT   54-142a, 142b
DE
DC   33-541(e); SCR-Crim. 118, Crim. 32(f)
FL   943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA
HI   712-1256; 831-3.1
ID
IL
IN   35-38-5-5
IA
KS   12.4516; 21-4619
KY
LA   44:9
ME
MD
MA   94C-34; 127-152; 276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI   712A.18e; 780.623
MN   242.31; 364.04; 609A.02(2); 638.02, Subd. 3-5
MS
MO   610.106, 120
MT   46-18-204
NE
NV   179.245, .275; 453.336
NH   318-B:28-a; 651:5
NJ   2C:52-2, 3, 4, 5
NM
NY   CPL 160.55(1)(c), 720.15
NC
ND
OH   2953.32
OK   22-18, 19, 991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(1)(a)
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-1, 2
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17
TN
TX
UT   77-18-11
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA
WA   13.50.050
WV   5-1-16a
WI
WY


11. Removal of disqualifications


AL
AK
AZ   13-907
AR
CA   Pen. Code 851.8; 1203.4, .4a, .45
CO   24-72-308
CT
DE
DC
FL   943.0585
GA   42-9-1 et seq.
HI   712-1255; 853-1
ID   18-3316
IL
IN
IA
KS   12-4516(e); 21-4619; 22-3722
KY
LA   44:9
ME
MD   27-641; 27-735 through 741
MA   276-100A, C
MI
MN   152.18; 242.31; 364.03
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH   651:5
NJ   2C:52-27
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY   CPL 160.60; 720.35(1)
NC
ND
OH   2951.04.1; 2953.33(A)
OK   22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR   137.225
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-4
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17
TN   40-35-313(b)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY


12. Right to state nonexistence of record


AL
AK   12.62.180(d)
AZ
AR   16-90-902
CA   Pen. Code 851.8, 1203.45; Lab. Code 432.7
CO   24-72-308
CT   54-142a
DE
DC   33.541(e)
FL   943.0585
GA
HI   712-1256; 831-3.2(b)(e)
ID
IL   20-2630/7
IN
IA
KS   12-4516(e); 12-4516a(d)
KY
LA
ME   16-618
MD   27-641, 739, 740
MA   94C-34; 127-152; 151B-4(9); 276-100A, C
MI   37.2205a
MS
MN   152.18, Subd. 2
MO   610.110
MT
NE
NV   179.285
NH   651:5
NJ   2C:52-27
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY   CPL 160.30, .60, 170.56(4)
NC   15A-145, 146; 90-96
ND
OH   2953.33(B)
OK   22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(3)
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-4
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17 (Exceptions: 23A-27-14.1, 23-3-42)
TN   40-35-313(b)
TX   Code Crim. Proc. Art. 55.03
UT
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.20
VI
VA   19.2-392.4
WA   10.97.030(8)
WV
WI
WY


13. Research access


AL   Reg. 003
AK   12.62.160(b)(7)
AZ
AR   12-12-1010
CA   Pen. Code 13202
CO
CT   54-142m
DE   11-8513, 8514, 8516, 8521
DC
FL   943.057; Reg. 11C-6
GA   33-3-33(8); Reg. 140-2-.04(1)(f)
HI   846-9(4)
ID
IL
IN
IA   692.4, .7(1), .22
KS
KY   17.150
LA   15-548; Reg. LAC 22-1305
ME   16-613(4)
MD   27-749; Reg. 12.15.01.12
MA   6-173; Reg. 803 CMR 7.03(1)(b), 8.00-8.03
MI
MN   13.03
MS
MO   43.507; 45.531
MT   44-5-304
NE
NV   179A.075.2a, .6; 179A.100.5a, .175
NH   Reg. 3.B.7
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(e)
NM   29-10-6(B)
NY   Exec. Law Sec. 837(4)
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0407, .0408
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-10-01; 10-13-11-03
OH
OK
OR   Reg. 257-010-0030
PA
PR   Reg. 8(c)(3)
RI
SC   Reg. 73-24D.
SD   23A-27-13.1, 16
TN
TX   Gov't Code 411.083
UT   53-10-108(1)(f)
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.90
VI
VA   19.2-389
WA   10.97.050(6); Reg. WAC 446-20-190, 420
WV
WI   19.35(1)
WY   7-19-106(a)(v)


14. Accuracy and completeness


AL   41-9-622, 648
AK   12.62.120, .150(a)(1), (a)(7), (b), (c), .170(a)
AZ   41-1751, 2205.A, .B; R 13-1-02, 04, 08E.-G
AR   12-12-209, 210, 1004, 1007, 1013, 1015
CA   Pen. Code 11079, 11107, 11115, 13100, 13100.1, 13125, 13127, 13150, 13151, 13152;Reg. 702(c), 707(c) ; Gov. Code 69844.5, 71280.5
CO   24-33.5-412(3); 24-72-307
CT   29-11, 12, 13; 54-142h(a), (b), (c); 54-142j
DE   11-8506, 8506(f), 8507, 8508, 8509, 8510, 8511, 8512, 8525
DC   4-131, 132, 134
FL   943.052, .055, .056; Reg. 11C-4
GA   17-4-27; 35-3-33(4), 36, 36(k), 37(c), (d)(5); 42-8-62; Reg. 140-2-.03, .07; 1975 Atty. Gen. Op. No. 75-110
HI   846-3, 4, 5, 6, 13
ID   67-3005, 3007
IL   20-2630/2.1; 20-2635/21; 20-3930/7(i); 705-405/5-901
IN   4-1-6-2, 5; 5-2-5-3; 5-2-5-10, 10(a)(l); 10-1-1-15, 18; 10-1-2.5-4 
IA   690.4, .5; 692.5, .13, .15, .17, .19(6), .21; Regs. 661-11.9, .10
KS   21-2501; 22-4705(a), 4706(f); Reg. 10-10-1, 2, 3, 4
KY   17.110, .150(1), .150(1)(c), .150(6), .152, .1521, .1522; Reg. 502 KAR 30:030
LA   15:579, 580, 581, 591, 594; Reg. LAC 22-1103, 1105, 1503, 1507, 1509, 1519
ME   25-1542A, 1544, 1547; 16-612(3)(B), 616
MD   27-746(5), 747, 748, 748(6); Court Rule 16-308, 503; Reg. 12.15.01.08, .09, .16
MA   6-171, 175; 66A-2; 127-23, 27; 263-1A; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07, 6.08, 6.10
MI   28.155, .243, .245a; 712A.11, .18; 764.29; 769.1, .16a; Regs. Sec. 28.5018
MN   13.05; 299C.06, .10 through .14, .17; 299C.09, .10, .10(2), .10(3)
MS   45-27-7(2)(c), 9
MO   43.50; Reg. CSR 30-4.040, .050, .090
MT   44-2-206; 44-5-202, 213, 213(5), 213(6), 215
NE   29-209, 3515, 3516, 3517, 3526
NV   179A.075.3, .080.3, .090, .150
NH   106-B:14, 14a; Reg. 4, 5
NJ   53:1-13, 14, 15, 18, 20.1, 20.2
NM   29-3-1, 3, 8
NY   CPL 160.20, .30; Exec. Law Sec. 837(4), 837-a, b, c; Family Court Act Sec.Sec.306.1(4), 354.1 
NC   15A-502, 1382; Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0201, .0202, .0302, .0801
ND   12-60-16.2, 16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-02-01; 10-13-03-03; 10-13-07-12; 10-13-08-01,02; 10-13-12-01, 02, 03, 04, 05; 10-13-13-01
OH   109.57(A), .61, .62; 1347.05
OK   47-2-124; 74-150.10, .12
OR   181.511(1)(b), (c), .521, .530, .555(3)
PA   18-9111, 9112, 9113, 9114, 9141, 9142, 9161; 61-2173, 2174; Reg. 37-195.2
PR   Reg. 6, 7, 10
RI   12-1-7, 8, 9, 10, 11
SC   14-17-325; 20-7-780; 23-1-90; 23-3-40, 120, 130; Reg. 73-21, 22, 22E., 28
SD   23-5-4, 8; 23-6-16; Reg. 2:02:02:01, 03, 04, 05; Reg. 2:02:04:01
TN   38-6-103; 38-10-101 through 105
TX   Code of Crim. Proc., Ch. 60
UT   53-10-208
VT   20-2053(b), 2054; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 3.20, 4.10, 6.30(1), 6.30(b)(5),11.10-11.30, 11.40
VI
VA   9-186, 191; 16.1-299, 299.1, 301; 19.2-389D, 390; 6 VAC 20-120-40, 90
WA   10.97.040, .045, .090(3); 10.98.050, .090, .100; Reg. WAC 446-20-260, 310
WV   15-2-24(f), (g)
WI   165.83, .84
WY   7-19-104, 105, 107, 107(h); 9-1-625


15. Dedication


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA   35-3-33(13)
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY


16. Civil remedies


AL
AK   12.62.200
AZ   39-121.02; R 13-1-05C
AR
CA   Civ. Code 1798.53; Lab. Code 432.7
CO   24-72-305; 30-10-101
CT   4-197
DE   11-1448A, 8514, 8523; 29-10005
DC   1-1527
FL   119.02
GA   35-3-39
HI
ID
IL   20-2635/1 et seq.
IN
IA   692.2(3), .6
KS   22-4707
KY   17.157; 61.882
LA   15:596
ME   25-1550
MD   27-753; Reg. 12.15.01.10
MA   6-168, 177; Reg. 803 CMR 5.06, 6.08(4)
MI
MN   13.08; 299C.21
MS
MO
MT   44-2-205; 44-5-112
NE   29-3528; 84-712.03, .07
NV   179A.230
NH
NJ   47:1A-4; 53:1-20
NM   14-2-12
NY   Exec. Law 837-b(3); Corr. Law 755
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4G.0201
ND
OH   1347.10
OK
OR   192.490
PA   18-9181, 9183
PR
RI   12-1-12; 12-1.3-4
SC   23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD   Reg. 2:02:04:03
TN
TX
UT
VT   1-319, 320; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 7.50, 13.10-13.22
VI
VA   2.1-346.1; 9-194
WA   10.97.050(8), .110; 42.17.390; 43.43.834(7); Reg. WAC 446-20-300
WV
WI   19.37
WY


17. Criminal penalties


AL   32-2-63; 41-9-600
AK
AZ   41-1756
AR   12-12-212, 1002
CA   Pen. Code 502, 11125, 11141, 11142, 11143, 13302, 13303, 13304; Lab. Code 432.7;
Gov. Code 6200, 6201
CO   24-72-309
CT   29-17; 54-142k(e)
DE   11-1448A, 8514, 8523, 8562
DC   16-5007
FL   119.02, .10
GA   35-3-38
HI   846-16
ID   67-3008
IL   20-2630/7; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN   5-2-4-7; 5-2-5-5(c)
IA   692.5, .7
KS   22-4707, 4710
KY   17.157
LA   15:596; 44:9D; Reg. 22-311, 313
ME   16-619
MD   27-739; State Gov't Code Sec. 10-627
MA   6-178
MI   28.243a, .246
MN   13.09; 364.10
MS   25-53-59; 45-27-13
MO   109.180; 610.115
MT
NE   29-3527
NV   179A.240, .300; 239.010
NH   106-B:14; 159-C:10; 651:5.X
NJ   2C:52-30; 53:1-20
NM   32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22
NY
NC   14-454
ND   12-60-16.10
OH   1347.99; 2953.35
OK   21-461
OR
PA   18-6111; 61-2176
PR   8-77
RI
SC   23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD   23-5-4; 23-6-4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16
TN   10-7-505; 37-1-409(b), (c); 40-15-106(c); 40-32-101(c); 62-26-230
TX   Gov't Code 411.085; 552.351, .352
UT   53-10-108
VT   20-2054(b)
VI
VA   9-195; 19.2-392.3.C, 392.4C; 52-8.3
WA   10.97.120; 43.43.810, .856
WV   15-2-24(j); 29B-1-5
WI   946.72(1)
WY


18. Public records


AL   36-12-40
AK   09.25.110, .120
AZ   39-121.01
AR   25-19-103
CA   Gov. Code 6251 et seq.
CO   24-72-301, 303; 30-10-101
CT   1-15, 19
DE   29-10002(d)(4)
DC   1-1521 et seq.
FL   119.01
GA   50-18-70 et seq.
HI   92F-12
ID   9-335 et seq.
IL   5-160/1 et seq.; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN   4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-1
IA   22.7(9); 692.2; Regs. 661-11.12
KS   45-215 et seq.
KY   61.870 et seq.; Reg. 200 KAR 1:020
LA   44:1 et seq.
ME   1-401-410
MD   State Gov't Code Sec.Sec. 10-611 et seq.
MA   4-7, cl. 26; 6-172; 66-10; 66A-1 et seq.
MI   750.492
MN   13.01 et seq.; 13.87
MS   25-53-53; 25-59-19
MO   109.180, .190
MT   2-6-101
NE   29-3520; 84-712 et seq.
NV   179A.100; 239.010 et seq.
NH   7-A:1; 91-A:4
NJ   47:1A-1
NM   14-3-1 et seq.
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87 et seq.
NC   132-1 et seq.
ND   44-04-18
OH   149.43 et seq.
OK   51-24A
OR   181.540
PA   65-66.1 et seq.
PR   32-1781
RI   38-2-1 et seq.
SC   30-4-10 et seq.
SD   1-27-1 et seq.
TN   10-7-504 et seq.
TX   Gov't Code 552.001 et seq.
UT   63-2-101 et seq.
VT   1-315 et seq.
VI   3-881
VA   42.1-76 et seq.
WA   10.97.030; 42.17.250
WV   29B-1-1
WI   19.35(1)
WY   16-4-201 through 205


19. Separation of files


AL
AK
AZ
AR   16-90-904
CA   Pen. Code 11075, 11105
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA   35-3-32; Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
ID
IL
IN   5-2-4-2
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI   15.232; 28.272
MN
MS
MO   610.120
MT
NV   62.350.3
NH
NJ
NM   32A-20-1
NY   Family Court Act Sec.306.1(4); Exec. Law Sec.837(8)
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA   18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN   37-10-207; Regs. Sec. 1395-1-1-.09(4)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI   48.396
WY


20. Regulation of intelligence collection


AK
AL   41-9-639
AR   12-12-1011
AZ
CA   Civ. Code 1798.14, .15
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL   943.08
GA   35-3-32(2); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
IA   692.8, .9; Regs. 661-8.202(5), (6); 661-8.203(4), (5)
ID
IL
IN   5-2-4-3, 4
KS
KY   17.150(2)
LA
ME
MA
MD
MI
MN   13.05, Subd. 4
MO
MS   25-53-53, 55
MT   44-5-501 through 515
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ   53:6-4, 5
NM   29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-20-1
NV   179A.070.2
NY
OH
OK
OR   181.575
PA   18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD   23-5-10, 11
TN
TX
UT   53-10-105
VA
VI
VT   20-1954
WA   43.43.854
WI
WV
WY   9-1-627


21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination


AL   41-9-641
AK
AZ
AR   12-12-1011
CA   Civ. Code 1798.18, .24
CO   24-72-305(5)
CT
DE   29-10002(d)(5)
DC   1-1524(a)(3)(d)
FL   119.07, .072; 943.08
GA   35-3-32(4); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI   92E-3(1)(B)
ID
IL   5-140/7(1)(d)
IN   5-2-4-6
IA   216A.136; 252B.9.7(h); 692.8, .8A, .9; Regs. 61-2.13.2(j); 661-8.202(7), .203(6)
KS
KY
LA
ME   16-611(8), 614
MD   10-618(f)
MA
MI   15.243
MN   13.05, Subd. 4
MS   25-53-53, 55; 45-31-5(5)(a)
MO   45.531; 610.100
MT   44-5-103(3)(b), 303, 404(2), 501 through 515
NE   
NV   179A.120.2, .150.1
NH   
NJ   53:6-5
NM   29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-15-4
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC   
ND   
OH   
OK   
OR   
PA   18-9106, 9121(d); Reg. 37-195.1
PR   
RI   
SC   
SD   23-5-11
TN   10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX   
UT   53-10-105
VT   20-1955
VI   
VA   
WA   42.17.310; 43.43.854, .856
WV   
WI   
WY   9-1-627


22. Security


AL   41-9-594, 621(9); Reg. 004, 005
AK   12.62.150(a)(3), (4), (5), (6)
AZ   13-2316
AR   12-12-1014
CA   Pen. Code 11077(a); Reg. 707, 707(a), 708
CO
CT   54-142i
DE   11-8505, 8521, 8608, 8609
DC
FL   119.031; 943.08; Reg. 11C-6
GA   16-9-90 et seq.; 35-3-33(13); Reg. 140-2-.02, .08, .09, .11
HI   846-7
ID   67-3007
IL   20-3930/7(g)
IN   4-1-6-2; 5-2-5-10(2); 5-14-3-7
IA   692.12, .14, .19(8); Reg. 661-8204
KS   22-4704; Reg. 10-11-1
KY
LA   15:578(F), 589; Reg. LAC 22-1705, 1707, 1709, 1711, 1713, 1715, 1717, 1719, 1721,1723, 1727
ME   16.614(1)(G); 25-1541(4), 2904
MD   Reg. 12.15.01.15
MA   6-171, 174; 66A-2; Reg. 803 CMR 7.06
MI   Regs. Sec. 28.5009, .5318
MN   13.05, Subd. 5; 299C.48(a)
MS   45-27-7(1)(f)
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.090
MT   44-5-401 through 405
NE   29-3518, 3519
NV   179A.080.1, .2
NH   Reg. 1, 2
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(E); S.O.P. B-33, B-34, B-35
NM   
NY   Exec. Law 837 (amended); Pub. Off. Law Sec. 87, 87(2)(i)
NC   114-10(2); Reg. 12 NCAC 4E.0203, .0303, .0401, 4F.0101, 4G.0102
ND   12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules; Admin. Code 10-13-06-01, 02, 03
OH   1347.05; Admin. Code 4501:2-10-03, 11
OK   51-24A.1 et seq.
OR   Reg. 257-010-0025
PA   18-9131; Gen. Reg. 37-195.6
PR   4-531g; Reg. 14, 16, 17
RI   
SC   Reg. 73-21A.(3), 73-26
SD   
TN   39-14-601 et seq.
TX   
UT   
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.70, 7.10, 7.20, 7.30, 7.40
VI   
VA   9-191; 6 VAC 20-120-110, 150, 160
WA   10.97.090; Reg. WAC 446-20-210 through 230, 270, 300
WV   
WI   
WY   7-19-105; 9-1-627


23. Transaction logs


AL   41-9-640
AK   12.62.150(a)(7)(B), .160(c)(4)
AZ
AR   12-12-1008
CA   Pen. Code 11078; Reg. 707(c)
CO
CT   54-142h(c)
DE   11-1448A, 8513(e); Reg. 1.5
DC
FL   943.055
GA   35-3-33(2); Reg. 140-2-.06
HI   846-6
ID   Id. APA 11.10.01.023
IL
IN   4-1-6-2
IA
KS   Reg. 10-14-1
KY
LA   Reg. LAC 22-1311
ME   16-620(5)
MD   Reg. 12.15.01.10, .11, .12
MA   6-172
MI   Regs. Sec. 28.5105
MN
MS   45-27-7(2)(b)
MO
MT   44-5-215, 305, 404(3)
NE   29-3517
NV   179A.130
NH   Reg. 3.C.4
NJ   
NM   
NY   
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0401, .0402
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-04-02; 10-13-05-04
OH   Admin. Code 4501:2-10-06
OK   47-2-124; 51-24A.1 et seq.
OR   Reg. 257-010-0035
PA   18-9121(f)
PR   Reg. 9(e)(f), 10
RI   
SC   Reg. 73-23F.
SD   Reg. 2:02:02:05
TN   
TX   
UT   
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.50, 14.10-14.30
VI   
VA   9-192; 6 VAC 20-120-50, 160
WA   10.97.050(7)
WV   
WI   
WY   7-19-106(h)


24. Training employees


AL
AK   12.62.150(a)(5)
AZ
AR   12-12-210, 211
CA   Pen. Code 11077(d)
CO
CT   54-142i(d)
DE   11-1448A, 8505, 8561
DC
FL   943.08
GA   35-3-33(6); Reg. 140-2-.09(4)
HI   846-7(5)
ID   67-3007
IL
IN   4-1-6-2; 10-1-1-13
IA   692.11
KS
KY   17.147(4)
LA   Reg. LAC 22-2105
ME
MD
MA   6-171
MI
MN   299C.10(2), .65
MS   25-53-51(c); 45-27-7(1)(b)
MO
MT   44-2-202
NE   29-3518
NV   
NH   
NJ   
NM   29-3-9
NY   
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4E.0401, .0402, .0403
ND   
OH   109.56; Admin. Code 4501:2-10-03
OK   
OR   Reg. 257-10
PA   
PR   
RI   
SC   Reg. 73-26D.
SD   
TN   62-26-226
TX   
UT   
VT   
VI   
VA   6 VAC 20-120-130, 140
WA   10.97.090; Reg. WAC 446-20-240
WV   
WI   
WY   9-1-624(a)(iii)


25. Listing of information systems


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN   4-1-6-7
IA   22.11
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA   Reg. 803 CMR 3.08
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE   
NV   
NH   7-A:2
NJ   
NM   
NY   
NC   
ND   
OH   
OK   
OR   
PA   18-9171
PR   
RI   
SC   
SD   
TN   
TX   
UT   
VT   
VI   
VA   
WA   
WV   
WI   
WY   


26. Freedom of Information Act 
(including criminal justice information)


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO   24-72-301, 303
CT
DE
DC   1-1521 et seq.
FL   119.01, .07; 943.053
GA   50-18-70
HI
ID
IL
IN   4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-2(6)
IA
KS   45-215 et seq.
KY   61.878
LA   44:3(4)
ME
MD
MA   66A-1
MI   15.231 et seq.
MN   13.03, .80 et seq.
MS   25-59-19
MO
MT
NE   29-3520
NV   
NH   
NJ   
NM   
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC   
ND   44-04-18
OH   
OK   51-24A.8
OR   181.540
PA   
PR   
RI   38-2-1
SC   
SD   1-27-1
TN   
TX   Gov't Code 552.108(c)
UT   
VT   1-317(b)(5)
VI   3-881(g)
VA   2.1-342.2(F)(1)
WA   
WV   
WI   
WY   


27. Freedom of Information Act 
(excluding criminal justice information)


AL
AK   12.62.160(a)
AZ   39-121.01
AR   12-12-909, 1003; 25-19-105
CA   Gov. Code 6254
CO
CT   4-190(i)
DE   29-10002(d)(4)
DC
FL   119.07
GA
HI   92F-11 through 92F-19
ID   9-340B
IL   5-140/7(1)(d)
IN
IA
KS
KY   17-150(4); 61.878
LA   44:3(4)
ME   1-402
MD   State Gov't Code Sec.Sec. 10-611 et seq.
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE   
NV   
NH   91-A:5; 106-B:14
NJ   Exec. Order 123
NM   
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC   
ND   
OH   109.57(D); 1347.04
OK   51-24A.8
OR   192.501, 502, 505
PA   
PR   
RI   38-2-1
SC   
SD   
TN   10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX   Gov't Code 552.108(a), (b)
UT   63-2-102
VT   1-317(b)(5); 20-2056
VI   
VA   2.1-342(F)(1); 2.1-384(3), (7)
WA   42.17.250; 43.43.710
WV   29B-1-4
WI   
WY   9-1-627; 16-4-201


28. Central State repository


AL   41-9-591
AK   12.62.110(1)
AZ   41-1750.A, 2205
AR   12-12-201, 207, 208, 1001
CA   Pen. Code 11105
CO   24-33.5-401, 412
CT   29-11
DE   11-8501(b)(1)
DC   4-132
FL   943.051
GA   35-3-31
HI   846-2, 2.5
ID   67-3003
IL   20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/8
IN   5-2-5-2; 10-1-1-12; 10-1-2.5-1
IA   690.1
KS   22-4705
KY   17.140, .151
LA   15:578(1)
ME   25-1541
MD   27-747(b); Reg. 12.15.01.04
MA   6-168
MI   28.241 et seq.
MN   299C.05, .06, .09
MS   45-27-7(1)(a)
MO   43.500, .540
MT   44-5-213
NE   29-209, 210
NV   179A.075.1
NH   106-B:14
NJ   53:1-13
NM   29-3-1
NY   Exec. Law 837(6)
NC   114-10.1; 132-1.4
ND   12-60-07
OH   109.57(C)
OK   74-150.9
OR   181.066
PA   18-9101
PR   Act 13; Reg. 6
RI   12-1-7
SC   23-3-110
SD   23-5-1, 2; 23-6-1
TN   38-6-101; 38-10-101 et seq.
TX   Code Crim. Proc., Art. 60.02; Gov't Code 411.042
UT   53-10-201
VT   20-2051; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 3.10
VI   
VA   19.2-388
WA   43.43.700
WV   15-2-24
WI   165.83, .84
WY   7-19-107(a)


29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO   24-33.5-412; 24-60-2701, 2702
CT   
DE
DE
FL   943.0543
GA   35-3-39.1
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA   692B.1, .2, .3
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MN
MI
MS
MO
MT   44-5-601
NE   
NV   179A.800
NH   
NJ   
NM   
NY   
NC   
ND   
OH   
OK   
OR   
PA   
PR   
RI   
SC   
SD   
TN   
TX   
UT   
VT   
VI   
VA   
WA   
WV   
WI   
WY   


Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by State


This section of the Compendium sets forth (1) A "State code
titles" table that lists the full titles of the official
compilations of each State's laws and regulations, and (2)
Summary tables of each State's criminal history record privacy
and security laws and regulations that includes (a) the full
titles for each classification category and subcategory, and (b)
the citations for that particular category or subcategory which
indicate section numbers of the State codes. These summary
tables are set out in alphabetical order by State.

The purpose of this collection is to make available to the
researcher the variety of approaches and alternatives taken by
the States with regard to their criminal history information
practices. However, please note that this effort is current
through July 1999; thus, further review of a particular State's
legislation or regulations may be appropriate to include more
recent enactments.

Readers are reminded that the full text of the State laws cited
herein is available for a small fee in microfiche form from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse. (The Clearinghouse
also offers a hard-copy version for a larger fee. See page vii
for ordering information.) A full, hard-copy library of these
laws, regulations and other materials is maintained by SEARCH,
The National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics,
at its offices in Sacramento, California. Copies of specific
enactments may be ordered by mail or telephone. (SEARCH is at
7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California 95831,
916/392-2550.)


State code titles


Alabama Code
Alaska Statutes
Arizona Revised Statutes Annotated
Arkansas Statutes Annotated
California (Codes listed on summary table)
Colorado Revised Statutes
Connecticut General Statutes Annotated (West)
Delaware Code Annotated
District of Columbia Code
Florida Statutes Annotated
Georgia Code of 1981
Hawaii Revised Statutes
Idaho Code
Illinois Compiled Statutes
Indiana Code Annotated
Iowa Code Annotated (West)
Kansas Statutes Annotated
Kentucky Revised Statutes Annotated (Baldwin)
Louisiana Revised Statutes Annotated (West)
Maine Revised Statutes
Maryland Annotated Code of 1957
Massachusetts General Laws Annotated (West)
Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
Minnesota Statutes Annotated
Mississippi Code Annotated                        
Missouri Annotated Statutes (Vernon)
Montana Revised Codes Annotated 
Nebraska Revised Statutes
Nevada Revised Statutes
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
New Jersey Statutes Annotated (West)
New Mexico Statutes Annotated
New York (Codes listed on summary table)
North Carolina General Statutes
North Dakota Century Code
Ohio Revised Code Annotated (Page)
Oklahoma Statutes Annotated (West)
Oregon Revised Statutes
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated (Purdon)
Puerto Rico Laws Annotated
Rhode Island General Laws
South Carolina Code
South Dakota Compiled Laws Annotated
Tennessee Code Annotated (Vernon)
Texas Codes Annotated (Vernon)
Utah Code Annotated
Vermont Statutes Annotated
Virgin Islands Code Annotated
Virginia Code
Washington Revised Code Annotated
West Virginia Code
Wisconsin Statutes Annotated (West)
Wyoming Statutes






End of file
jb/pm   7/17/00