
U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Compendium of State Privacy
and Security Legislation:
2002 Overview

November 2003, NCJ  200030

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without many of the tables. 
A spreadsheet (.wk1) of the Summary of State statutes by State
and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cspsl02.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cspsl
-------------------------------------------------------------------



Current status of the law

Summary of State statutes
     By category
     By State

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director

This report was prepared by SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics, Gerald E. Wethington,
Chairman, and Gary R. Cooper, Executive Director. The project
director was Sheila J. Barton, Deputy Executive Director. Paul L.
Woodard, Senior Counsel, and Eric C. Johnson, Policy Research
Analyst, prepared the report. Twyla R. Cunningham, Manager,
Corporate Communications, and Linda Townsdin, Writer/Editor,
edited the report. Jane L. Bassett, Publishing Specialist, provided
layout and design assistance. Adonica L. McGarr, Law and Policy
Administrative Assistant, assisted in the preparation of data
tables. The project was conducted under the direction of Carol G.
Kaplan, Chief, Criminal History Improvement Programs, Bureau
of Justice Statistics.

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement No.
2000-MU-MU-K006 awarded to SEARCH Group, Incorporated,
7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California
95831. Contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the
views or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the U.S.
Department of Justice.

Copyright (c) SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, 2003

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to
reproduce, publish, translate, or otherwise use all or any part of
the copyrighted material in the publication with the exception of
those items indicating that they are copyrighted by or reprinted by
permission of any source other than SEARCH, The National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics.
Foreword

This updated version of the Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation: 2002 Overview is the twelfth in a series of
Bureau of Justice Statistics' publications referencing and
analyzing State laws, administrative regulations and attorneys
general's opinions relating to the security, confidentiality,
accuracy, and completeness of criminal history records. The first
Compendium was published in 1974 in conjunction with the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration's development and
issuance of the Department of Justice regulations on privacy and
security of criminal history record information. Subsequent
editions were published in 1978, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989,
1992, 1994, 1997, 1999, and now, in 2002.

The volumes continue to provide assistance to legislators,
planners, administrators, legal analysts, and other researchers in
reviewing and contrasting the various approaches States have
taken to maintain and use criminal records. Such assistance is
particularly timely in light of the dramatic increase in recent years
in the number of enacted State statutes that permit access to
criminal history record information for background checks related
to jobs, volunteer activities, security, and other purposes. This
trend was intensified by the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, following which the Federal government instituted or
considered criminal record checks for workers in aviation,
farming and food preparation, hazardous materials transportation,
and other occupations. By utilizing the information contained in
this Compendium, States can take a more enlightened approach to
criminal record policymaking, balancing the public's interest in
increased security through criminal background checks with
individual rights regarding the protection and use of personal
information. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics hopes that this report will be a
useful resource for policymakers as they seek to improve and
promote the Nation's criminal history records. The efficient
operation of complete and accurate records systems serves to
benefit us all.

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director 



Contents

Introduction   
The Compendium series    
Scope of this Compendium 
How to use the Compendium     3

Section 1: Review and analysis     
A. Current status of the law  
B. Analysis of critical issues     
1. Data quality     
2. Access to criminal history records for noncriminal justice
purposes  

Section 2: Classification category definitions    

Section 3: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by
classification category  
A. Survey comparison of changes in State
statutes and regulations by classification category    
B. Summary of State statutes and regulations by classification
category  
1. State regulatory authority 
2. Privacy and security council    
3. Dissemination regulations  
4. Inspection  
5. Right to challenge    
6. Judicial review of challenged information 
7. Purging nonconviction information    
8. Purging conviction information  
9. Sealing nonconviction information    
10. Sealing conviction information 
11. Removal of disqualifications.  
12. Right to state nonexistence of record    
13. Research access 
14. Accuracy and completeness 
15. Dedication 
16. Civil remedies  
17. Criminal penalties   
18. Public records  
19. Separation of files  
20. Regulation of intelligence collection    
21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination 
22. Security   
23. Transaction logs     
24. Training employees   
25. Listing of information systems 
26. Freedom of Information Act 
(including criminal justice information)     
27. Freedom of Information Act 
(excluding criminal justice information)     
28. Central State repository  
29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted
     

Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by State
     
State code titles   
Alabama   
Alaska    
Arizona   
Arkansas  
California     
Colorado  
Connecticut    
Delaware  
District of Columbia     
Florida   
Georgia   
Hawaii    
Idaho     
Illinois  
Indiana   
Iowa 
Kansas    
Kentucky  
Louisiana 
Maine     
Maryland  
Massachusetts  
Michigan  
Minnesota 
Mississippi    
Missouri  
Montana   
Nebraska  
Nevada    
New Hampshire  
New Jersey     
New Mexico     
New York  
North Carolina 
North Dakota   
Ohio 
Oklahoma  
Oregon    
Pennsylvania   
Puerto Rico    
Rhode Island   
South Carolina 
South Dakota   
Tennessee 
Texas     
Utah 
Vermont   
Virgin Islands 
Virginia  
Washington     
West Virginia  
Wisconsin 
Wyoming   


Electronic versions of the full text of legislation cited in this
document
are available as a whole (approximately 1,500 pages), or by State,
from:

SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice Information and
Statistics
7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145
Sacramento, California  95831
(916) 392-2550
Email: twyla@search.org


Introduction

The Compendium series

This Compendium is the latest in a series of 12 U.S. Department
of Justice publications that reference and analyze State laws and
regulations relating to privacy and security of criminal history
record information. ***Footnote1: The term "criminal history
record information" is defined in the Department of Justice
regulations to include "information collected by criminal justice
agencies on individuals consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, detentions, indictments, informations, or other
formal criminal charges, and any disposition arising therefrom,
sentencing, correctional supervision, and release." 28 C.F.R. ¤
20.3(b) (1993).*** These compendia include: (1) compilations of
State laws and administrative regulations, and (2) analyses of
findings and trends reflected in that body of law and policy
documents. The purpose of these compendia is to assist
legislators, planners, administrators, legal analysts and others
interested in reviewing State statutes and regulations governing
the maintenance and use of criminal records, and in analyzing
national trends in this important area. Comparing and contrasting
the various approaches reflected in the many State laws and
regulations cited in these documents should assist planners and
administrators in developing effective and fair policies for their
jurisdictions. By facilitating such comparisons and by furthering
research in this area, the compendia are intended to promote the
evolution of enlightened privacy and information policy.

The first Compendium was published by the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (LEAA) in 1974 as part of its efforts
connected with the promulgation of regulations covering the
privacy and security of criminal history record information.
***Footnote2: U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration, Office of General Counsel,
Compendium of State Laws Governing the Privacy and Security
of Criminal Justice Information (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1974).*** A second Compendium, published in
1978, documented the growth of State privacy and security laws
subsequent to the earlier survey. ***Footnote3: U.S. Department
of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, National
Criminal Justice Information and Statistics Service, Privacy and
Security of Criminal History Information, Compendium of State
Legislation (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
January 1978).*** At that time, LEAA also published a
companion document that provided an overview of the significant
changes in State laws that had occurred, largely as a result of the
impact of the Federal regulations, and analyzed policy issues in
specific areas of privacy and security law. ***Footnote4: U.S.
Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: An Analysis of Privacy Issues (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1978).*** Updating supplements to
those compendia were published in 1979 by the LEAA and in
1981 by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), covering State
legislation and regulations up to July 1981. ***Footnote5: U.S.
Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, National Criminal Justice Information and
Statistics Service, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Legislation, 1979 Supplement,
by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1979); U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Legislation, 1981 Supplement,
by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1982).*** The 1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994,
1997 and 1999 volumes - all of which were published by BJS -
replaced all of the earlier volumes in the series and referenced all
State laws and regulations up to their publication dates.
***Footnote6: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information:
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1984
Edition: Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, September 1985); Privacy and
Security of Criminal History Information: Compendium of State
Privacy and Security Legislation, 1987 Overview, by SEARCH
Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
August 1988); Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Privacy and Security
Legislation, 1989 Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc.
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, April 1990);
Criminal History Record Information: Compendium of State
Privacy and Security Legislation, 1992, by SEARCH, The
National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1992);
Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information:
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1994
Overview, by SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, January 1995); Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation: 1997 Overview by SEARCH, The National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics (Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, May 1998); Compendium of
State Privacy and Security Legislation: 1999 Overview by
SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice Information and
Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July
2000).***

Scope of this Compendium
This Compendium is an up-to-date and complete document that
supercedes the earlier volumes in the series. It references all
current State laws through December 2002, as well as regulations,
executive orders and opinions of State attorneys general, where
applicable.  The Compendium also includes a review and analysis
section containing a general overview of State laws and
regulations and a discussion of trends and conclusions concerning
two especially important information policy issues: (1)
requirements imposed on criminal justice agencies to maintain
record quality, and (2) dissemination and use of criminal history
information for noncriminal justice purposes.

Since this compiles the material from previous compendia, as well
as more recent enactments, the sheer bulk of this body of material
precludes reproducing the complete text of the State laws and
regulations. The complete set of statutes is available electronically
from SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice Information
and Statistics. A full, hard-copy library of these laws, regulations,
and other materials is maintained by SEARCH at its offices in
Sacramento, California. Copies of specific or all enactments may
be ordered (for a fee) by mail or telephone. ***Footnote7:
SEARCH is located at 7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145,
Sacramento, California 95831, (916) 392-2550.*** 

This Compendium contains four sections. Section 1 sets out an
overview of State criminal history record laws and an analysis of
State requirements relating to data quality and noncriminal justice
access and use. Section 2 defines the 29 subject-matter categories
into which the laws and regulations are classified in the
Compendium tables. These categories are essentially the same as
those used in previous volumes. ***Footnote8: Category 29,
"National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted" was
added for the first time in 1999.*** Section 3 presents summary
tables showing trends and developments in criminal justice
information law and policy by classification category. Section 4
provides summary tables of criminal justice information statutes
and regulations by State, along with a list of the titles of the State
codes (see page 55) from which the citations were extracted. All
of the tables in Sections 3 and 4 include complete citations to the
official State codes or other State compilations where the full text
of the laws and regulations may be found. These citations should
be used when ordering copies of particular provisions. 

The methodology used in compiling the Compendium included a
survey of State officials involved with criminal record programs
and policy, followed by extensive research in the State codes to
verify and augment survey responses. The survey and research
compiled the laws of 53 jurisdictions: the 50 States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. In the
Compendium, all of these jurisdictions are referred to as "States."

How to use the Compendium
Because this volume is a complete revision of all prior compendia
and supplements, it is not necessary to consult prior volumes.

To facilitate use of this volume, the laws and regulations have
been classified into 29 subject-matter categories that are defined
in Section 2. Numerous tables are included in Sections 3 and 4 to
assist readers in finding laws dealing with particular subjects, or
to determine which aspects of information policy are addressed by
particular States. The summary tables in Section 3 list citations to
all State statutes and regulations under each of the 29
classification categories. For example, the table for the category
"State regulatory authority" (see page 20) indicates which States
have provisions establishing or designating an agency to
promulgate statewide regulations governing criminal history
records and provides the legal citations to the provisions. In
addition to finding particular citations, the reader is able to
quickly identify the concentration of States addressing a particular
policy area.

Another view of State privacy and security trends is reflected in
the table on page 18 titled "Survey comparison of changes in State
statutes and regulations by classification category." At a glance,
the table indicates the degree of attention that a particular area of
information policy has received in the States over the past 28
years, as reflected by surveys and research conducted in 1974,
1978, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994, 1997, 1999 and
2002.

A summary table for each State is included in Section 4. These
tables use the 29 classification categories relating to criminal
history record information privacy and security and set out
citations to all of the laws and regulations of particular States. If
no entry appears under one or more classification categories for a
State, it means the State has no law or regulation addressing that
policy area, or that research has failed to discover any.

The State summary tables presented in Section 4 include
subdivisions of four classification categories:
* Category 3, "Dissemination Regulations," is subdivided to show
whether the States authorize or prohibit access by various types of
groups or individuals (criminal justice agencies, governmental
noncriminal justice agencies, and private agencies or individuals)
to various types of information (conviction, nonconviction and
arrest information).
* Category 4, "Inspection," is subdivided to indicate whether the
States permit an individual to inspect his criminal history record;
inspect his record and take notes; or inspect his record and obtain
a copy of information contained in that record.
* Category 14, "Accuracy and Completeness," is subdivided to
permit statutes to be classified as relating to disposition reporting,
auditing, or other accuracy and completeness requirements.
* Category 22, "Security," is subdivided to enable statutes to be
classified as relating to physical, administrative or computer
security.
These classification subdivisions should present a more accurate
and detailed view of State legislative and regulatory activity in
these four important policy areas, and will make the Compendium
a more useful research tool.

Section 1: Review and analysis

A. Current status of the law

In the early 1970s, at a time when public concern about privacy,
automation and mushrooming information systems was at its
height, Congress considered several legislative proposals that
would have imposed a uniform nationwide information
management scheme for State and local handling of criminal
history record information. Although Congress did not enact
comprehensive legislation, in 1973 it did amend the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. ***Footnote9: Now
¤ 812(b), Justice Assistance Act of 1984; Pub. L. 98-473.*** The
amendment provided in general terms that all criminal history
record information collected, maintained or disseminated by State
and local criminal justice agencies with financial support made
available under the Act must be kept complete and secure, must
be made available for review and challenge by record subjects,
and must be used only for law enforcement and other lawful
purposes. ***Footnote10: The amendment does not cover
investigative and intelligence information.***

In 1976, the U.S. Department of Justice's Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (LEAA) issued comprehensive
information systems regulations to implement the amendment.
***Footnote11: "Criminal Justice Information Systems
Regulations," 28 C.F.R. Part 20.*** These regulations, usually
referred to as the Department of Justice (DOJ) regulations, are
applicable to all State and local criminal justice agencies that have
used Federal funding for the support of criminal history record
systems. The regulations impose minimum general requirements
for criminal history information management, leaving the
development of specific programs and procedures to State
legislation and policymaking. ***Footnote12: Wanted person
information, original records of entry, court records or traffic
offense records are specifically exempted from coverage of the
Department of Justice regulations.*** As intended, the
regulations have been instrumental in stimulating many States to
enact their own laws to comply with the Federal government
requirements. In addition, the regulations triggered a reassessment
of existing State privacy and security laws that has gone beyond
mere compliance, as evidenced by the fact that the majority of the
States have enacted comprehensive criminal history laws, some of
which contain provisions stricter than the requirements of the
regulations.

Today, virtually all States have enacted legislation governing at
least the dissemination of criminal history records. Although the
approaches differ considerably, virtually all States have followed
the lead of the DOJ regulations in distinguishing between
information referring to convictions and current arrests, on the one
hand, and nonconviction data on the other (information referring
to cases without recorded dispositions or with dispositions
favorable to the accused). Most States have placed stricter limits
on the release of nonconviction data for noncriminal justice
purposes, such as background screening for employment and
licensing purposes. All but two States have also established
procedures to permit record subjects to review their records and to
institute procedures to correct inaccuracies. Finally, most States
have established security procedures complying generally with the
requirements of the regulations. In these areas, as in other areas of
record management, the regulations do not require the enactment
of legislation, so long as adequate operational procedures are
implemented by regulation, agency rule or other appropriate
means. Thus, the number of State statutes in these areas cited in
this volume do not fully reflect the significant progress made in
these areas of privacy protection.

Two areas of criminal history record information management
merit special analysis: (1) data quality and (2) dissemination of
criminal records for noncriminal justice purposes, particularly in
light of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the
subsequent enactment of new homeland security measures.

B.   Analysis of critical issues

1. Data quality

As noted earlier, the broad language of the 1973 Congressional
amendment provided the basis for comprehensive regulations
issued by LEAA in 1976 covering all State and local criminal
history record systems supported in whole or in part by Federal
funding. Among other things, the regulations require all covered
agencies to implement operational procedures designed to ensure
that criminal history record information is complete and accurate.
***Footnote13: 28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(2002).***

The regulations state that to be complete, a record of an arrest
must contain information concerning any disposition occurring
within the State within 90 days after the disposition has occurred.
In order to promote the dissemination of complete criminal
history records, the regulations require that State and local
agencies establish procedures to query the State central repository
prior to disseminating information unless the agency is assured
that it is disseminating the most up-to-date disposition data, or
time is of the essence and the repository is technically incapable
of responding within the necessary time period. ***Footnote14:
28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(1)(2002).***

The provisions of the regulations dealing with accuracy define
accuracy literally to mean that "no record containing criminal
history record information shall contain erroneous information."
***Footnote15: 28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(2)(2002).*** In order to
promote accuracy, two types of operational procedures are
required: (1) a process of data collection, entry, storage and
systematic audit that will minimize the possibility of recording
and storing inaccurate information; and (2) procedures for sending
correction notices to all criminal justice agencies known to have
received inaccurate information. As a practical matter, this
provision requires agencies to create and maintain dissemination
logs so corrections can be sent to recipients of erroneous
information.

Finally, the regulations require agencies to give criminal record
subjects an opportunity, upon request, to review their criminal
history record information for purposes of ensuring accuracy and
completeness. ***Footnote16: 28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(g)(2002).***

State statutory provisions

As noted earlier, the DOJ regulations do not require the States to
enact legislation dealing with accuracy and completeness. Many
States, however, have chosen to address data quality issues
through State law. In 1974, just prior to publication of the
regulations, only 14 States had adopted statutory data quality
safeguards. By 1978, 2 years after the adoption of the LEAA
regulations, 41 States had added data quality provisions of one
kind or another to their criminal history record statutes. That
number increased to 45 States in 1979, to 49 States in 1981, to 51
States in 1984, and to 52 States in 1991 through 2002.
***Footnote17: As used in the Compendium, the term "State"
includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin
Islands. All except the Virgin Islands have enacted data quality
provisions.***

Although the regulations do not expressly require that the States
establish State central criminal record repositories, the
"Commentary" published with the regulations noted that the
provisions on accuracy and completeness were written with State
central repositories in mind. Indeed, the provisions of the
regulations dealing with completeness state that complete records
"should" be maintained in State central repositories.
***Footnote18: 28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(1)(2002).*** Today every
State, as well as the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, have
established State central repositories and most of them conform
generally to the model described in the "Commentary." In all of
those States, pursuant to statute, regulation or established practice,
criminal justice agencies throughout the State are required to
report arrest and disposition data to the State repositories for all
serious offenses (usually felonies and serious misdemeanors). 

All of the States have statutory provisions expressly requiring the
reporting of arrest information. Arrest information was
historically reported on arrest fingerprint cards, which included
the subject's name and identification information, arrest event
information (date, place, etc.), arrest charges and inked fingerprint
impressions. Automated fingerprint systems are assuming these
functions in a growing number of States. The FBI's Criminal
Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division reported that more
than 60 percent of the 16,776,328 fingerprints it received and
processed between June 1, 2001, and May 31, 2002, were
transmitted to the Bureau electronically.

All 52 of the jurisdictions with data quality provisions also have
adopted legislation that imposes some form of disposition
reporting requirement on some types of State and local agencies.
***Footnote19: "Disposition" is used here to mean post-arrest
case processing information, including information relating to
prosecution, court adjudication, sentencing and correctional
status.***  Many of these statutes are quite specific as to the types
of data to be reported, the responsible agency or official, time
requirements and sanctions. Others, however, merely state a
general reporting requirement with little or no detail as to how or
by whom reporting is to be accomplished, leaving these
particulars to be spelled out in regulations.

Even in those States with more detailed reporting laws, not all
types of information are covered. Only 33 States specifically
require the reporting of prosecutor declinations to the central
repository. ***Footnote20: The 33 States are: Alaska, Arizona,
Arkansas, California, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii,
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan,
Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey,
New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virgin Islands, Virginia,
Washington, West Virginia, Wyoming.  (Sheila J. Barton, Survey
of State Criminal History Information Systems, 2001, Criminal
Justice Information Policy series [publication pending] Table 5.
Hereafter, 2001 Survey.)*** Forty-seven States require courts
with felony jurisdiction to report felony dispositions.
***Footnote21: The 47 States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona,
Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of
Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota,
Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island,
South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virgin
Islands, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,
Wyoming. (Ibid., Table 5).*** Forty States require correctional
agencies to report felon admissions and releases. ***Footnote22:
The 40 States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota, Virginia,
Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming (Ibid., Table
5).***

States employ a variety of methods to link disposition information
to arrest charge information in the criminal history record.
Thirty-four States employ a unique tracking number for individual
subjects. ***Footnote23: The 34 States are: Alabama, Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia. Florida,
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
Oregon, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, Wyoming (Ibid., Table
16).*** Thirty-nine use a unique arrest event identifier.
***Footnote24: The 39 States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona,
Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland,
Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey,
New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming (Ibid., Table 16).*** Other
methods involve the use of a unique charge identifier (17 States
***Footnote25: The 17 States are: Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
California, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii,
Iowa, Kentucky, Missouri, Nevada, New Jersey, Puerto Rico,
South Dakota, Texas, Vermont (Ibid., Table 16).***); arrest data
(39 States ***Footnote26: The 39 States are: Alabama, Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Missouri, Montana, New Jersey,
New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virgin Islands, Virginia,
Washington, Wisconsin, Wyoming (Ibid., Table 16).***); subject
name (38 States ***Footnote27: The 38 States are: Alabama,
Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Delaware, District of
Columbia, Florida, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virgin Island,
Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, Wyoming (Ibid., Table
16).***); and name and reporting agency case number (25 States
***Footnote28: The 25 States are: Arizona, Arkansas, California,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, New Jersey, New
Mexico, Oklahoma, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
Vermont, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, Wyoming (Ibid.,
Table 16).***).

Statutes that impose transaction log requirements are the most
common type of data quality provision other than disposition
reporting. Thirty-six States have adopted statutory provisions that
require criminal justice agencies to maintain logs of criminal
history record information dissemination. ***Footnote29: The 36
States are: Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, California, Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas,
Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Maine, Michigan, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto
Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, Wyoming (see Table 23, Page 18).*** 

Statutes in 37 States require the central repositories to conduct
some type of audit. ***Footnote30: The 37 States are: Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, North
Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico,
South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, Wyoming (see Section 4: Summary tables of statutes
and regulations by State, beginning on Page 53).*** Auditing is
generally viewed as one of the most effective data quality
procedures. Statutes in 28 of these States require the central
repository to conduct continuing or periodic audits of State and
local agencies that submit records to the repository.
***Footnote31: The 28 States are: Alaska, Arkansas, California,
Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa,
Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri,
New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont,
Virginia, Washington and Wyoming (see Section 4: Summary
tables of statutes and regulations by State, beginning on Page
53).***  The scope of this kind of local agency audit usually
includes: (1) adherence by the local agency to Federal and State
regulations; (2) completeness and accuracy of criminal history
record reporting; (3) adherence to dissemination standards; (4)
implementation of appropriate security safeguards; and (5)
compliance with mandated subject-access and review provisions.
Fourteen States require the repository to conduct an in-house audit
of its own records, usually on an annual basis. ***Footnote32:
The 17 States are: Alaska, Arizona, California, Illinois, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
North Dakota, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Texas, Utah and Wyoming (see Section 4: Summary tables of
statutes and regulations by State, beginning on Page 53).*** In
general, the scope of these audits parallels the scope of the audits
of local agency systems. However, statutes in some of these States
expressly require that the in-house audit also attempt to identify
case cycles with dispositions that are likely to have occurred but
that have not been reported. Statutes in 15 of the States require
both an in-house repository audit and audits of contributing
agencies. ***Footnote33: The 15 States are: Alaska, Arizona,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri, New Hampshire, North
Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming (see Section 4: Summary
tables of statutes and regulations by State, beginning on Page
53).***

Finally, statutory provisions adopted in a few States impose other
kinds of data quality requirements:

* Statutes in 16 States require State and local criminal justice
agencies to query the central repository prior to disseminating
criminal history record information in order to assure that the
most up-to-date disposition information is being used.
***Footnote34: The 16 States are: Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii, Louisiana, Maine, Missouri,
Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, Virginia
and Washington (see Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and
regulations by State, beginning on Page 53).***  

* Thirteen States have added provisions to their statutes that
require the repository to implement some kind of delinquent
disposition monitoring system (for example, a system designed to
periodically identify arrest entries for which dispositions are
probably available but not reported). ***Footnote35: The 13
States are: Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii,
Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New
Hampshire and Washington (see Section 4: Summary tables of
statutes and regulations by State, beginning on Page 53).***

* Nine States have adopted statutory provisions that specifically
impose training requirements on personnel involved in entering
data into criminal history record systems. ***Footnote36: The
nine States are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Georgia,
Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana and Wyoming (see Section 4:
Summary tables of statutes and regulations by State, beginning on
Page 53).***

* Seven States have adopted statutory provisions that address the
use of automated programs to provide systematic editing
procedures for the purpose of detecting missing or nonconforming
data. ***Footnote37: The seven States are: Alaska, Connecticut,
Hawaii, Kentucky, Nebraska, South Carolina and Virginia (see
Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by State,
beginning on Page 53).***

Of course, in almost every State, the bulk of data quality
requirements is expressed in regulations or administrative policies
and procedures, rather than in legislation. However, the extent to
which State legislation addresses data quality issues is a reflection
of a State's concern about data quality.

The issuance of regulations are not enough to solve data quality
problems.  In addition, States must be committed to put into place
- and practice - procedures to collect and maintain complete and
accurate data, and to scrupulously and regularly conduct
systematic audits to ensure compliance with those procedures.

2. Access to criminal history records for noncriminal justice
purposes

Background

Reversing a trend that began after issuance of the DOJ
regulations, criminal history record information is increasingly
becoming available outside the criminal justice system. Even
nonconviction information is now more available to noncriminal
justice agencies. Twenty-three States have adopted open record or
freedom of information statutes that cover some types of criminal
history record information. (See the survey comparison table on
page 18.) This does not mean that criminal history record
information is publicly available in these States in all
circumstances, but it does mean that some types of information
are now more available.

As a part of this trend, a majority of the States now permit access
to some criminal history records by at least some types of
noncriminal justice agencies and private entities. For example,
special access rights are increasingly accorded to governmental
agencies with national security missions, to licensing boards and
to some governmental and private employers screening applicants
for sensitive positions, such as those involving public safety,
supervision of children or custody of valuable property.

Great diversity of statutory schemes exists in the States. As the
various interests press their cases with legislatures, the volume of
authorized noncriminal justice uses has steadily increased. The
FBI's CJIS Division reported that, between June 1, 2001, and May
31, 2002, more than half the fingerprints submitted for processing
were for noncriminal justice background checks. In contrast, a
1993 study found that only around 9 percent of the fingerprint
cards received by the FBI from States that year were for
noncriminal justice purposes. ***Footnote38: Bureau of Justice
Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Survey of Criminal History
Information System, 1993, prepared by SEARCH, The National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics (Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office, NCJ 148951, January
1995).*** In many of these States, every session of the legislature
in recent years has resulted in new statutory authority for
noncriminal justice agencies and groups to obtain criminal record
checks for such purposes as public and private employment,
suitability determinations for foster and adopted parents,
occupational licensing, and the issuance of various permits,
certifications and clearances. As a result, those now required to
undergo background checks include such varied categories as
pawnshop workers, alcohol distributors, masseuses, bail bond
personnel and even timber buyers.

The devastating terror attacks of September 11, 2001, spurred
legislators to consider additional noncriminal justice background
check requirements for employees in industries that provided
access to critical infrastructure facilities or systems, including
private-sector workers in banking, chemicals, energy,
transportation, shipping, public health, and farming and food
preparation. Federal initiatives such as the USA PATRIOT Act
***Footnote39: Public Law 107-56.*** and the Aviation and
Transportation Security Act ***Footnote40: Public Law
107-71.*** mandated criminal history checks on truck drivers
who transport hazardous materials (hazmat) (PATRIOT Act) and
on airport workers such as air marshals, baggage screeners and
those who have access to secure areas of the airport (Aviation
Security Act). As of March 2003, the rules governing hazmat
driver checks were not completed, whereas some 750,000 air
industry workers at 438 commercial service airports throughout
the country had been checked.

Regardless of the source of the background mandate, it is now
literally true that no two State statutes on noncriminal justice
access are identical. The following analysis of State statutory
provisions confirms these observations.

State statutory provisions

State statutes governing dissemination of criminal history records
for noncriminal justice purposes are so varied as to defy
classification. A few States have no statutory provisions setting
statewide policies on noncriminal justice access; in these States,
the DOJ regulations control access and use. In a few other States,
the statute merely delegates to a designated official the authority
to issue rules and regulations on noncriminal justice
dissemination. In States that do have laws dealing with the
subject, the statutory approaches vary from those of Florida,
Wisconsin, Oklahoma and other "open record" States, where
anyone can obtain access to criminal history records for any
purpose, to that of Tennessee and California, which prohibit
noncriminal justice access and use except for limited purposes
specifically authorized by statute, and which make it a criminal
offense to release criminal history records for unauthorized
purposes. The other States fall somewhere in between, with
statutory approaches that differ greatly as to what types of
noncriminal justice agencies may have access to particular types
of records for particular purposes. 

Twenty-nine of the 43 States that responded to an informal email
survey conducted by SEARCH, The National Consortium for
Justice Information and Statistics, in 2001 reported that "anyone"
could obtain official criminal history record information,
although, in many cases, only limited data is provided after
specific requirements are met. ***Footnote41: Survey results are
available at
http://www.search.org/policy/surveys/open_records_survey.pdf.*
** For example, while anyone can theoretically obtain rap sheet
information in Alaska, he or she must provide the record subject's
fingerprints before information is released. Then, only
information on convictions within the last 10 years and pending
prosecutions is made available. In contrast, anyone who provides
the Colorado Department of Public Safety with a record subject's
name and date of birth is provided with the subject's entire record
except for sealed or most juvenile records. 

There are, however, some patterns and similarities, due to the
influence of the DOJ regulations. The regulations do not place any
restrictions on the dissemination of conviction records or open
arrest records (arrest records with no recorded disposition) less
than one year old. Nonconviction records (favorable dispositions,
including decisions not to refer or prosecute charges and
indefinite postponements, and open arrest records over a year old
and not actively pending) may be disseminated for any purpose
authorized by statute, ordinance, executive order or court ruling.
Most States have followed the approach of treating conviction
records differently from nonconviction records. Commonly,
States place few or no restrictions on the dissemination of
conviction records and a number of States also do not restrict the
dissemination of open arrest records less than a year old.
Nonconviction records are restricted to a greater degree and in
some States may not be disseminated at all for noncriminal justice
purposes, or may be disseminated only for particular purposes
under specified circumstances.

It is interesting to note that the public has become aware of these
distinctions as well. A survey conducted by SEARCH and the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, in 2001
found substantial public support for making certain types of
criminal justice records available for noncriminal justice purposes
when there is a perceived public benefit and/or safety rationale.
***Footnote42: Public Attitudes Toward Uses of Criminal
History Information, A Privacy, Technology and Criminal Justice
Information Report, NCJ 187663 (Washington D.C.: U.S.
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, July 2001).***
Support declines significantly when the goal for making records
available is purely private. Eighty-four percent of the 1,030
individuals surveyed favored limits on either the type of criminal
history record information disseminated or the user.

Another similarity among many States is that the statutory
provisions do not specifically identify particular noncriminal
justice agencies or organizations that may obtain criminal history
records. Instead, they define classes or types of agencies or
organizations that may obtain certain types of records for
specified purposes. Out-of-State or Federal agencies may be
included, in addition to in-State, private and governmental
agencies. The statutes may define permitted purposes in specific
or more general terms. For example, some States authorize the use
of criminal history records for any occupational licensing or
employment purpose, while others authorize such use only for
screening applicants for high-risk occupations, such as those
involving the public safety, supervision of children, or custody of
cash, valuable property or information.

Many of the laws also require certain agencies or organizations to
show specific legal authority under other statutory provisions to
obtain criminal records or the need for the record must be
approved by a designated board, council or official. The statutory
provisions that require separate legal authority for certain types of
agencies vary considerably from State to State. The requirement
may simply provide that the requestor must be "authorized by
law" or must have "legal authority" or that the records must be
necessary for a "lawful purpose." Such provisions are interpreted
in some States as authorizing the dissemination of criminal
records for employment and occupational licensing purposes
where the employing or licensing agencies are required by law to
screen out applicants who lack "good moral character." Other
State criminal record statutes, however, authorize the release of
records for noncriminal justice purposes only if the requesting
agency is "expressly" authorized by some other provision of State
or Federal law to obtain criminal records for use in the course of
official duties. This is a much stricter standard. Still-stricter
provisions authorize the release of criminal records only pursuant
to statutory provisions that expressly refer to criminal conduct or
to criminal records and contain requirements, exclusions or
limitations based upon such conduct or records.

Where prior approval by a council, board or designated official is
required for the release of criminal records for noncriminal justice
purposes, the designated standard for approval varies among the
States. For example, criminal record laws in New Hampshire and
South Dakota delegate general discretion to the director of the
criminal history record repository to determine who may have
access, while Massachusetts law provides that the Criminal
History Systems Board must find that the public interest in
releasing criminal records to particular noncriminal justice
requesters outweighs the security and privacy interests of the
record subject.

Several States require that the record subject must consent in
writing to any release of his or her criminal history record for
noncriminal justice purposes.

State dissemination policies

As evident from the discussion above, the criminal history record
laws in many States provide only the framework for the State's
policies on dissemination. Specific legal authority for particular
agencies or organizations to obtain criminal records may be set
out in separate statutory provisions, executive orders or even local
ordinances. In addition, the actual policies and practices of
particular States may be set out in regulations or may be based
upon written or unwritten repository policies. These policies and
practices often provide for more restrictive dissemination
approaches than the criminal record laws require them to be. That
is, usually due to lack of staff and facilities, some State
repositories may not provide records to all of the noncriminal
justice agencies and organizations that are authorized to obtain
them under their laws.

In addition, many States impose administrative requirements that
may not be required specifically by their laws. For example, some
States require that the subject's fingerprints be submitted with all
requests for noncriminal justice access, and that records may be
released only when a fingerprint comparison positively verifies
that the requested record relates to the subject of the request. All
except a handful of the States charge fees ranging from $2 to  $50
for processing record searches for noncriminal justice purposes.
***Footnote43: Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and West Virginia
have not statutorily established fees for noncriminal justice
requests for criminal history record information. (Fee amounts
from 2001 Survey, Table 22).***

Interstate dissemination

For many years, the considerable disparity among State
dissemination laws was not perceived as a serious obstacle to the
interstate dissemination of criminal records for noncriminal
justice purposes, such as employment and occupational licensing.
This was due primarily because there was no effective system
linking the State repositories together in such a way as to permit
the efficient exchange of records from State to State for
noncriminal justice purposes. National criminal record checks for
noncriminal justice purposes have been feasible in the past only
through use of the criminal files maintained in the FBI's Criminal
Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division, which contain arrest
and disposition information voluntarily submitted by criminal
justice agencies throughout the country. Pursuant to Federal laws
and regulations, searches of these files are conducted for Federal
noncriminal justice agencies for such purposes as civilian
employment, security clearances, military recruitment, alien
registration, visas and other official purposes, and for Federal and
State law enforcement agencies for criminal justice employment
purposes. Searches are also conducted for State and local
governmental employment and licensing agencies with approved
legal authority to request such searches and for employment in
federally chartered or insured banks and designated segments of
the securities and commodities industries.

Although the criminal files of the U.S. Department of Justice are
made up primarily of arrest and disposition data submitted by
State and local criminal justice agencies, these records are subject
to Federal law and are disseminated by the FBI pursuant to
Federal laws and regulations authorizing record checks for the
agencies and organizations noted above. Under this program,
inquiring Federal agencies are provided with all of the
information the FBI possesses on subject individuals, including
favorable dispositions and open arrest records without regard to
the age of the record. Responses provided to banks, securities
firms and State employment and licensing agencies include the
subject's entire record with the exception of open arrests that are
over a year old and not actively pending. Thus, because most
States' dissemination laws are more restrictive than the Federal
standard, it is possible for authorized Federal and State
noncriminal justice agencies to legally obtain State-contributed
records from the FBI for purposes for which they could not, in
some cases, obtain the records directly from the States in which
the records originated.

This system of duplicate State and Federal files is being phased
out because of concern about the expense of maintaining and
updating records at both the State and Federal levels. The
emerging system replaces the "national repository" concept with a
system based on a national index linking State repositories. This
system is known as the Interstate Identification Index (usually
referred to as "III" or "Triple I"). When the system is fully
operational nationwide, the III index maintained at the national
level will contain personal identification data on individuals
whose criminal records are maintained in State criminal record
repositories (State offenders) and in the criminal files of the FBI
(Federal offenders), but it will not contain any charge or
disposition information. 

The index serves as a "pointer" to refer inquiring criminal justice
agencies to the State or Federal files where the requested criminal
history records are maintained. The records  are exchanged
directly between the States and between State and Federal
criminal justice agencies by means of telecommunications lines
linking Federal, State and local criminal justice agencies
throughout the country. Dissemination and use of the records
obtained by means of the system are governed by the laws and
policies of the receiving jurisdictions. Each State enforces its own
laws and policies within its borders; record dissemination and use
by Federal agencies are governed by Federal law.

Conclusion

The absence of Federal legislation or regulations establishing a
uniform nationwide dissemination policy for State criminal record
systems has permitted States to develop and implement their own
approaches to the release of criminal records for noncriminal
justice purposes. This has had the laudable effect of leaving the
States free to establish their own privacy and confidentiality laws
and policies to strike a proper balance between the rights of record
subjects and the public interest. However, this has also resulted in
the evolution of widely varying State approaches, and in laws and
policies in many States that are more restrictive than the Federal
standard that governs noncriminal justice use of the FBI's files of
State-contributed criminal history records. These factors have
presented serious obstacles to the full implementation of the III
"index-pointer" system for the interstate exchange of criminal
records. 

It was apparent to the State and Federal officials who developed
the III concept that full participation in the index-pointer system
would eventually require most States to modify their existing laws
and policies governing the availability of criminal history records
for noncriminal justice purposes in order to meet the proposed
interstate standard on record availability. In addition, Federal and
State officials recognized a need to formally commit the FBI and
participating State repositories to long-term participation in a
decentralized system.

From the initial phases of the III concept, a strong consensus
developed for the use of an interstate/Federal-State compact to
implement the system. Such a compact must be ratified in
identical form by all parties, and no party can unilaterally amend
it after ratification. Ratifying parties can withdraw from the
compact only through the same formal action used for ratification,
a feature that provides some assurance of long-term participation
by ratifying parties. Because the compact takes precedence over
conflicting State or Federal laws, and because the compact
authorizes State repositories to provide record responses for all
authorized III purposes, ratification of the compact would have
the effect of providing the repositories with needed interstate
record dissemination authority in those cases where such authority
is now lacking under State law. 

The National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact, which
governs III use for noncriminal justice purposes, was approved by
the Congress on October 8, 1998, and signed by the President on
October 9, 1998. ***Footnote44: Public Law 105-251; 112
Statutes at Large 1870. Codified at 42 USCA ¤ 14611 et seq.***
It became effective, by its terms, on April 28, 1999, when ratified
by the second State. As of December 2002, 16 States - Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia,
Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey,
Oklahoma and South Carolina - have ratified the compact. 

The compact binds the FBI and ratifying States to participate in
the III noncriminal justice access program in accordance with the
compact and established system policies. Authorized users are the
same as those currently authorized to obtain records from the
FBI's files. Participating State repositories are authorized and
required to make all unsealed criminal history records available in
response to authorized noncriminal justice requests. All
noncriminal justice access to the system is through the FBI and
the State repositories and is based upon fingerprint identification
of record subjects to ensure positive identification. Release and
use of information obtained through the system for noncriminal
justice purposes is governed by the laws of the receiving States,
and the receiving repositories are required to screen record
responses and delete any information that cannot legally be
released within the State. The compact established a Compact
Council, comprised of Federal and State officials and other
members representing user interests, to create operating policies
for noncriminal justice uses of the III system.

Section 2: Classification category definitions

The following are definitions of the 29 subject-matter categories
into which State laws and regulations have been classified in this
Compendium, as illustrated in both the individual classification
category tables in Section 3 and the summary State tables in
Section 4.

1. State regulatory authority. A grant of power to a State agency to
promulgate statewide security and privacy regulations for criminal
justice information systems.

2. Privacy and security council. A State board, committee,
commission or council whose primary statutory function is
monitoring, evaluating or supervising the confidentiality and
security of criminal justice information.

3. Dissemination regulations. Restrictions on dissemination of
criminal history information.

4. Inspection. The right of an individual to examine his or her
criminal history record.

5. Right to challenge. The right to an administrative proceeding in
which an individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of
his or her criminal history record.

6. Judicial review of challenged information. The right of an
individual to appeal to a State court an adverse agency decision
concerning challenged information.

7. Purging nonconviction information. The destruction or return to
the individual of criminal justice information where no conviction
has resulted from the event triggering the collection of the
information.

8. Purging conviction information. The destruction or return to an
individual of criminal history information indicating a conviction.

9. Sealing nonconviction information. The removal of criminal
history information from active files where no conviction has
resulted from the event triggering the collection of the
information.

10. Sealing conviction information. The removal from active files
of individual criminal history information indicating a conviction.

11. Removal of disqualifications. The restoration of rights and
privileges, such as public employment, to persons who have had
criminal history records purged or sealed.

12. Right to state nonexistence of record. The right to indicate in
response to public or private inquiries the absence of criminal
history in cases of arrest not leading to conviction or where an
arrest or conviction record has been purged.

13. Research access. The provision for and regulation of access to
criminal justice information by outside researchers.

14. Accuracy and completeness. A requirement that agencies
institute procedures to ensure reasonably complete and accurate
criminal history information, including setting deadlines for
reporting prosecutorial and court dispositions.

15. Dedication. The requirement that computer configurations be
assigned exclusively to the criminal justice function.

16. Civil remedies. Statutory actions for damages or other relief
resulting from violations of privacy and security laws.

17. Criminal penalties. Criminal sanctions for violations of
privacy and security laws.

18. Public records. Requirements that official records maintained
by public officials be open to the public.

19. Separation of files. Requirements that criminal history
information be stored separate from investigative and intelligence
information.

20. Regulation of intelligence collection. Restrictions on the kind
of intelligence information that may be collected and retained
and/or prohibition on its storage in computerized systems.

21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination. Restrictions on
dissemination of intelligence information.

22. Security. Requirements that criminal justice agencies institute
procedures to protect their information systems from unauthorized
disclosure, sabotage and accidents.

23. Transaction logs. Records that must be maintained by criminal
justice agencies indicating when and to whom criminal justice
information is disseminated.

24. Training employees. Security and privacy instruction that
must be provided to employees handling criminal justice
information.

25. Listing of information systems. A mandatory disclosure of the
existence of all criminal justice information systems describing
the information contained in such systems.

26. Freedom of Information Act (including criminal justice
information). Provisions for public access to government records
that apply to criminal justice records.

27. Freedom of Information Act (excluding criminal justice
information). Provisions for public access to government records
from which criminal justice records are specifically excluded.

28. Central State repository. Establishment of a bureau, agency or
other entity to collect and maintain criminal history records or
criminal identification data for all criminal justice agencies in the
State.

29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted.
Enactment of the National Crime Prevention and Privacy
Compact, which authorizes the State repository to provide record
responses for all authorized III purposes.

Section 3: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by
classification category


A. Survey comparison of changes in State statutes and regulations
by classification category

The table on the following page[TRC1], "Survey comparison of
changes in State statutes and regulations by classification
category," graphically depicts comparative results of legislative
survey findings for the years 1974, 1978, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987,
1989, 1992, 1994, 1997, 1999 and 2002, which track changes in
State security and privacy statutes and regulations by
classification category. The reader should note, however, that each
survey year is included in the results of the succeeding survey,
with the cumulative sum of the legislative activity reflected in the
current survey year.

The table shows that the leveling trend detected in the 1984
survey has continued. Surveys through 1981 showed significant
increases in the number of States enacting new laws or regulations
in most categories. More recent surveys show that legislative
activity defining the criminal record dissemination philosophies
and practices of particular States has slowed. This probably
reflects two developments:

1. Most of the States have now settled on the basic approach they
favor concerning the regulation of the maintenance and use of
criminal records, and recent legislation has dealt with refinements
in existing laws rather than enactment of new initiatives. (State
legislatures have been busy in recent years, however, dramatically
expanding the number of noncriminal justice agencies and private
sector entities that are authorized to access criminal history
records for licensing purposes and to determine employment
suitability.)

2. The basic principles of security and privacy reflected in the
DOJ regulations have become widely recognized and understood
by criminal justice officials, and procedures to prevent abuses
have been established and enforced. Security and privacy issues
and concerns are not as prevalent as they were in the late 1960s
and early 1970s, when the States were beginning to wrestle with
the problem of compliance with the regulations. 


As a result, the survey comparison table shows that, in many
categories, the numbers for 2002 are the same - or only slightly
higher or lower - as those for 1984 through 1999. In most of the
others, the numbers reflect new enactments by only one or two
States.

Survey comparison of changes in
State statutes and regulations by classification category*

*The figures presented are cumulative and may include statutes or
regulations previously enacted but excluded from prior surveys.

**Data are unavailable for these years.

***The Compact was signed into law October 1998, and became
effective April 1999 after its ratification by two States.

+In some cases, where the total number has decreased, laws have
been repealed.

B. Summary of State statutes and regulations by classification
category

The other 29 tables in this section - titled "Summary of State
statutes and regulations by classification category" - contain
detailed matrixes summarizing State statutes and regulations
through July 1999. For easy reference, the table for each particular
classification category is organized alphabetically by State, and
the matrix references are keyed to section numbers of the State
codes.

These summary tables, and all other tables in this Compendium,
reflect the laws of 53 jurisdictions: the 50 States and the District
of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. The citations
are to official compilations of State laws and regulations. Only
title and section numbers are set out in these summary tables. For
the full titles of the compilations to which the citations refer,
please refer to the "State Code Titles" table in section 4, page 55.


Summary of State statutes and regulations
by classification category


1. State regulatory authority


AL   41-9-591, 594; AAC 265-X-1-.01. -.02
AK   AS 12.62.110(5)
AZ   41-1750, 2405
AR   12-12-201, 207, 211, 1003; 015 07 CARR 001; 183 00
CARR 001
CA   Penal Code 11077
CO   24-33.5-401, 412; 24-72-301
CT   29-11; 54-142j
DE   3-10208; 11-8501, 8601, 8605
DC
FL   943.05
GA   35-3-31, 32, 33
HI   846-2.5
ID   19-5203; 67-3003
IL   20-3930/4, 7
IN   5-2-5-10; 10-1-2.5-1
IA   232.45, .148; 690.1; 692.10
KS   22-4704
KY   17.147, .150(6)
LA   15:579
ME   25-1541(4)
MD   27-746
MA   6-168
MI   28.155; 28.241 et seq.
MN   299C.01, .03
MS   45-27-7(1)(a)
MO   43.509, 515
MT   44-2-201; 44-5-105
NE   29-3516
NV   179A.080
NH   106-B:14
NJ   53:1-12
NM   29-3-1; 32A-15-4
NY   Exec. Law 837, Subd. 8; Corr. Law 29(2); Pub. Off. Law
89(1)(b)
NC   114-10.1, .5, 12, 19; 132-1.4
ND   12-60-07; Admin. Code 10-13-02-01
OH   109.57
OK   47-2-124; 74-150.4, Subd. 4.; 74-150.7, Subd. 2.;
74-150.7d
OR   181.066, .511, .521, .540, .555, .560, .575; 181.730(3);
Reg. Ch. 257, Div. 
10
PA   18-9152, 9161
PR   4-531
RI
SC   23-3-130
SD   23-5-5, 6; Reg. 2:02:01, 05
TN   38-6-101; 38-10-101 through 105
TX   Crim. Proc. Art 60.02; Gov't Code 411.042
UT   53-10-201
VT   20-2051, 2056d
VI   3-258
VA   9.1-102, 127
WA   10.97.090
WV   15-2-25
WI
WY   7-19-105; 9-1-623


2. Privacy and security council


AL   41-9-594; AAC 265-X-1-.04
AK   AS 12.62.100
AZ   41-2404.A.11(i)
AR   12-12-201, 202, 203
CA
CO
CT   54-142q
DE   11-8603
DC
FL   943.06, .08; Reg. 11C-5
GA   35-3-32
HI
ID
IL   20-3930/2, 7
IN   5-2-5-11
IA
KS
KY
LA   15:578
ME
MD   27-744
MA
MI   Regs. ¤ 28.5107
MN
MS   45-27-7(1)(f)
MO   43.515, 518
MT
NE   29-3505
NV   179A.080
NH   Reg. 7.C, D
NJ
NM
NY   Pub. Off. Law 89, Subd. (2)(a)
NC
ND
OH
OK   74-150.4
OR   181.540, .715; Regs. ¤ 257-10
PA
PR   4-531g
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY


3. Dissemination regulations


AL   16-22A-5, -6, -9, -10; 22-50-90; 22-14-31; 26-1-4;
27-8A-13; 32-2-60, 61, 62; 
38-12-3, -13-7; 41-9-621, 621(6), 639, 642; AAC 20-X-5-.01,
-23-.01; AAC 290-
3-2-.01; AAC 660-5-26-.07, -27-.05; AAC 265-X-2-.02; AAC
660-5-46-.01 et 
seq.; Reg. 003
AK   12.62.160(b)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8), (9), (10);
18.20.302; 
21.27.040; 47.33.100; 4 AAC 12.010, 62.210; 7 AAC 50.210,
56.210, 75.215; 13 
AAC 68.215, 300-345
AZ   4-202; 14-5308; 15-350; 20-142, -340.04; 32-921, -1109,
-2304; 41-172, -
1279.02, .04, -1750.G.1, .2, .4,  -2147, 2204.6; R 13-1-01; R
13-1-06, .A
AR   6-17-410, 414; 9-13-105, -28-409; 12-12-211, 1008, 1009,
1010, 1011, 1102, 
1303, -33-202, 203, 207; 17-1-103, -19, 203, -27-313, -97-312,
-103-307; 20-
13-1102, 1103, -33-202, 203, 207, -48-802, 806, -78-602;
21-15-102, 103, 107; 
015 07 CARR 01; 007 05 CARR 005; 016 06 CARR 006
CA   Business & Professions Code 144, 6054, 7583.9, 18868,
19527; Civil Code 
1798.24a; Education Code 44237, 44830.1, 45125, 87013; Family
Code 8712, 
8811, 8908, 17505, 17506; Financial Code 777.5, 4990, 6525,
14409.2, 17331, 
17414.1, 50317; Government Code 8880.35, 8880.38, 13968.5,
50317; Health & 
Safety Code 1522, 1568.09, 1569.17, 1596.871, 1797.172; 12101,
25186.3; Labor 
Code 432.7; Penal Code 273.75, 830.11, 11076, 11077, 11105,
13300, 14202; 
Public Utilities Code 394, 5135; Vehicle Code 12523.6; Welfare
& Institutions 
Code 272, 4689.2, 16501; Step Foundation Inc. v. Younger (App
1979), 157 Cal. 
Rptr. 117
CO   10-13-112, 803, -15-103; 12-7-103, -25.5-106, -38.1-104,
-47-304, 307, 411, 
412, -47.1-511, -48.5-105, -60-503, -61-103; 13-14-102;
16-11.7-106, -11.8-
103, 17-1-204; 18-12-105.1; 19-2-411.5, -5-207; 22-32-109.8, .9;
24-33.5-
415.4, -35-205, 206, -72-301, 303, 305, 305.3, .4, .5, 306;
25-1-124.5, -3.5-
203, -27-104, 105, -3.5-203; 26-6-103.5, 107; 27-1-110
CT   10-221d; 13b-97; 14-14; 17a-151; 17b-749k, 750; 18-81l;
21-40, 100; 19a-80, 
87b; 22a-6m; 29-11, 16, 29, 36f, 152f; 54-142k, n, p, 227, 231
DE   3-10128(b), 10202; 10-2702; 11-1448A, 6506, 8511,
8513, 8514, 8516, 8561, 
8571; 13-2205(a)(3)(e); 14-2901; 16-122, 1141, 6712, 9405,
9809A; 21-2708; 
24-904A, 1203, 1204, 1311, 1329, 5504; 29-4805(a)(16), (17),
4807A, 7920A; 
31-309(d)(1), (2), 613, 613(c)
DC   2-531 et seq.; 5-113.04; 10-404; 23-1303(a); 1 DCMR
1004.1, 1004.4, .5
FL   24.108; 39.306; 114.05; 119.07; 125:5801; 166:0442;
285.18; 311.12; 397.451; 
400.215; 409:907; 415.1045; 454.026; 455:213; 456:039, :0391;
464:009; 
468:453; 475:175, .615; 493.6121; 548.024; 550.902, 908;
624:34; 626.8732; 
648:34, .355; 744.3135; 790.06, 0.65; 943.053, .0535, .0542,
.0575, .0585, 
.059, .14; 957.13, .14; 1012:21; Reg. 11C-6, 7
GA   15-11-83; 16-11-129; 35-3-33, 34, 34(b), 35, 37(d)(5);
42-8-101; 43-47-6; 50-
18-101; Reg. 140-2-.01, .04(1)(b), (1)(b)(3), (1)(e), (1)(f), (1)(g),
.04(2), 
(2)(b)
HI   261-17; 333F-22; 346-19.6, 19.7, 154; 352-5.5; 353C-5;
463-5 et seq; 514A-82; 
571-34; 846-9, 10, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45; 846D-4, 6
ID   32-717D; 33-130A; 39-1105, -1208, -1210; 67-3008
IL   15-305/13, -310/10b.1; 20-205/205-425, -415/8b.1, /10;
20-505/5; 20-415/8b.1; 
20-510/510-100; 20-1205/6; 20-1505/1505-200; 20-1605/10.1;
20-1710/1710-75; 
20-1905/1905-150; 20-2105/2105-15; 20-2310/2310-185;
20-2505/2505-675; 20-
2605/55a(22), (28), (32), (34), /2605-315, /2605-320; 20-2630/3,
3.1, 5, 
(Sealed Records Only), 7; 20-2635/1 et seq.; 20-2705/2705-90;
20-3205/5; 40-
5/2-156; 40-5/14-149; 40-5/15-187; 40-5/18-163; 50-705/6.1;
50-708/15; 65-
5/10-2.1-6.2; 105-5/10-21.9; 105-5/34-18.5; 215-5/401;
220-5/4-101; 225-10/4, 
4.1, 4.2, 5(d), 22; 225-210/2002; 225-446/75, 80; 230-5/9, /15,
/15(3); 230-
10/22; 235-5/4-7; 325-5/7.4; 625-5/6-106.1, 411; 625-5/189-200;
705-405/1-7, 
5-905
IN   4-30-6-3, -5; 4-32-13-4; 5-2-5-4; 5-2-5-5, 5.1; 5-2-5-15;
10-1-1-21; 12-17.4-
4-3, 5-3; 16-25-6-2, -27-2-4, -28-13-4; 20-5-2-7, -6.1-3-7.1;
25-36.5-1-18; 
28-11-5-4.5; 34-28-2-3; 35-47-2.5-3, -6
IA   216A.136; 232.71.15, .71B; 252B.9.7(h); 481-57.12(3)(a),
58.11(3)(a), 
59.13(1)(a), 62.9(a), 63.11(3)(a), 64.34(1), 65.9(a);
571-15.9(3)(f), 
.10(3)(f); 657-6.2(4)(b); 661-4.4(5), 8.104(d), 11.12; 692.2, .2(5), 
.2(b)(6); 692A.13A; 692.17; 724.10, .17; 904.602, 602.2(g); Reg,
61-
2.13.2(j); Regs. 441-107.8(c), 108.8(13), 109.6(b), 110.25.8(a),
110.31, 
113.13, 157.3(17)(b); Regs. 661-11.12
KS   16-5-1(e)(2)(B); 17-20-1(c), 2234; 22-4704, 4707(b);
32-964; 39-969, -970; 
41-311b; 65-516, 1120, 2839a, 3503, 4209, 5117; 74-4905, 8705,
8803, 8804, 
8806, 9804, 9805; 75-712; 17-20-1(c); Reg. 10-11-2; Reg.
10-12-1, 2
KY   7.111; 15A.310; 17.150, .151, .160, .165, .167; 27A.450;
60.380; 165A.465; 
230.310; 238.525; 281A.300; 329A.040; Reg. 500 KAR 2:020;
Reg. 502 KAR 
30:060; Reg. 503 KAR 1:140
LA   4:275, 4.75; 15:546, 547, 548, 576, 584, 587, 587.1, 587.2,
587.3; 17:15, 
2047, 2048.31; 26:800; 36:454, 654; 37:760, 763.1, 918, 920.1 ,
969, 969.1, 
1270, 1277, 1395.1, 3505, 3507.1; 40:61.1, 1235.2, 1236.2,
1300.52, 1379(k); 
44:3; 46:51.2, 282, 286.1; 49:654; 51:911.24; Reg. LAC 22-507,
1303, 1305
ME   5-5301; 16-612(3), 612(3)(A), (B), 612(A), 613(1), (2),
615, 617, 631; 18-A-
9-304; 20-A-6103, 13011; 22-3480, 4021
MD   10-102, 103, 104; 11-506.1; 12-204, 207; 19-907; 20-305;
27-255C(e)(4); 27-
749; 38A-7A; 83C-132; Fam. Law 5-560 through 5-568; Reg.
12.15.01.10, .11, 
.12, .13; Reg. 12.15.02.06;
MA   6-168, 168A, 172, 172B, 172C, 172E, 178A, 178I, 183;
22C-37; 128A-9A; 140-
122, 122B, 129B, 131; 234A-33; Reg. 803 CMR 3.02, 3.03, 3.04,
3.06, 4.01(3), 
4.02, 4.04(3), 5.00 et seq. 7.03, 7.03(1)(d)
MI   15.231 et seq.; 28.243, 244; 256.604, 605b, 605c;
257.248f; 259.85, 85a; 
333.20173; 338.1068; 380.1230, 1230a; 380.1230, 1230a;
432.221; 500.249a; 
600.949; 722.13; Regs. 432.1301; Governor's Executive Order
1990-10
MN   13.82 Subd. 15; 53A.03; 65B.81; 122A.18; 123B.03;
148B.21, .22; 148C.09; 
171.321, .3215; 221.84; 241.021; 244.052; 245A.041 ; 299C.046,
.095, .13, .46 
.62, .68; 299F.035 ; 299L.03; 326.336; 349.151; 364.04(1), (2),
(3); 525.545; 
9555.6125 ; Admin. Code 7400.0200; 7406.0360; 7411.0610;
7414.0400; 
7570.0020; 7862.0010; 7863.0010; 7864.0010; 9502.0345 ; Reg.
6 S.R. 269-272
MS   25-53-51; 31-5, 7, 12; 37-9-17, -13-89; 41-4-7; 43-11-13,
-15-6, -20-8, -57; 
45-27-7(1)(d), 12; 45-31-5, 7, 12, 13; 47-5-26; 67-1-57;
75-67-323, -421, -
509; 81-18-13 [repealed eff. 7/01/05]; 97-37-7
MO   43.540, .541, .543; 84.720; 590.060, .070; 610.100, 120;
660-317; Reg. CSR 
30-4.070, 4.370, 4.375
MT   44-5-214, 301, 301(1)(a), (1)(b), 302, 303
NE   2-1247; 7-102; 14-702; 29-3520; 28-1229; 29-210, 3520,
3523, 4013; 43-107, 
3201; 69-2410, 2412; 71-15, 163, 1903; 79-8, 112, 114; 81-1410,
1810; 83-
1217, 1217.02
NV   7.030; 127.281; 179A.075.4(a); 179A.100, .180 through
.240; 179B.250; 
202.254; 202.366; 239B.010; 379.0077; 391.033, 100; 394.465;
414.290; 
422.393; 424.033; 425.393; 432A.175; 449.176, .179; 453A.210;
463.335; 
482.3163; 574.040; 599B.115; 624.165, .265; 632.344; 645D.180;
648.203
NH   159-C:2, :3; 170-E:7, -G:8-c; 189:13-a; 328-B:4; Reg.
3.A.2; Reg. 3.B, Reg. 
3.B.2, .3, .8 ; Gen. 106-B:14, :14-a; 651-B:7
NJ   NJAC 2B1-3; 5:2A-5, 15; 5:12-76; 6:1-100; 8:43I-3.1;
9:3-54.2; 10:121-4.2; 
11:1-28.7, -37.17, :5-15, :5-3.3; 13:1E-128; 13:39-3.13, :445-9.2;
13:59-1.1; 
13:85-3.1; 15A:3A-2; 16:79-1.1; 17:15A-36, 15C-23, 22B-6;
18A:6-4.14, -7.2, 
2a, :39-19.1; 19:8-10.1, :9-5.1; 26:2H-7.18, -83, 2Y-5;
27:25-15.1; 30:4-3.5, 
:4C-26.8, -86, :6D-65;  32:2-37; 39:4-197.10; 40A:12A-22.2;
45:5A-26, -35; 
:11-24.4;  48:16-22.3a; 52:4B-5.1; 53.1-20.8, .9a, 9b,. .9c, 16, 17
NM   6-24-12; 11-13-1; 14-2-1; 14-2A-1; 28-2-3; 29-3-2, 3;
29-6-4.2; 29-10-4, 5, 
6, 7; 29-17-5; 32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22; 32A-15-3; 34-2-9;
59A-11-2; 60-2E-5, 11, 
3A-9; 74-4-4.7, 6-5.1, 9-21
NY   Alco. & Bev. Con. Law ¤126; Arts & Cul. Aff. Law ¤
61.11; Bank. Law ¤¤ 22(a), 
22(b), 369, 591, 591(a), 4002(a), 4002(b), 9001-a(a), 9000-a(b);
Civ. Ser. 
Law ¤ 50(4)(d); CPL ¤¤ 330.20; Ch. 264, Laws of 1993; Corr.
Law 29, ¤ 168-
1(5); Dom Rel ¤ 115-d; Educ. ¤ 305, ¤ 3004-b, ¤ 3035; Env.
Cons. Law ¤¤ 27-
0913, 27-1517; Exec. Law ¤ 243, ¤ 837(6), (8-a), c(c), m, n, p, ¤
99; Family 
Court Act ¤ 306.2; General Bus. Law ¤¤ 69-o, 72, 81, 89-e, 89-I,
89-ddd, 359-
e, 421; Gen. Muni. Law, Art. 9-A, ¤ 481; Insur. Law ¤¤
1102(e)(2), 2108(d), 
6802(g), 7802(f)(4), 7803; Men. Hyg. Law ¤¤ 7.09, 9.27, 9.37,
9.39, 9.41, 
9.43, 9.45; Penal Law ¤ 400.00(4); Pub A ¤ 1728; Pub. Health ¤
230;  Pub. 
Off. Law 87(2)(e); Rac. Pari-Mut. Wag. & Breed. Law ¤¤ 213,
309, 407; Racing 
& Wagering ¤¤ 1101, 1107; Soc Serv ¤ 378-a; ¤ 390-b; Tax Law
1605(e); Veh. & 
Traffic ¤ 509-d, 1229-d; Reg. 9 NYCRR 6052.1, 6150.4; CPL
160.30, .50(1)(c), 
.55(1)(c), 170.56(3)
NC   14-404, 415.12; 18B-902; 48-3-309; 53-243.16; 58-7-37,
-71-50; 62-333; 66-
165; 74C-8; 74D-2; 84-24; 85B-3.2; 90-11, -30, -85.15, -171.48,
-210.25, -
224; 90D-7; 93A-4; 95-47.2; 106-65.26; 110-90.2; 114-10, 10.1,
19, 19.2, 
19.9, .3, .4, .5, .6, .7, .8., .10, .11; 115C-238.29K, -332; 122C-80;
131D-
10.3A, 40; 131E-265; 132-1.4; 143B-146.16; 160A-304; Reg.
NCAC 4F.0401, 
.0402, .0403, .0407, .0408; Reg. 10 NCAC 34.2701, .2702, .2703,
.2704; 10 
NCAC 41F.0813; 12 NCAC 2I.0203; 12 NCAC 4F.0405, .0406;
12 NCAC 9B.0102, 
.0103; 12 NCAC 10B.0305; 12 NCAC 70.0201, .0203, .0902,
.0904; 12 NCAC 
11.0201; 14A NCAC 8H.0203; 16 NCAC 6C.0313; 19A NCAC
3J.0902; 21 NCAC 4B, 
4B.0201
ND   4-41-02; 5-02-02; 12-60-16.5, .6; 12-60-16.6 after one
year; 12.1-32; 14-15-
11; 15-38; 15.1-13-14; 43-30-06; 50-11-02, 02.4, 06.8;
50-11.1-06.2; 50-11.3-
01; 50-12-03.2; 53-06.1-06, -06.2-05; Admin. Code 10-13-04-01;
93-02-01-06; 
93-02-02-13; 99-01.3-02-02
OH   109.57(A), .77, .572 ; 173.41; 311.01 ; 2950.03 ; 3301.32,
.88, .541; 
3319.39; 3712.09; 3721.121; 3722.151; 3734.42 ; 3770.02;
4734.20; 5104.012, 
.013; 5119.072; 5123.081; 5126.28; 5153.111; Admin. Code
109:5-1-01; 4501:2-
10-03
OK   10-404.1, 7004-1.5, 7209; 21-1290.12; 51-24A.2, .8;
56-1025.2; 57-138, 566.4; 
59-698.7; 63-1-1950.8; 70-6-190; 74-150.9, 9B, 9C
OR   181.537, .538, .539, .555(1), (2), .560(1)(b); 267.237;
326-607; 418.747; 
657A.030; Reg. 411-009-0015, 0021; 416-540-0060;
416-800-0060; Reg. 411-009-
0015, 0021; 416-540-0060; 416-800-0060
PA   3-456.4; 5-3302; 18-6111.1, 9121(a), (b), 9124, 9125;
23-6344; 24-1-111; 35-
7131.503, 10225.502; 42-1904, 6342, 9798; 53-2164; 62-432;
63-456.310, 674; 
Reg. 4-7.343; 6-11.18; 6-15.121; 22-8.2; 37-21.11; 52-30.12,
30.72; 55-
3490.125, 2380.20, 6000.22, 6000.31, 6400.21, 6500.23;
365-11.3-303, 11.8-
801, 11.9-901
PR   4-531, 531c; 7-2003; 8-69, -73; 34-1725, -1725d; 34-1725,
-1725d; Reg. 8(a), 
(c)(1)
RI   11-37.1-6, -12; 12-1-4; 14-1-34; 15-7-11; 16-48.1-4, 1-5;
23-19.1-10; 38-2-2
SC   13-7-610; 20-7-23-3-45, -130; 20-7-610, 616, 635, 1640,
2386, 2725, 2730, 
2740, 2800, 2810, 2850, 2860, 2900, 3097; 40-35-230;
59-25-115, -150-165; 61-
6-505, 2005; Gen. 23-3-130, 140; Reg. 73-23, 23E.
SD   13-49-14.3; 23-3-15.2, 15.3; 23-5-11, 12, 12.1; 23-6-9, 14;
23-7-7; 42-7B-
19.2; 58-30-23.6; Reg. 2:02:03:06
TN   8-8-102 ; 10-7-504(a)(2) ; 33-1-209 ; 37-1-408; 37-5-511 ;
38-6-106, 109 ; 
39-13-525, -17-1351 ; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(c)(1);
45-6-206 ; 49-5-
413, -7-2005 ; 54-1-132 ; 62-26-201-230, -35-107, 119 ; 71-2-403
; 71-3-
504(4), 507 ; Op. Atty. Gen. (Feb. 28, 1984); Regs. 1395-1-1-.09,
.09(3)
TX   Alco. Bev. Code 109.532; Crim. Proc. Art 60.02; Educ.
Code 22.082, .083, 
.084, 51.215; Fam. Code 58.0051; Finance Code 14.151, .153,
.155, 156.206; 
Gov't Code 411.081 through .138, 176, 466.201, 467.036; Health
& Safety Code 
250.002, .007, 765.003; Hum. Res. Code 32.0322, 40.054,
42.056, .105, 91.0165 
; Ins. Code art. 21.28; Labor Code 301.042 ; Occ. Code 504.057,
.155, 161, 
901.253, .354, 1702.282, 2003.051 ; Ops. Atty. Gen. (May 14,
1976) No. 127; 
(Sept. 24, 1976) No. 144; Prob. Code 698 ; Civ. Stat. Art. 41a-1;
art. 179e, 
Sec. 5.04; art. 179f, Sec.3; art. 4413, Sec. 39; art. 45120, Sec.
17A; TRCS 
Art. 6252-17a
UT   26-8a-310, -21-9.5, -39-107; 31A-16-103, -23-203,
-25-203, -26-203; 53-5-706, 
-10-108, 108(1), 201; 58-31b-302, -47b-302, -55-302, -63-302,
-65-302; 61-2-
9, -2c-202; 62A-2-120, -4a-202.4; 76-10-526; 78-2-4.5, -3a-307.1,
-30-3.5; 
Admin. Code R501-14-1
VT   10-6605f; 15A-1-113; 20-2053, 2056a, e, 2060; 33-309;
CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 
4.10(i), 6.30(a), (b); CVR 80-70-001, Rule 38
VI   32-428(b)(8)
VA   9.1-142; 15.2-709.1; 18.2-308, 308.2:2, .2:3; 19.2-389,
389.1, 391, 392.02, 
80.2; 22.1-296.2, .3; 27-6.2, 97.2; 32.1-126.01, .02, 162.9:1;
37.1-183.3, 
197.2, 20.3; 54.1-2506, 306, 3925.2, 4407; 58.1-4008; 63.1-198.1,
248.7:2; 6 
VAC 20-120-50
WA   9.46.210; 10.97.030(2), 050(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6);
10.98.150; 
18.165.070, .170.130; 21.20.370; 28A.400.303, 304, 305, 306;
43.33A.025; 
43.43.700; 43.43.745, .838; 43.43.815, .830 through .845;
43.52.525; 
46.72.100; 66.08.030, .24.010, .025; 67.17..005, 060; 70.74.360;
71.09.115; 
72.09.345, .580; 74.15.030(2)(b); 82.36.060; 82.38.110;
82.42.040
WV   15-2-24(c), (d), (e); 17B-2-5a; 18A-3-10; 19-12E-5;
19-24-1; 29-3-12, 22B-601
WI   19.35(1); 134.59; 165.82, 825, 83; 939.615, 615(6)(c)
WY   7-4-211; 7-19-106(a), 106(k), 201; 9-1-627; 11-25-104;
21-7-401; 33-21-
122(c)(viii)


4. Inspection


AL   41-9-642, 643; 32-2-60, 61; AAC 265-X-02-.03
AK   12.62.160(b)(11)
AZ   41-1750.G.7; R 13-1-08
AR   12-12-211, 1013
CA   Penal Code 11121, 11124, 13320, 13323
CO   24-72-301, 303, 306
CT   54-142k
DE   11-8513
DC   1-1522; 5-113.06; 1 DCMR 1004.1 et seq.
FL   943.056; Reg. 11C-8
GA   35-3-37, 37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-12; 846-14
ID   67-3007
IL   (For 4.2) 20-2630/7; (For 4.3) 20-2630/7  (Redacted copy)
IN   5-2-5-8, 5-14-3-3
IA   692.5; Regs. 661-11.4, .5, .15
KS   22-4709, 4711; Reg. 10-13-2
KY   17.150; 27A.450; 61-874, 884; Reg. 502 KAR 30:070 
LA   15:588; Reg. LAC 22-701 et. seq.
ME   16-620(1)
MD   27-751; Reg. 12.15.01.05
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.02, 6.05, 605(5), 6.06
MI   15.233, .235
MN   13.03(3), .04, Subd 3
MS   45-27-11
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT   44-5-214
NE   29-3520, 3525
NV   179A.150
NH   91-A:4; Reg. 3.B.9
NJ
NM   14-2-1 et seq.; 14-2A-1; 29-10-6, 8; 32A-2-26, 32;
32A-3B-22
NY   CPL 160.50(1)(d), .55(1)(d); Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.1
NC   Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-07-01
OH
OK   51-24A.5
OR   181.540(1)(b)
PA   18-9151, 9152; Reg. 37-195.4
PR   4-531c; Reg. 9(a)
RI   38-2-3
SC   Reg. 73-25
SD   1-11-13; 23-5-12, 13; 23-6-9, 11, 14; Reg. 2:02:03:01, :06
TN   10-7-506, 507; 40-15-106; 40-32-101; 40-35-313; Regs.
1395-1-1-.08(1)(k)
TX   Gov't Code ¤ 552.023; Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT   53-10-108(8); Admin. Code 722-2-3
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.10, .20
VI   3-881(b)
VA   9.1-132; 19.2-389; 6 VAC 20-120-50, 60
WA   10.97.080; 43.43.730; Reg. WAC 446-20-090
WV   29B-1-3
WI   19.35(1)
WY   7-19-109


5. Right to challenge


AL   41-9-645; AAC 265-X-02-.03
AK   AS 12.62.170(b)
AZ   R 13-1-08.D
AR   12-12-211, 1013; 20-13-1107; 20-33-208, -48-807; 016 06
CARR 006; 016 14 CARR 
004; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Penal Code 11126, 13324
CO   24-72-307
CT   54-142l
DE   11-1448A, 8506(e), 8560
DC
FL   943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA   35-3-37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-24; 846-14
ID   67-3007
IL   20-2630/7; 20-3930/7(h)
IN   5-2-5-8(b), 10(b)
IA   692.5; Regs. 661-11.4
KS   22-4709, 4711
KY   Reg. 502 KAR 30:070
LA   15:588; Reg. LAC 22-903
ME   16-620(2), (3)
MD   19-908; 20-306; 27-752; Reg. 12.15.01.05, .06, .07
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07, 6.08
MI
MN   13.04, Subd. 4
MS   45-27-11
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT   44-5-215
NE   29-3525, 3526
NV   179A.150
NH   Reg. 7
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(b)
NM   29-10-8
NY   Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.2
NC   Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND   12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK
OR   181.540(1)(b)
PA   18-9151, 9152; Reg. 37-195.5
PR   4-531n; Reg. 9(b)
RI
SC   Reg. 73-25
SD   Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN
TX   Health & Safety Code 250.005; Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT   53-10-108(8)(b)(i); Admin. Code R722-2-5
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.30
VI
VA   9.1-132; 6 VAC 20-120-70
WA   10.97.080; 43.43.730; Reg. WAC 446-20-120
WV
WI
WY   7-19-109


6. Judicial review of challenged information


AL   41-9-645; AAC 265-X-02-.03
AK   AS 12.62.170(c)
AZ
AR
CA   Penal Code 11126
CO   24-72-307
CT
DE   11-1448A
DC
FL
GA   35-3-37(c); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI   92F-25
ID
IL
IN
IA   692.5; Regs. 661-11.6
KS
KY   17.150(5); Reg. 502 KAR 30:070, Sec. (6)
LA   Reg. LAC 22-917
ME   16-620(4)
MD   27-753(c), Reg. 12.15.01.05, .07
MA   6-176
MI
MN   13.04, Subd. 4; 14-63 et seq.
MS   45-27-11
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM   29-10-8
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR   Reg. 257-010-0035(5)
PA   18-9152(e)
PR   4-531o
RI
SC
SD   Reg. 2:02:05:01
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA   43.43.730
WV
WI
WY   7-19-109


7. Purging nonconviction information

AL   41-9-625
AK   AS 12.62.190
AZ
AR
CA   Health & Safety Code 11361.5 ; Penal Code 851.8
CO
CT   54-142a
DE   11-8506(c)
DC
FL   943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA   35-3-37(c)
HI   831-3.2; 853-1(e)
ID   67-3004
IL   20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/5; 705-405/5-915
IN   35-38-5-1, -3
IA   661-8.305.1; 692.16, .17
KS
KY
LA   15:586; 44:9
ME
MD   27-736, 737
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI   28.243
MN   152.18; 299C.11; 609A.03
MS   45-27-9(2), (4)
MO   610.123, 124, 125, 126
MT   44-5-202(8), 212
NE   29-3523
NV   179A.075.3c; 179A.160
NH   Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21; 32A-20-1
NY   CPL 160.50; Family Court Act ¤ 354.1
NC   15A-146; 90-96(b), (d); Reg. NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND   Admin. Code 10-13-11-02
OH   109.60; 2951.04.1
OK   22-18, 19, 305.4, 991cv1, cv2
OR   137.225
PA   18-9122
PR
RI   12-1-12, 12.1
SC   17-1-40; Reg. 73-27
SD   23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN   40-15-106; 40-32-101
TX   Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 55.01
UT   53-10-108; 77-18-10(1)
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA
WA   10.97.060
WV   15-2-24(h)
WI   165.84(1)
WY


8. Purging conviction information


AL
AK   AS 12.62.190
AZ
AR
CA   Health & Safety Code 11361.5 ; Penal Code 1203.45
CO
CT   54-142a
DE   11-8506(c)
DC
FL   943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA   35-3-37(c)
HI
ID
IL   705-405/5-915 (juvenile only, class B and below)
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA   6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI
MN   152.18; 364.04; 609A.03
MS   45-27-9(10), 11
MO
MT   44-5-202(8), 212
NE
NV   179A.160
NH   651:5; Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM
NY   CPL 160.55; Family Court Act ¤ 354.1
NC   15A-145; 90-96; Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND   Admin. Code 10-13-11-01
OH
OK   22-991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225
PA   18-9122
PR   4-531g; 34-1731
RI   12-1.3-1
SC   22-5-910; 56-5-750(F); Reg. 73-27
SD   23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN   38-6-118
TX
UT   77-18-11; 78-3a-905
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA
WA   9.94A.230; 9.96.060; 10.97.060
WV
WI
WY   7-13-301; 14-6-241; 35-7-1037


9. Sealing nonconviction information


AL
AK   AS 12.62.180
AZ   13-4051
AR   16-90-904, 905
CA   Penal Code 851.8, .85
CO   24-72-308
CT   29-16; 54-142a
DE   11-4372
DC   SCR-Crim. 118
FL   943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA   42-8-62
HI   831-3.2
ID
IL   20-2630/5; 705-405/5-915
IN   35-38-5-1
IA
KS   12-4516a; 21-4619
KY   17.142
LA   44:9
ME
MD
MA   276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI   333.7411; 750.350a(4); 762.14; 769.4a
MN   152.18; 299C.11; 609A.02(1)
MS
MO   610.100, 105, 120
MT   44-5-202(8)
NE
NV   179.255, .275
NH
NJ   2C:36A-1, :52-6
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26
NY   CPL 160.50(1)(c), 170.56, 720.15, 725.15
NC
ND
OH
OK   22-18, 19, 991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(1)(b)
PA
PR
RI   12-1-12.1
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT   77-18-10(1)
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA   19.2-392.2; 6 VAC 20-120-80
WA   13.50.050
WV   5-1-16a
WI
WY



10. Sealing conviction information


AL
AK   AS 12.62.180
AZ   13-907
AR   16-90-904, 905
CA   Penal Code 1203.45 
CO   24-72-308
CT   54-142a, 142b
DE
DC   48-904.01; SCR-Crim.118, Crim. 32(f)
FL   943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA
HI   712-1256; 831-3.1
ID
IL
IN   35-38-5-5
IA
KS   12-4516; 21-4619
KY
LA   44:9
ME
MD
MA   94C-34; 127-152; 276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI   712A.18e; 780.623
MN   242.31; 364.04; 609A.02(2); 638.02, Subd. 3-5
MS
MO   610.106, 120
MT   46-18-204
NE
NV   179.245, .275; 453.336
NH   318-B:28-a; 651:5
NJ   2C:52-2, 3, 4, 5
NM
NY   CPL 160.55(1)(c), 720.15
NC
ND
OH   2953.32
OK   22-18, 19, 991cv1, cv2; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(1)(a)
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-1, 2
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17
TN
TX
UT   77-18-11
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 10.10
VI
VA
WA   13.50.050
WV   5-1-16a; 49-5-18
WI
WY



11. Removal of disqualifications


AL
AK
AZ   13-907
AR
CA   Penal Code 851.8 ; 1203.4, .4a, .45
CO   24-72-308
CT
DE
DC
FL   943.0585
GA   42-9-1 et seq.
HI   712-1255; 853-1
ID   18-3316
IL
IN
IA
KS   12-4516(e); 21-4619; 22-3722
KY
LA   44:9
ME
MD   27-641; 27-735 through 741
MA   276-100A, C
MI
MN   152.18; 242.31; 364.03
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH   651:5
NJ   2C:52-27
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY   CPL 160.60; 720.35(1)
NC
ND
OH   2951.04.1; 2953.33(A)
OK   22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR   137.225
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-4
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17
TN   40-35-313(b)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY



12. Right to state nonexistence of record


AL
AK   AS 12.62.180(d)
AZ
AR   16-90-902
CA   Labor Code 432.7 ; Penal Code 851.8, 1203.45
CO   24-72-308
CT   54-142a
DE
DC   48-904.01
FL   943.0585
GA
HI   712-1256; 831-3.2(b)(e)
ID
IL   20-2630/7
IN
IA
KS   12-4516(e); 12-4516a(d)
KY
LA
ME   16-618
MD   27-641, 739, 740
MA   94C-34; 127-152; 151B-4(9); 276-100A, C
MI   37.2205a
MN   152.18, Subd. 2
MS
MO   610.110
MT
NE
NV   179.285
NH   651:5
NJ   2C:52-27
NM   30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY   CPL 160.30, .60, 170.56(4)
NC   15A-145, 146; 90-96
ND
OH   2953.33(B)
OK   22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR   137.225(3)
PA
PR
RI   12-1.3-4
SC
SD   23A-27-14, 17 (Exceptions: 23A-27-14.1, 23-3-42)
TN   40-35-313(b)
TX   Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 55.03
UT
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.20
VI
VA   19.2-392.4
WA   10.97.030(8)
WV
WI
WY



13. Research access


AL   Reg. 003
AK   AS 12.62.160(b)(7)
AZ
AR   12-12-1010
CA   Penal Code 11144, 13202
CO
CT   54-142m
DE   11-8513, 8514, 8516, 8521
DC
FL   943.057; Reg. 11C-6
GA   33-3-33(8); Reg. 140-2-.04(1)(f)
HI   846-9(4); 846D-4
ID
IL
IN
IA   692.4, .7(1), .22
KS
KY   17.150
LA   15:548; Reg. LAC 22-1305
ME   16-613(4)
MD   27-749; Reg. 12.15.01.12
MA   6-173; Reg. 803 CMR 7.03(1)(b), 8.00 - 8.03
MI
MN   13.03
MS
MO   43.507; 45.531
MT   44-5-304
NE
NV   179A.075.2a, .6; 179A.100.5a, .175
NH   Reg. 3.B.7
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(e)
NM   29-10-6(B)
NY   Exec. Law ¤ 837(4)
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0407, .0408
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-10-01; 10-13-11-03
OH
OK
OR   Reg. 257-010-0030
PA
PR   Reg. 8(c)(3)
RI
SC   Reg. 73-24D.
SD   23A-27-13.1, 16
TN
TX   Gov't Code 411.083
UT   53-10-108(1)(f)
VT   20-2056b; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 8.90
VI
VA   19.2-389
WA   10.97.050(6); Reg. WAC 446-20-190, 420
WV
WI   19.35(1)
WY   7-19-106(a)(v)


14. Accuracy and completeness


AL   41-9-622, 648
AK   12.62.120, 150 (a), (b), (c), 170
AZ   41-1750.U, -1751, 2205.A,.B; R 13-1-02, 04, 08.E, .G
AR   12-12-209, 210, 1004, 1007, 1013, 1015; 015 07 CARR
01; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Government Code 69844.5, 71280.5; Penal Code 11079,
11107, 11115, 13100, 
13100.1, 13125, 13127, 13150, 13151, 13152 ; Reg. 702(c),
707(c)
CO   24-33.5-412(3), 72-307
CT   29-11, 12, 13; 54-142h(a), (b), (c), 142j
DE   11-8506, 8506(f), 8507, 8508, 8509, 8510, 8511, 8512,
8525
DC   5-113.01, .02, .05
FL   943.052, .055, .056; Reg. 11C-4
GA   17-4-27; 35-3-33(4), 36, 36(k), 37(c), (d)(5); 42-8-62;
Reg. 140-2-.03, 07; 
1975 Atty. Gen. Op. No. 75-110
HI   846-3, 4, 5, 6, 13; 846D-3
ID   67-3005, 3007
IL   20-2630/2.1; 20-2635/21; 20-3930/7(i); 705-405/5-901
IN   4-1-6-2, 5; 5-2-5-3, 10, 10(a)(1), 12; 10-1-1-15, 18;
10-1-2.5-4
IA   690.4, .5; 692.5, .13, .15, .17, .19(6), .21; Regs. 661-11.9,
.10
KS   21-2501; 22-4705(a), 4706(f); Reg. 10-10-1, 2, 3, 4
KY   17.110, .150(1), (1)(c), (6), .152, .1521, .1522; 27A.300;
194A.065; 196.093; 
Reg. 502 KAR 30:030
LA   15:579, .580, .581, .591, .594; Reg. LAC 1519; Reg. LAC
22-1103, 1105, 1503, 
1507, 1509
ME   16-612(3)(B), 616; 25-1542-A, 1544, 1547
MD   27-746(5), 747, 748(6); Reg. 12.15.01.08, .09, .16; Court
Rule 16-308, 503
MA   6-18.75; 6-171, 175; 66A-2; 127-23, 27; 263-1A ; Reg.
803 CMR 6.07, 6.08, 
6.10
MI   28.155, .243, .245a; 712A.11, .18; 769.1, .16a; 764.29;
Regs. ¤ 28.5018
MN   13.05; 299C.06, .10 through .14, .10(2), .10(3), .17
MS   45-27-7(2)(c), 9
MO   43.503; Reg. CSR 30-4.040, .050
MT   44-2-206, -5, -105, 202, 206, 213, 213(5), (6), 215
NE   29-209, 3507, 3515, 3516, 3517, 3526; 81-1423
NV   179A.075.3, .080.3, 090, .150
NH   106-B:14, 14-a; Reg. 4, 5
NJ   53:1-13, 14, 15, 18, 20.1, 20.2
NM   29-3-1, 3, 8
NY   CPL 160.20, 30; Exec. Law ¤ 837(4), 837-a, 837-b, c;
Family Court Act ¤¤ 
306.1(4), 354.1
NC   15A-502, 1382; Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0201, .0202, .0302,
.0801
ND   12-60-16.2, 16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-02-01; 10-13-03-03;
10-13-07-12; 10-13-
08-01, 02; 10-13-12-01, 02, 03, 04, 05; 10-13-13-01
OH   109.57(A), .61, .62; 1347.05
OK   47-2-124; 74-150.10, .12
OR   181.511(1)(b), (c), .521, .530, .555(3)
PA   18-9111, 9112, 9113, 9114, 9141, 9142, 9161; 61-2173,
2174; Reg. 37-195.2
PR   Reg. 6, 7, 10
RI   12-1-7, 8, 9, 10, 11
SC   14-17-325; 23-1-90; 23-3-40, 120, 130; Reg. 73-21, 22,
22E, 28; 20-7-780
SD   23-5-4, 8; 23-6-16; Reg. 2:02:02:01, 03, 04, 05;
2:02:04:01
TN   38-6-103; 38-10-101 through 105
TX   Code of Crim. Proc., Ch. 60
UT   53-10-208; 63-25a-104
VT   20-2053(b), 2054; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 3.20, 4.10,
6.30(1), (b)(5), 11.10-
11.30, 11.40
VI
VA   9.1-102, 131; 16.1-299, 299.1, 301; 19.2-389D, 390; 6
VAC 20-120-40, 90
WA   10.97.040, 045, 090(3); 10.98.100, 050, 090; Reg. WAC
446-20-260, 310
WV   15-2-24(f), (g)
WI   165.83, .84
WY   7-19-104, 105, 107, 107(h); 9-1-625


15. Dedication


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA   35-3-33(13)
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY



16. Civil remedies


AL
AK   AS 12.62.200
AZ   39-121.02; R 13-1-05.C
AR   015 07 CARR 01; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Civil Code 1798.53 ; Labor Code 432.7
CO   24-72-305; 30-10-101
CT   4-197
DE   11-1448A, 8514, 8523; 29-10005
DC   2-537
FL   119.02
GA   35-3-39
HI
ID
IL   20-2635/1 et seq.
IN
IA   692.2(3), .6
KS   22-4707
KY   17.157; 61.882
LA   15:596
ME   25-1550
MD   27-753; Reg. 12.15.01.10
MA   6-168, 177; Reg. 803 CMR 5.06, 6.08(4)
MI
MN   13.08; 299C.21
MS
MO
MT   44-2-205; 44-5-112
NE   29-3528; 84-712.03, .07
NV   179A.230
NH
NJ   47:1A-4; 53:1-20
NM   14-2-12
NY   Exec. Law 837-b(3); Corr. Law 755
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4G.0201
ND
OH   1347.10
OK
OR   192.490
PA   18-9181, 9183
PR
RI   12-1-12; 12-1.3-4
SC   23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD   Reg. 2:02:04:03
TN
TX
UT
VT   1-319, 320; 20-2056a, 2056c; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 7.50,
13.10-13.22
VI
VA   2.1-346.1; 9-194
WA   10.97.050(8), .110; 42.17.390; 43.43.834(7); Reg. WAC
446-20-300
WV
WI   19.37
WY



17. Criminal penalties


AL   32-2-63; 41-9-600
AK
AZ   41-1756
AR   12-12-212, 1002; 015 07 CARR 01; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Government Code 6200, 6201; Labor Code 432.7; Penal
Code 502, 11125, 11141, 
11142, 11143, 13302, 13303, 13304
CO   24-33.5-424, -72-309
CT   29-17; 54-142c, 54-142k(e)
DE   11-1448A, 8514, 8523, 8562
DC
FL   119.02, .10; 409:175
GA   16-11-182 ; 35-3-38
HI   846-16; 846D-7
ID   67-3008
IL   20-2630/7; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN   5-2-4-7; 5-2-5-5(c); 35-47-2.5-10
IA   169.6; 147.21; 154A.6; 155.17; 455B.213; 542B.32;
542C.16; 543B.52; 544A.27; 
602.3301, .10141; 692.5, .7
KS   22-4707, 4710
KY   17.157
LA   15:596; 44:9D; Reg. 22-311, 313
ME   16-619
MD   27-739; State Gov't Code ¤ 10-627
MA   6-178
MI   28.243a, .246
MN   13.09; 364.10
MS   25-53-59; 45-27-13
MO   109.180; 610.115
MT
NE   29-3527; 69-2419
NV   179A.240, .300; 239.010
NH   106-B:14; 159-C:10; 651:5.X
NJ   2C:52-30; 53:1-20
NM   32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22
NY
NC   14-454
ND   12-60-16.10
OH   1347.99; 2953.35
OK   21-461
OR
PA   18-6111; 61-2176
PR   8-77
RI
SC   23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD   23-5-4; 23-6-4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16
TN   10-7-505; 37-1-409(b), (c); 40-15-106(c); 40-32-101(c);
62-26-230
TX   Gov't Code 411.085; 552.351, .352; Health & Safety Code
250.008
UT   53-10-108; 76-10-527
VT   20-2054(b)
VI
VA   9.1-136; 18.2-308.2:2, 2:3; 19.2-392.3C, 392.4C; 52-8.3
WA   10.97.120; 43.43.810, .856
WV   15-2-24(j); 29B-1-5
WI   946.72(1)
WY


18. Public records


AL   36-12-40
AK   AS 40.25.120
AZ   39-121.01; 41-1346
AR   25-19-103
CA   Government Code 6251 et seq.
CO   24-72-301, 303; 30-10-101
CT   1-200 et seq.
DE   29-10002(d)(4)
DC   2-531 et seq.
FL   119.01
GA   50-18-70 et seq.
HI   92F-12
ID   9-335 et seq.
IL   5-160/1 et seq.; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN   4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-1
IA   22.7(9); 692.2; Regs. 661-11.12
KS   45-215 et seq.
KY   61.870 et seq.; Reg. 200 KAR 1:020
LA   44:1 et seq.
ME   1-401-410
MD   State Gov't Code ¤¤ 10-611 et seq.
MA   4-7, cl. 26; 6-172; 66-10; 66A-1 et seq.
MI   750.492
MN   13.01 et seq.; 13.87
MS   25-53-53; 25-59-19
MO   109.180, .190
MT   2-6-101
NE   29-3520; 84-712 et seq.
NV   179A.100; 239.010 et seq.
NH   7-A:1; 91-A:4
NJ   47:1A-1
NM   14-3-1 et seq.
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87 et seq.
NC   132-1 et seq.
ND   44-04-18
OH   149.43 et seq.
OK   51-24A
OR   181.540
PA   65-66.1 et seq.
PR   32-1781
RI   38-2-1 et seq.
SC   30-4-10 et seq.
SD   1-27-1 et seq.
TN   10-7-504 et seq.
TX   Gov't Code 552.001 et seq.
UT   63-2-101 et seq.
VT   1-315 et seq.
VI   3-881
VA   42.1-76 et seq.
WA   10.97.030; 42.17.250
WV   29B-1-1
WI   19.35(1)
WY   16-4-201 through 205


19. Separation of files


AL
AK
AZ
AR   16-90-904
CA   Penal Code 11075, 11105
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA   35-3-32; Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
ID
IL
IN   5-2-4-2
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI   15.232; 28.272
MN
MS
MO   610.120
MT
NE
NV   62.350.3
NH
NJ
NM   32A-20-1
NY   Family Court Act ¤ 306.1(4); Exec. Law ¤ 837(8)
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA   18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN   37-10-207; Regs. 1395-1-1-.09(4)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI   48.396
WY



20. Regulation of intelligence collection


AL   41-9-639
AK
AZ
AR   12-12-1011
CA   Civil Code 1798.14, .15
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL   943.08
GA   35-3-32(2); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
ID
IL
IN   5-2-4-3, 4
IA   692.8, .9; Regs. 661-8.202(5), (6); 661-8.203(4), (5)
KS
KY   17.150(2)
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN   13.05, Subd. 4
MS   25-53-53, 55
MO
MT   44-5-501 through 515
NE
NV   179A.070.2
NH
NJ   53:6-4, 5
NM   29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-20-1
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR   181.575
PA   18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD   23-5-10, 11
TN
TX
UT   53-10-105
VT   20-1954
VI
VA
WA   43.43.854
WV
WI
WY   9-1-627


21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination


AL   41-9-641
AK
AZ
AR   12-12-1011
CA   Civil Code 1798.18, .24
CO   24-72-305(5)
CT
DE   29-10002(d)(5)
DC   2-534
FL   119.07, .072; 943.08
GA   35-3-32(4); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI   92E-3(1)(B)
ID
IL   5-140/7(1)(d)
IN   5-2-4-6
IA   216A.136; 252B.9.7(h); 692.8, .8A, .9; Regs. 61-2.13.2(j);
661-8.202(7), 
.203(6)
KS
KY
LA
ME   16-611(8), 614
MD   10-618(f)
MA
MI   15.243
MN   13.05, Subd. 4
MS   25-53-53, 55; 45-27-19, 31-5(5)(a)
MO   45.531; 610.100
MT   44-5-103(3)(b), 303, 404(2), 501 through 515
NE
NV   179A.120.2, .150.1
NH
NJ   53:6-5
NM   29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-15-4
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA   18-9106, 9121(d); Reg. 37-195.1
PR
RI
SC
SD   23-5-11
TN   10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX
UT   53-10-105
VT   20-1955
VI
VA
WA   42.17.310; 43.43.854, .856
WV
WI
WY   9-1-627


22. Security


AL   41-9-594, 621(9); AAC 265-X-2-.02; Reg. 004, 005
AK   12.62.150(a)(3), (4), (6); 13 AAC 68.220
AZ   13-2316
AR   12-12-1014, 015 07 CARR 01; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Penal Code 11077(a); Reg. 707, 707(a), 708
CO
CT   54-142i
DE   11-8505, 8608, 8609, 8521
DC
FL   119.031; 943.08; Reg. 11C-6
GA   35-3-33(13); 16-9-90 et seq.; Reg. 140-2-.02, .08, .09, .11
HI   846-7; 846D-5
ID   67-3007
IL   20-3930/7(g)
IN   4-1-6-2; 5-2-5-10(2); 5-14-3-7
IA   692.12, .14, .19(8); Reg. 661-8204
KS   22-4704; Reg. 10-11-1
KY
LA   15:578(F); 15:589; Reg. LAC 22-1705, 1707, 1709, 1711,
1713, 1715, 1717, 
1719, 1721, 1723, 1727
ME   16-614(1)(G); 25-1541(4), 2904
MD   Reg. 12.15.01.10, .11, .12, .15
MA   6-171; 174; 66A-2; Reg. 803 CMR 7.06
MI   Regs. ¤ 28.5009, .5318
MN   13.05, Subd. 5; 299C.48(a)
MS   45-27-7(1)(f), 12
MO   Reg. CSR 30-4.090
MT   44-5-401, 402, 403, 404, 405
NE   29-3518, 3519
NV   179A.080.1, .2
NH   Reg. 1, 2
NJ   NJAC 13:59-1.6(E); S.O.P. B-33, B-34, B-35 
NM
NY   Exec. Law 837 (amended); Pub. Off. Law ¤ 87, 87(2)(i)
NC   114-10(2); Reg. 12 NCAC 4E.0203, .0303, .0401,
4F.0101, 4G.0102
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-06-01, 02, 03
OH   1347.05; Admin. Code 4501:2-10-03, 11
OK   51-24A.1 et seq.
OR   Reg. 257-010-0025
PA   18-9131; Gen. Reg. 37-195.6
PR   4-531g; Reg. 14, 16, 17
RI
SC   Reg. 73-21A.(3), 73-26
SD
TN   39-14-601 et seq.
TX
UT
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.70, 7.10, .20, .30, .40
VI
VA   6 VAC 20-120-110, 150, 160
WA   10.97.090; 43.43.815, .838; Reg. WAC 446-20-210
through 230, 270, 300
WV
WI
WY   7-19-105; 9-1-627


23. Transaction logs


AL   41-9-640; AAC 265-X-02-.01
AK   AS 12.62.150(a)(7)(B); AS 12.62.160(c)(4)
AZ
AR   12-12-1008; 015 07 CARR 01; 183 00 CARR 001
CA   Penal Code 11078 ; Reg. 707(c)
CO
CT   54-142h(c)
DE   11-1448A, 8513(e); Reg. 1.5
DC
FL   943.055
GA   35-3-33(2); Reg. 140-2-.06
HI   846-6
ID   Id. APA 11.10.01.023
IL
IN   4-1-6-2
IA
KS   Reg. 10-14-1
KY
LA   Reg. LAC 22-1311
ME   16-620(5)
MD   Reg. 12.15.01.10, .11, .12
MA   6-172
MI   Regs. ¤ 28.5105
MN
MS   45-27-7(2)(b)
MO
MT   44-5-215, 305, 404(3)
NE   29-3517
NV   179A.130
NH   Reg. 3.C.4
NJ
NM
NY
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4F.0401, .0402
ND   12-60-16.3; Admin. Code 10-13-04-02; 10-13-05-04
OH   Admin. Code 4501:2-10-06
OK   47-2-124; 51-24A.1 et seq.
OR   Reg. 257-010-0035
PA   18-9121(f)
PR   Reg. 9(e)(f), 10
RI
SC   Reg. 73-23F.
SD   Reg. 2:02:02:05
TN
TX
UT
VT   CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 6.50, 14.10-14.30
VI
VA   9.1-132; 6 VAC 20-120-50, 160
WA   10.97.050(7)
WV
WI
WY   7-19-106(h)


24. Training employees


AL
AK   AS 12.62.150(a)(5)
AZ
AR   12-12-210, 211
CA   Penal Code 11077(d)
CO
CT   54-142i(d)
DE   11-1448A, 8505, 8561
DC
FL   943.08
GA   35-3-33(6); Reg. 140-2-.09(4)
HI   846-7(5)
ID   67-3007
IL
IN   4-1-6-2; 10-1-1-13
IA   692.11
KS
KY   17.147(4)
LA   Reg. LAC 22-2105
ME
MD
MA   6-171
MI
MN   299C.10(2), .65
MS   25-53-51(c); 45-27-7(1)(b)
MO
MT   44-2-202
NE   29-3518
NV
NH
NJ
NM   29-3-9
NY
NC   Reg. 12 NCAC 4E.0401, .0402, .0403
ND
OH   109.56; Admin. Code 4501:2-10-03
OK
OR   Reg. 257-10
PA
PR
RI
SC   Reg. 73-26D.
SD
TN   62-26-226
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA   6 VAC 20-120-130, 140
WA   10.97.090; Reg. WAC 446-20-240
WV
WI
WY   9-1-624(a)(iii)


25. Listing of information systems


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN   4-1-6-7
IA   22.11
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA   Reg. 803 CMR 3.08
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH   7-A:2
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA   18-9171
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY



26. Freedom of Information Act 
(including criminal justice information)


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO   24-72-301, 303
CT
DE
DC   2-531 et seq.
FL   119.01, .07; 943.053
GA   50-18-70
HI
ID
IL
IN   4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-2(6)
IA
KS   45-215 et seq.
KY   61.878
LA   44:3(4)
ME
MD
MA   66A-1
MI   15.231 et seq.
MN   13.03, .80 et seq.
MS   25-59-19
MO
MT
NE   29-3520
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND   44-04-18
OH
OK   51-24A.8
OR   181.540
PA
PR
RI   38-2-1
SC
SD   1-27-1
TN
TX   Gov't Code 552.108(c)
UT
VT   1-317(b)(5)
VI   3-881(g)
VA   2.1-342.2(F)(1)
WA
WV
WI
WY



27. Freedom of Information Act 
(excluding criminal justice information)


AL
AK   12.62.160(a)
AZ   39-121.01
AR   12-12-909, 1003; 25-19-105
CA   Government Code 6254
CO
CT   4-190(i)
DE   29-10002(d)(4)
DC
FL   119.07
GA
HI   92F-11 through 92F-19
ID   9-340B
IL   5-140/7(1)(d)
IN
IA
KS
KY   17-150(4); 61.878
LA   44:3(4)
ME   1-402
MD   State Gov't Code ¤¤ 10-611 et seq.
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH   91-A:5; 106-B:14
NJ   Exec. Order 123
NM
NY   Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND
OH   109.57(D); 1347.04
OK   51-24A.8
OR   192.501, .502, .505
PA
PR
RI   38-2-1
SC
SD
TN   10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX   Gov't Code 552.108(a), (b)
UT   63-2-102
VT   1-317(b)(5); 20-2056
VI
VA   2.1-342.2(F)(1); 2.1-384(3), (7)
WA   42.17.250; 43.43.710
WV   29B-1-4
WI
WY   9-1-627; 16-4-201


28. Central State repository


AL   41-9-591
AK   AS 12.62.110(1)
AZ   41-1750.A, 2205
AR   12-12-210, 207, 208, 1001
CA   Penal Code 11105
CO   24-33.5-401, 412
CT   29-11
DE   11-8501(b)(1)
DC   5-113.02
FL   943.051
GA   35-3-31
HI   846-2, 2.5
ID   67-3003
IL   20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/8
IN   5-2-5-2; 10-1-1-12; 10-1-2.5-1
IA   690.1
KS   22-4705
KY   17.140, .151
LA   15:578(1)
ME   25-1541
MD   27-747(b); Reg. 12.15.01.04
MA   6-168
MI   28.241 et seq.
MN   299C.05, .06, .09
MS   45-27-7(1)(a)
MO   43.500, .540
MT   44-5-213
NE   29-209, 210
NV   179A.075.1
NH   106-B:14
NJ   53:1-13
NM   29-3-1
NY   Exec. Law 837(6)
NC   114-10.1; 132-1.4
ND   12-60-07
OH   109.57(C)
OK   74-150.9
OR   181.066
PA   18-9101
PR   Act 13; Reg. 6
RI   12-1-7
SC   23-3-110
SD   23-5-1, 2; 23-6-1
TN   38-6-101; 38-10-101 et seq.
TX   Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 60.02; Gov't Code 411.042
UT   53-10-201
VT   20-2051; CVR 28-050-001, Sec. 3.10
VI
VA   19.2-388
WA   43.43.700
WV   15-2-24
WI   165.83, .84
WY   7-19-107(a)


29. National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact enacted


AL
AK   AS 12.64.010
AZ   41-1750.01
AR   12-12-1010(b)(2)(A)
CA
CO   24-33.5-412; 24-60-2701, 2702
CT   29-164f
DE
DC
FL   943.0543
GA   35-3-39.1
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA   692B.1, .2, .3
KS   22-5001
KY
LA
ME   25-1701 et seq.
MD
MA
MI
MN   299C.58
MS
MO
MT   44-5-601
NE
NV   179A.800
NH
NJ   53:1-32
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK   74-150.9a, .9b
OR
PA
PR
RI
SC   23-3-1010
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

Full titles of State code compilations are set out in individual
State tables in 
section 4.


Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and regulations by State



This section of the Compendium sets forth (1) A "State code
titles" table that lists the full titles of the official compilations of
each State's laws and regulations, and (2) Summary tables of each
State's criminal history record privacy and security laws and
regulations that includes (a) the full titles for each classification
category and subcategory, and (b) the citations for that particular
category or subcategory, which indicate section numbers of the
State codes. These summary tables are set out in alphabetical
order by State.

The purpose of this collection is to make available to the
researcher the variety of approaches and alternatives taken by the
States with regard to their criminal history information practices.
However, please note that this effort is current through July 1999;
thus, further review of a particular State's legislation or
regulations may be appropriate to include more recent enactments.

Readers are reminded that the full text of the State laws cited
herein is available for a small fee from SEARCH. A full,
hard-copy library of these laws, regulations and other materials is
maintained by SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, at its offices in Sacramento, California.
Copies of specific enactments may be ordered (for a fee) by mail,
telephone, or email. (SEARCH is at 7311 Greenhaven Drive,
Suite 145, Sacramento, California 95831, 916/392-2550. Email
twyla@search.org.)




State code titles

Alabama Code
Alaska Statutes
Arizona Revised Statutes Annotated
Arkansas Statutes Annotated
California (Codes listed on summary table)
Colorado Revised Statutes
Connecticut General Statutes Annotated (West)
Delaware Code Annotated
District of Columbia Code
Florida Statutes Annotated
Georgia Code of 1981
Hawaii Revised Statutes
Idaho Code
Illinois Compiled Statutes
Indiana Code Annotated
Iowa Code Annotated (West)
Kansas Statutes Annotated
Kentucky Revised Statutes Annotated (Baldwin)
Louisiana Revised Statutes Annotated (West)
Maine Revised Statutes
Maryland Annotated Code of 1957
Massachusetts General Laws Annotated (West)
Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
Minnesota Statutes Annotated
Mississippi Code Annotated
Missouri Annotated Statutes (Vernon)
Montana Revised Codes Annotated
Nebraska Revised Statutes
Nevada Revised Statutes
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
New Jersey Statutes Annotated (West)
New Mexico Statutes Annotated
New York (Codes listed on summary table)
North Carolina General Statutes
North Dakota Century Code
Ohio Revised Code Annotated (Page)
Oklahoma Statutes Annotated (West)
Oregon Revised Statutes
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated (Purdon)
Puerto Rico Laws Annotated
Rhode Island General Laws
South Carolina Code
South Dakota Compiled Laws Annotated
Tennessee Code Annotated (Vernon)
Texas Codes Annotated (Vernon)
Utah Code Annotated
Vermont Statutes Annotated
Virgin Islands Code Annotated
Virginia Code
Washington Revised Code Annotated
West Virginia Code
Wisconsin Statutes Annotated (West)
Wyoming Statutes

11/21/03 jb