U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001


April 2004, NCJ 202803


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ctcvlc01.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#civil
---------------------------------------------------------------

By Thomas H. Cohen, J.D., Ph.D.
Steven K. Smith, Ph.D. 
BJS Statisticians
                                     
------------------------------------
Highlights
                                     
In 2001 plaintiffs in the 75 largest counties won just over half 
the 12,000 general civil cases at trial, with 442 or 4% awarded 
$1 million or more

*  During 2001 a jury decided almost 75% of the 12,000 tort, 
contract, and real property trials in the Nation's 75 largest
counties. Judges adjudicated the remaining 24%. Tort cases (93%) 
were more likely than contract cases (43%) to be disposed of by 
jury trial.

*  The 11,908 civil trials disposed of in 2001 represents a 47% 
decline from the 22,451 civil trials in these counties in 1992.
 
*  In jury trials, the median award decreased from $65,000 in 1992 
to $37,000 in 2001 in these counties.  

*  Two-thirds of disposed trials in 2001 involved tort claims, and 
about a third involved contractual issues.
  
*  Overall, plaintiffs won in 55% of trials. Plaintiffs won more 
often in bench trials (65%) than in jury trials (53%), and in 
contract trials (65%) more than in tort (52%) or real property 
trials (38%).  

*  An estimated $4 billion in compensatory and punitive damages
were awarded to plaintiff winners in civil trials. Juries awarded 
$3.9 billion to plaintiff winners while judges awarded $368 million. 
The median total award for plaintiff winners in tort trials was 
$27,000 and in contract trials $45,000.

*  Punitive damages, estimated at $1.2 billion, were awarded to 6% 
of plaintiff winners in trials. The median punitive damage award 
was $50,000.

*  Plaintiffs prevailed in about a fourth (27%) of medical 
malpractice trials. Half of the 311 plaintiffs who successfully 
litigated a medical malpractice claim won at least $422,000, and 
in nearly a third of these cases, the award was $1 million or 
more.
----------------------------------------------------- 

State courts of general jurisdiction in the Nation's 75 largest 
counties disposed of almost 12,000 tort, contract, and real 
property cases by   jury or bench trial during 2001. Juries
decided almost three-fourths of these cases, while judges resolved
about a fourth of them.
 
Plaintiffs won in 55% of trials and were awarded a total of about 
$4 billion in compensatory and punitive damages. The median total 
award was $33,000, and the amounts awarded to plaintiff winners 
ranged from under $10 to $454 million. Tort claims comprised 67% of
trials disposed. The majority of trials (62%) were disposed of in 
less than 2 years.

These are some of the findings from a study of civil trials in State 
courts involving tort, contract, and real property cases in the 
Nation's 75 largest counties. This study is part of a series
examining general jurisdiction court civil cases resolved through 
trials.***Footnote 1: Courts of general jurisdiction may handle
many types of civil cases including estate, domestic relations,
probate, and small claims.  This report only examines general 
civil cases (that is, tort, contract, and real property) in courts
of general jurisdiction.***

The sample of civil cases included tort, contract, and real property 
cases. Federal trials, trials in counties outside the 75 most 
populous counties, and trials in State courts of limited jurisdiction
were excluded from the sample.

Cases that reach trial

During calendar year 2001 State courts of general jurisdiction in 
the Nation's 75 most populous counties disposed of an estimated 
11,908 tort, contract, and real property trial cases. Previous 
studies conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics found that 
a majority of tort, contract, and real property cases are resolved 
prior to going to trial and that only a small percentage (about 3%) 
are actually disposed of by jury or bench trial verdict.*** Footnote 
2: See Tort Cases in Large Counties, NCJ 153177, April 1995 and 
Contract Cases in Large Counties, NCJ 156664, February 1996.***

Civil trials, however, are crucial because it is through these 
cases that important information on civil case components
such as compensatory award amounts, punitive damages, and case 
processing times are known. In the majority of civil cases that 
settle, the terms of settlement agreements and other key case
information may not be publicly available.  

Most (67%) of the civil cases disposed of by trial in the Nation's 
75 most populous counties during 2001 involved a tort claim, in 
which plaintiffs alleged injury, loss, or damage from the negligent 
or intentional acts of defendants. Cases dealing with allegations 
of breach of contract (contract cases) accounted for 31% of trials 
and real property cases about 2%.

The most frequent kinds of civil cases disposed of by trial were 
automobile accident cases (36%); premises liability cases, alleging 
harm from inadequately maintained or dangerous property (11%); 
seller plaintiff cases, involving payment owed by a buyer or 
borrower (10%); and medical malpractice cases in which the 
plaintiff claimed harm from a doctor, dentist, or other health 
care provider (10%).

Cases involving the purchasers of goods or services seeking a 
return on their money (buyer plaintiff) and cases that arose due 
to the intentional or negligent misrepresentation of a product or
company (fraud) accounted for 7% and 5% respectively, of all 
civil trials.  

Product liability cases represented less than 2% of all civil 
trials.

Types of cases disposed of by trial

Generally, juries decided civil cases involving issues of personal 
injury or harm, such as automobile or medical malpractice. For 
example, juries were more likely to decide tort cases (93%) than 
contract cases (43%) or real property cases (27%). Judges disposed
of business-related civil trials such as contract (57%) and real 
property cases (73%) more often than juries (not shown in a table).

Over 90% of medical malpractice and premises liability cases were 
decided by jury trial. Among the sampled product liability cases, 
100% of asbestos and 93% of the other product liability cases
were disposed of by jury trial. The majority of automobile tort 
cases were also adjudicated by jury trial.

Among contract cases, bench trials disposed of 77% of seller 
plaintiff cases, 77% of rental lease cases, and 53% of fraud 
cases. Only in employment discrimination suits was a substantial
majority of contract cases (89%) decided by a jury (not shown in 
a table).

Comparing jury and bench trials

The cases before judges and juries differ in terms of case type, 
plaintiff win rates, damage awards, case processing times, and 
other trial characteristics.

Type of litigants: Plaintiffs

In 83% of all trial cases, the plaintiff was an individual.
***Footnote 3: Each civil trial case, regardless of the number of
plaintiff types involved, was assigned one of four plaintiff 
designations from the following hierarchy: hospital, business, 
government, and individual.  A case with multiple plaintiffs received 
the designation of whichever type appeared first in the hierarchy.*** 
Businesses were plaintiffs in 16% of all trials, government agencies, 
1% and hospitals, 0.3%. Because tort litigation primarily involves
personal injury, over 97% of tort trials had an individual as the 
plaintiff (not shown in a table).

As contract cases often involved business disputes, businesses
comprised a substantial percentage (44%) of all contract plaintiffs.
Government agencies represented a majority of plaintiffs (69%) in 
eminent domain property cases (not shown in a table).

Type of litigants: Defendants

Defendants in all trials were primarily divided between individuals 
(47%) and businesses (42%).  ***Footnote 4: A case with multiple
defendants was assigned the defendant type that appeared first in the
hierarchy.*** Hospitals were named as the defendant in 6% of all
trials and governments 5%. In jury trials, 47% of defendants were 
individuals and 40% were businesses. Defendants in bench trials were 
evenly represented by businesses (50%) and individuals (47%).

Who sues whom?  

The most common type of civil trial involved an individual suing 
either another individual (42%) or a business (31%). Businesses sued 
each other in about 11% of all civil trials.  Among bench trials, a 
larger proportion of businesses were more likely to be plaintiffs 
suing either businesses (27%) or individuals (14%) (not shown in a
table).

Multiple plaintiffs and defendants

Over 42,000 litigants were involved in the 12,000 tort, contract, and 
real property trials disposed of in the Nation's 75 largest counties 
in 2001. Cases with multiple defendants were more prevalent than cases 
with multiple plaintiffs. About three-fourths (73%) of all trials had 
only one plaintiff while about half (56%) had only one defendant (not 
shown in a table).

Trial outcomes

Overall, plaintiffs won in 55% of trials. The rate of plaintiff 
success varied according to the type of case litigated.
Plaintiffs were more likely to win in contract cases (65%) than 
in either tort (52%) or real property cases (38%).

*  Among tort trials plaintiffs prevailed in over half of animal 
attack (67%), automobile (61%), and asbestos (60%) cases.  
Plaintiffs won in less than a third of medical malpractice (27%) 
cases. 

*  For contract trials the estimated win rate surpassed 70% in 
seller plaintiff (77%) and mortgage foreclosure (73%) cases and 
exceeded 60% in buyer plaintiff (62%), rental lease (65%), and
subrogation (67%) cases. Conversely, plaintiffs prevailed in 44% 
of employment discrimination cases and 46% of partnership 
disputes. 

Trial awards

During 2001 plaintiff winners in civil trials were awarded an 
estimated $4.4 billion in compensatory and punitive damages
in the Nation's 75 largest counties. Slightly over half the 
estimated total amount ($2.3 billion) was awarded in tort
cases.  

The median amount awarded to plaintiff winners for all trial cases 
was $33,000. Contract cases garnered higher median awards ($45,000) 
compared to tort ($27,000) cases.

--------------------------------------
Class action lawsuits

A class action lawsuit requires that (1) the number of persons
be so numerous that it would be impractical to bring them
all before the court, (2) the named representatives can fairly 
represent all of the members of the class, and (3) the class 
members have a well defined common interest in the questions 
of law or fact to be resolved (Black's Law Dictionary).  

Of the 11,908 civil trials litigated in 2001, only 1 could be
classified as a class action. This lawsuit, "Bell v. Farmers 
Insurance Exchange," resulted from the decision of Farmers
Insurance Exchange to classify their claims' representatives as 
administrative personnel, which exempted the insurance company 
from having to pay overtime. The suit was certified as a class 
action because it involved over 2,400 California claims adjustors. 
The jury trial took place in Oakland, California, and a finding 
was entered for the plaintiffs. The award totaled $124.5 million 
of which $90 million was for uncompensated overtime, $1.2 million
for double time, and $34.5 million for prejudgment interest. The 
case took almost 5 years from filing to verdict to litigate.

Source for additional case details: The National Law Journal 
(February 2002) Vol. 24, No. 22 (Col. 3).
--------------------------------------

About 18% of plaintiff winners were awarded over $250,000 in total 
damages while an estimated 7% were awarded $1 million or more. 
Among particular types of cases, asbestos product liability trials 
had the highest median awards, with half of the 19 asbestos cases 
receiving at least $1.7 million in damages. These cases averaged a 
higher number of plaintiffs (3.2 plaintiffs per case) compared to 
the typical tort case (1.4 plaintiffs per case). Among the non-
asbestos product liability cases, plaintiffs recovered a median
award of $311,000. Plaintiff winners in medical malpractice trials 
received a median award of $422,000, with 1 in 3 receiving awards 
of $1 million or more.

Among contract trials, employment discrimination suits had median 
awards of $166,000, with 14% garnering awards of $1 million or 
more.

Jury awards versus bench awards

The data reveal that final award amounts also varied by whether the 
case was decided by a jury or a judge.

-------------------------------------
Largest damage award

Of the 11,908 civil trials studied, the largest damage award 
involved a business dispute between several parties in Texas 
and Mexico. A company in Texas attempted to franchise several
stores in Mexico. Under Mexican law this company could not 
establish franchise con- tracts without a Mexican business
partner. The company sought assistance from several Mexican 
business partners who initially expressed an interest in the
deal; however, the company contended that these business 
associates broke off negotiations and used the insider
information gained to directly buy the franchise for $800 
million. The plaintiff accused their Mexican business
associates and the seller of reneging on the contractual 
deal. 

A jury in Dallas, Texas, found for the plaintiff corporation 
and awarded $90 million in actual damages for lost profit
and $364.5 million in punitive damages. The case, from filing 
to disposition, took 3½ months to process; the trial lasted 
17 days.  The $454 million total award was reduced to $121 
million on appeal.

Sources for additional case details: Los Angeles Times, 
February 9, 2001; Houston Chronicle, May 19, 2001.
-------------------------------------------------

This was particularly true for contract cases where juries awarded 
a median amount of $81,000 compared to the $30,000 median amount 
awarded by judges. Among the employment discrimination cases, 
plaintiff winners received a median award of $218,000 from juries 
and a median award of $40,000 from judges. In seller plaintiff 
cases, juries awarded a median of $68,000 to plaintiffs compared 
to $29,000 by judges (not shown in a table). 

Punitive damage awards

Punitive damages were awarded in 6% of the 6,487 trial cases in 
which the plaintiff won damages. Punitive damages totaled over 
$1.2 billion and accounted for about 28% of the $4.4 billion 
awarded to plaintiffs overall.

The median punitive damage amount awarded to plaintiff winners who
received a punitive damage award was $50,000. Twenty-three percent 
of punitive damage awards were over $250,000, and 12% were $1 
million or more. 

Among tort cases punitive damages were awarded more frequently to 
plaintiff winners in slander/libel cases (59%), intentional tort 
cases (36%), and false arrest/imprisonment cases (26%). Contract 
cases recorded the highest estimated punitive awards in partnership
disputes (21%), employment discrimination (18%), and fraud cases
(17%).

Compensatory versus punitive
damage awards

In civil trials that received punitive damages, substantial 
differences can occur between the amount awarded in punitive 
and compensatory damages.*** Footnote 5: The U.S. Supreme Court
ruled on the compensatory to punitive damages ratio, after this 
sample of civil trials was collected, in "State Farm Insurance
v. Campbell" in which the Court overturned a punitive damage
award that if considered "grossly excessive."  While the Supreme
Court did not delineate a bright line ratio of punitive to 
compensatory damages, it did not delineate a bright line ratio of
punitive to compensatory damages, it did suggest that punitive 
damages "more than four times the amount of compensatory damages
might come close to the line of constitutional impropriety." (State
Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company v. Campbell, April 7, 2003,
123 S. Ct. 1513: 1524.)  In 39% of civil trials that awarded punitive
damages to the plaintiff winner, the amount of punitive damages 
exceeded the amount awarded for compensatory damages.  Punitive 
awards exceeded compensatory awards in 40% of tort trials and in 37% 
of contract trials. 

----------------------------------------
Federal civil trials

Federal district courts exercise jurisdiction in civil actions 
that --
(1) deal with a Federal question arising out of the U.S. 
Constitution, 
(2) are between parties that reside in different States or
countries and that exceed $75,000 at
issue, 
(3) are initiated by the U.S. Government, or 
(4) are brought against  the U.S. Government. (See Federal Tort
Trials and Verdicts, NCJ 172855, February 1999, and "The 
Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts," <www.uscourts.gov/understand03>,
viewed 3/9/2004.)

*  In fiscal year 2001 Federal district courts disposed of 1,964 
tort, contract, and real property cases by jury or bench trial.

*  As in State courts, a small percentage (2%) of the 87,852 
terminated Federal tort, contract, and real property cases
reached trial.

*  A jury verdict disposed of a majority (67%) of Federal tort, 
contract, and real property trials.

*  Federal tort cases (79%) were more likely to be decided by 
jury trial than contract (50%) and property (26%) cases.

*  In about half of Federal tort, contract, and real property 
trials, the plaintiff won the decision. Plaintiffs won 51% of
jury trials and 56% of bench trials.

*  The median amount awarded to plaintiff winners was larger in 
Federal district courts than in the sampled State courts. The 
median award for plaintiff winners was $216,000 for all Federal 
tort, contract, and real property cases disposed of by trial. The 
median award was $228,000 for jury trials and $177,000 for bench 
trials.
---------------------------------------

Case processing time

Among all trials the average case processing time from filing of the
complaint to verdict or judgment was 24.2 months, with half the civil 
trials taking a minimum of 20.2 months to dispose (not shown in a 
table).

*  Tort trials reached a verdict or judgment in an average of 25.6 
months compared to 21.7 months for real property cases and 21.5 
months for contract cases.

*  Among tort cases, non-asbestos product liability trials had one 
of the longest case processing times, averaging 35.1 months from 
filing to verdict or judgment, followed by medical malpractice 
cases with an average of 33.2 months. 

*  The 31 asbestos product liability cases had one of the shortest 
average case processing times (16.8 months).

Number of days in trial

General civil trials conducted in the Nation's 75 most populous 
counties lasted 3.7 days on average.***Footnote 6: Trial days involve
the actual number of business days that a case is in trial. Weekends
and holidays are not counted.*** Asbestos cases took about 3 weeks 
on average to process (14.1 days), while the other product liability 
trials were disposed within nearly 2 weeks (8.1 days). Medical 
malpractice and employment discrimination cases took between 1 and 2 
weeks on average to dispose. The average number of days in trial for
automobile cases, the most common civil case, was 2.9 days.

A bench or jury disposition also affected the length of time in 
trial. Jury trials lasted 4.3 days on average compared to 1.9 days 
for bench trials. The longest jury trial recorded in the sample 
lasted 70 days, and the longest bench trial, 18 days (not shown in 
a table).

Trends in civil trials

The total number of civil trials declined from 1992 to 2001  

The number of civil trials decreased 47%, from 22,451 to 11,908 
cases, since 1992. Tort cases decreased the least (-32%), while 
real property (-80%) and contract (-61%) cases registered the
largest declines. Among tort cases, product and premises liability 
saw the sharpest declines, while medical malpractice and automobile 
torts had insignificant decreases.***Footnote 7: Civil cases disposed
of in 1992 and in 1996 are part of the earlier BJS studies on this
topic. See Civil Jury Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 1992,
NCJ 154346, July 1995, and Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large
Counties, 1996, NCJ 173426, September 1999.***

The growing use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) as a 
diversion from trial, and other statutory reforms aimed at 
limiting damage awards, contributed to the decline in civil trials. 
In addition, the National Center for State Courts reports that the 
number of tort filings declined by 9% in 30 States during the
1992-2001 period. Contract filings, in comparison, rose nearly 21% 
in 17 States after 1995; however, because contract cases account 
for a smaller proportion of civil trials, their impact is less 
substantial than the tort filings.***Footnote 8: The sources for
these findings are Tort Reform Record, American Tort Reform Association,
2003 and B. Ostrom, N. Kauder, and R. LaFountain, Examining the Work
of State Courts, 2002: A National Perspective from the Court Statistics
Project, 2003.***

The percentage of tort plaintiff winners
remained stable in civil trials during the
1992 to 2001 period

In 1992 and 1996, 52% of plaintiffs were successful at trial, while 
in 2001, that percentage was 55%. Among tort cases, around half the 
plaintiffs prevailed at trial from 1992 (47%) to 2001 (52%). Contract 
case plaintiff win rates rose from 1992 (57%) to 2001 (65%).
Conversely, the percentage of prevailing plaintiffs in real property 
cases dropped from 56% to 38% during the 1992 to 2001 period (not 
shown in a table).

From 1992 to 2001 the overall median
awards in jury trials declined  

When adjusted for inflation, the median jury trial award for civil 
cases in 1992 and 1996 was $65,000 and $40,000, respectively. ***
Footnote 9: The inflation adjustment was calculated by utilizing the
inflation calculator on the U.S. Department Labor's website at
<http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm>.***  The median award imposed by 
juries in 2001 was $37,000.
 
Some civil case categories had marked
increases in their median jury awards  

This trend was particularly apparent in product liability trials in 
which the median award amounts were at least 3 times higher in 2001 
than in 1992. The median award amounts also doubled for medical
malpractice cases.***Footnote 10: The inflation rate for medical services
between 1992 and 2001 explains some of the increase in medical malpractice
awards.  The inflation rate for medical services can be calculated on the
U.S. Department of Labor's website at <http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm>.***  

Punitive damages awarded in a small
percentage of jury trials  

Since 1992 the number of jury trials with punitive damage awards has 
remained stable (4% to 6%).

Between 1992 and 2001 the median amounts awarded for plaintiff winners
with punitive damages decreased from $63,000 to $50,000; this decline,
however, was not statistically significant (not shown in a table). 

-------------------------------------
Civil trials involving a wrongful death
claim

Civil cases in which a party alleges that the defendant's negligent 
action or wrongdoing resulted in a death comprised a small number of 
civil trials. These trials, however, can involve large damage awards. 
Of the 11,908 civil trials, 452 had a wrongful death claim. Nearly 
two-thirds (65%) were medical malpractice cases. The remaining
involved automobile (16%), intentional (6%), other torts (6%), 
premises liability (5%), and product liability (2%). The majority of 
wrongful death claims (93%) were adjudicated by jury trial.

Plaintiffs prevailed in about a third (36%) of all wrongful death cases
including 25% of wrongful death cases involving a medical malpractice 
action. In comparison, at least half the estimated plaintiffs
successfully litigated the small number of wrongful death cases with 
an automobile, premises liability, product liability, intentional tort, 
and other tort claim. 

Half the plaintiffs who prevailed in a wrongful death case were 
awarded at least $961,000. The estimated median awards were above 
$2 million for the product liability and other tort cases and
over $1 million for the intentional tort cases. Wrongful death 
cases with estimated median awards below $1 million included medical
malpractice, premises liability, and automobile torts.
------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Definitions of disposition types: 

Jury trial: A trial held before and decided by a group of laypersons
selected according to the law presided over by a judge culminating in 
a verdict for the plaintiff(s) and/or defendant(s).

Bench trial (nonjury trial): A trial held in the absence of a jury 
and decided by a judge culminating in a judgment for the plaintiff(s) 
or defendant(s).

Directed verdict: In a case in which the party with the burden of 
proof has failed to present a prima facie case for jury consideration, 
a trial judge may order the entry of a verdict without allowing the
jury to consider it, because, as a matter of law, there can be only
one such verdict. 

Judgment notwithstanding the verdict: ("JNOV" or Judgment non
obstante veredicto):  A judgment rendered in favor of one party 
despite the finding of a jury verdict in favor of the other party.

Jury trials for defaulted defendants: Some States make provisions 
for a jury to be impaneled even if the defendants in a case fail 
to appear and enter a defense. The purpose of a trial is typically 
to decide issues such as amount of damages. 

Definitions of civil case types:

Torts: Claims arising from personal injury or property damage caused 
by negligent or intentional acts of another person or business. 
Specific tort case types include: automobile accident; premises 
liability (injury caused by the dangerous condition of residential or
commercial property); medical malpractice (by doctor, dentist, or
medical professional); other professional malpractice (such as by 
lawyers, engineers, and architects); product liability (injury or 
damage caused by defective products; injury caused by toxic substances 
such as asbestos); libel/slander (injury to reputation); intentional 
tort (vandalism, intentional personal injury); animal attack (the
negligent supervision of a dog or other animal resulting in an attack);
conversion (unauthorized use or control of another person's personal
property); false arrest/imprisonment (an arrest or imprisonment 
without the proper legal authority); and other negligent acts
(negligence against another party for an act not represented by the 
other case categories).

Contracts: Cases that include all allegations of breach of contract.
Specific case types include seller plaintiff (sellers of goods or
services, including lenders seeking payment of money owed by a buyer 
or borrowers); buyer plaintiff (purchaser of goods or services seeking
return of their money, recision of the contract, or delivery of the 
specified goods); mortgage contract/foreclosure (foreclosures on 
commercial, or residential real property); fraud (financial damages
incurred due to intentional or negligent misrepresentation regarding a
product or company; fraud is also considered a type of tort claim, but
because it arises out of commercial transactions, it was included under
contracts); employment discrimination (claim based on an implied
contractual relationship against an employer for unfair treatment or 
denial of normal privileges due to race, gender, religion, age, handicap
and/or nationality); other employment dispute (claim against and employer 
for wrongful termination not based on discrimination or by the
employer or the employee claiming contractual failure of the other party);
rental/lease agreement; tortious interference with a commercial or
contractual relationship (this claim consists of four elements: existence 
of a valid contract, defendant's knowledge of that contract, defendant's
intentional procuring of breach of that contract and damages); partnership
dispute (dispute over a business owned by two or more persons that is not
organized as a corporation); subrogation (the exchange of a third party 
who has paid a debt in the place of a creditor, so that the third
party may exercise against the debtor all the rights which the creditor 
might have done); and other contract claims (any contractual dispute other
than the case categories used in this study such as stockholder claims). 
 
Real property: Any claim concerning ownership or division of real 
property (excluding mortgage foreclosures which are included under 
contracts). Specific categories used include eminent domain
(condemnation of real property to obtain for public use) and other 
real property (any other claim regarding title to or use of real 
property).

Source: Definitions were developed by the National Center for State 
Courts through consultation with NCSC staff attorneys, law professors, 
and from Black's Law Dictionary.

Sample 

The sample design for the 2001 civil trial study was similar to the 
ones used for the 1996 and 1992 BJS civil trial studies. The sample 
is a 2-stage stratified sample with 46 of the 75 most populous
counties selected at the first stage. The 75 counties were divided into 
5 strata based on 1990 civil disposition data obtained through telephone
interviews with court staff in the general jurisdiction trial courts. 
Stratum 1 consisted of the 14 counties with the largest number of
civil case dispositions. Every county in stratum 1 was selected with
certainty. Stratum 2 consisted of 13 counties with 11 chosen for the 
sample. From strata 3, 10 of the 18 counties were selected. Nine of the 
26 counties in stratum 4 were included in the sample. Stratum 5
was added to the 2001 sample to replace Norfolk County, Massachusetts,
a stratum 4 site that participated in the 1992 and 1996 studies but 
that fell out of the 75 most populous counties in the 2000 Census. 
Mecklenberg County, North Carolina, and El Paso County, Texas, were 
randomly selected from the 4 counties whose population increased
sufficiently that they joined the ranks of the 75 most populous 
counties.

The second stage of the sample design involved generating lists of 
cases that would be coded. Prior to drawing the 2001 case sample, 
each participating jurisdiction was asked to identify a list of
cases that had been disposed of by jury trial or bench trial between 
January 1, 2001, and December 31, 2001. Trial cases were to meet the
definitional criteria for jury and bench trials as defined in Black's 
Law Dictionary: (1) A jury trial was defined as "a trial held before 
and decided by a jury of laypersons and presided over by
a judge culminating in a verdict for the plaintiff(s) or defendant(s)," 
and (2) A bench trial was defined as "a trial held in the absence of 
a jury and decided by a judge culminating in a judgment for the
plaintiff(s) or defendant(s)."

The study plan was to obtain every jury and bench trial disposed from 
the court of general jurisdiction in each of the counties selected for 
the study. In courts where the number of trials became too
great, a sample of civil trials based on "take rates" generated by 
WESTAT was selected. Regardless of whether all or a sample of civil 
trials was collected, every medical malpractice or product liability
case was included to oversample these case types.

At the second stage of sampling, all tort, contract, and real property 
cases disposed of by bench or jury verdict between January 1, 2001, 
and December 31, 2001, were selected in 43 jurisdictions. In two of 
the remaining three jurisdictions (Cook and Philadelphia), a sample 
of civil trials was selected and then "weighted" to obtain
an appropriate number of civil trials. In Bergen County some civil 
case files were unavailable for coding purposes. Weights were applied 
in Bergen County in order to account for these missing cases.  

Data on 6,215 civil jury trial cases, 1,958 civil bench cases, and 
138 other civil trial cases that met the study criteria were
collected in the 46 courts. The final sample consisted of 8,311 tort,
contract, and real property cases disposed of by jury or bench verdict.
 
Sampling error

Since the data in this report came from a sample, a sampling error 
(standard error) is associated with each reported number. In general, 
if the difference between 2 numbers is greater than twice the standard 
error for that difference, there is confidence that for 95
out of 100 possible samples a real difference exists and that the 
apparent difference is not simply the result of using a sample rather 
than the entire population. All differences discussed in the text of 
this report were statistically significant at or above the 95-percent
confidence level. Standard error estimates were generated by using a
bootstrap method (jackknife) available for WESVAR PC.

Data coding

For each sampled case, a standard coding form was manually completed 
by on-site court staff to record information about the litigants, 
case type, processing time, and award amounts.

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director.

This BJS Bulletin presents the first release of
findings in a series of reports from the Civil
Justice Survey of State Courts, 2001.
Thomas H. Cohen wrote this Bulletin under
supervision of Steven K. Smith. Mark
Motivans provided statistical review. Data
collection was supervised by the National
Center for State Courts (NCSC); Paula
Hannaford-Agor was the project director.
Paula Hannaford-Agor and Neil LaFountain
of the NCSC provided comments. Neil
LaFountain also provided data assistance.
Devon Adams, Tina Dorsey, and Tom
Hester edited the report. Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for final printing.


April 2004, NCJ 202803               E
-------------------------------------------

End of file
04/16/04 ih