U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Census of Tribal Justice Agencies in Indian 
Country, 2002


December 2005, NCJ 205332


--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ctjaic02.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

By Steven W. Perry
BJS Statistician

Contents

Lawrence A. Greenfeld, Director

Steven W. Perry, BJS Statistician, wrote the 
report under the supervision of Steven K. 
Smith. Mark Motivans provided the statistical 
review. Also at BJS, Thomas Cohen, Matthew 
Hickman, and Stephanie Ross commented on drafts 
of the report. Tina Dorsey, Tom Hester and 
Marianne Zawitz produced and edited the report. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
publication. Valuable comments were contributed 
by Norena Henry, American Indian/Alaska Native 
Affairs Desk in the Office of Justice Programs. 
Also, Stella Ogunwole of the Census Bureau, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, provided a special 
tabulation of Indian country residents based on 
Census 2000 data used in this report.

Highlights    

Introduction    

Table 1-- American Indian and
Alaska Native(AIAN)population, 
by place of residence, 2000
  
Figure 1 -- Map of States, by Public 
Law 83-280 Status
  
Table 2 -- Number of tribes, by State, 
Public law 280 status, and court systems

Law Enforcement

Table 3 -- Tribal law enforcement
   
Table 4 -- Tribal cross deputization and 
authority recognition on and off 
reservation

Courts  

Figure 2 -- Federal, State, and tribal 
court systems
  
Table 5 -- Tribal court systems

Table 6 --Type of separate courts
  
Table 7 -- Tribal justice system full-time 
staff 

Corrections 

Table 8 -- Tribal criminal detentions
  
Table 9 -- Tribal court intermediate 
adult sanctions
  
Criminal history records     
      
Table 10 -- Tribal law enforcement 
criminal justice data access
      
Table 11 -- Tribal offender, incident 
data, and measuring tribal crime
      
Table 12 -- Tribal justice agencies 
electronically networked
  
Table 13 -- Tribal justice criminal 
statistics electronic sharing
  
Appendix

*  2002 Census of Tribal Justice 
Agencies non-participants
  
* Questionnaire
  
Highlights

Census of Tribal Justice Agencies, 2002
 
* Over 92% (314) of the 341 federally recognized
American Indian tribes in the lower 48 States
participated in the Census of Tribal Justice 
Agencies, 2002. (See respondent description 
below).   

* Public Law 280 establishes criminal justice
responsibilities among American Indian tribes 
with tribal land, the States in which tribes 
are located, and the Federal Government. Public 
Law 280 is mandatory or optional for 204 tribes, 
about two-thirds of the total in the lower 48 
States.

* During 2000 an estimated 44% (1,021,747) of 
all American Indians resided in Indian Country --
reservations, trust land, and/or communities.

------------------------------------------------
Census respondents

American Indians in the United States belong to
approximately 562 federally recognized tribes -- 
as well as bands and clans -- that have a distinct 
history, culture, and often a separate language 
(Federal Register, Vol. 68, No. 234, December 5, 
2003). Three hundred forty-one federally 
recognized American Indian tribes are located in 
the lower 48 States. 

This report summarizes results of the 2002 Census 
of Tribal Justice Agencies. Participation by Alaska 
Native tribes or villages was not extensive enough 
to enable their inclusion. Thus, this report 
provides data for Indian tribes located in the 
lower 48 States of the continental United States.
----------------------------------------------

Law enforcement         

* 165 of the 314 responding tribes employed 1 or 
more full-time sworn officers with general arrest 
powers.  
* Almost all (99%) had cross deputization 
agreements with another tribal or public agency.

* 56% (93) of the tribes that employed 1 or more
full-time sworn officers with general arrest 
powers were also recognized by their State to 
possess arrest authority.
 
Courts and administration

* An estimated 59% (188) of the 314 tribes had 
some form of judicial system.

* Eighty-four percent of the tribal justice 
systems operating in Indian Country handled 
misdemeanor cases.

* 175 tribes had a formal tribal court. 
Of these:
-- About 174 had a separate, general 
jurisdiction tribal court,
-- 91 had an appellate court,
-- 80 had a juvenile court,
-- 51 had a family court, and
-- Over 60% (112) provided victim services.

* Sixty percent of the tribes had written 
family codes for:
-- establishing paternity,
-- issuing a child support order, 
-- enforcing a child support order,
-- modifying or adjusting a child, and 
support order.

* Nearly a third (97)of the tribes had a child 
support enforcement program.  

Corrections and intermediate sentences 

* About 23% (71) of the responding tribes provided 
their own detention function. About two-thirds 
relied on local or county agencies to provide a 
jail or detention facility.

* 24 of the 314 tribes had their own residential 
juvenile facility available for placing juveniles 
who committed offenses on tribal lands. An 
estimated 68% (119) of tribes placed juveniles in 
neighboring county or nontribal agency residential 
facilities.

* About 44% of all tribes(314)imposed some type 
of intermediate sanction for offenses.

* At least three-fourths of the 175 tribes that 
operated
tribal courts could order:
-- monetary fines without, incarceration (84%), 
 - alcohol rehabilitation (79%), 
-- counseling/therapy (79%), 
-- community service (78%),  
-- drug rehabilitation (74%), and
-- restitution without incarceration (74%).

* Over two-thirds of the tribes with a tribal 
judicial system imposed probation for adults 
(130)or juveniles (124). 

Criminal history records 
and justice statistics

* 75% of the tribes recorded crime incidents on 
the reservation manually and/or electronically.

* Over half of the tribes had access to the 
National Criminal Information Center (NCIC).

* An estimated 54 tribes submitted information 
on tribal sex offenders to the National Sex 
Offender Registry (NSOR).
  
* Less than 12% of the tribes reported their 
justice agencies were electronically networked 
with other justice agencies on or off the 
reservation.

* 14 tribes routinely shared crime statistics 
with neighboring local governments, the State, 
or the FBI.

Introduction

Overview

Purpose

This report describes the characteristics of 
tribal -- 

* law enforcement
* courts and administration
* corrections and intermediate sanctions
* criminal history records
* justice statistics.  

The report addresses basic questions about the 
criminal justice system in Indian country: 

Which tribes have sworn law enforcement personnel
and the source of authority? 
 
What are the number and types of tribal court 
systems? 
 
Who performs the tribal detention function and 
what types of sanctions are to be imposed? 
 
Do tribes have access to State and national 
criminal record systems?

------------------------------------
Tribal Justice on the web

All of the tables in this report are available 
in a spreadsheet format on the BJS website:
<http://www/ojp. usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/
ctjaic02.htm>.

Other information not published in this report, 
either because of low response rates or because 
it has only specialized interest, is also in a 
digital table on the web. The web-only table 
cover the following subjects:

* Criminal investigation functions
* Criminal case referral to U.S. attorneys 
office
* Number and type of separate courts
* Tribal court judge selection
* Judicial staffing
* Tribal victims services
* Tribal reliance on State courts 
  for judicial services
* Tribal reliance on county/municipal
  social service agencies.
-----------------------------------------

The 13 tables present individual agency data 
for tribal criminal justice agencies across 
the United States. The table notes describe 
the data used and provide information for 
interpreting the tables.

The publication is divided into four parts, 
according to broad topical areas:

Part I: Law enforcement

* sworn law enforcement personnel

* source of tribal law enforcement authority

* estimated number of sworn full-time law 
enforcement officers reported in 2000

* cross-deputization agreements

* law enforcement reciprocity with local and 
State authorities for crimes committed on and 
off tribal land.

Part II: Courts and administration 

* tribal justice systems 

* BIA Court of Indian Offenses 

* types of tribal operated court systems

* number of full-time judges, prosecutors, 
public defenders, and peacemakers.

Part III: Corrections and intermediate 
sanctions

* tribal detention facilities 

* types of adult intermediate sanctions 
(for example, drug and alcohol rehabilitation, 
and fines without incarceration).

Part IV: Criminal history records and justice
statistics 

* access to the National Crime Information 
Center(NCIC) 

* sharing of tribal criminal history records 
with State repositories or the FBI

* participation in the National Sex Offender 
Registry (NSOR) 

* types of criminal incidents recorded

* method of recording crimes 

* tribal justice agencies electronically 
networked within and outside the tribe 

* sharing of crime statistics with Bureau 
of Indian Affairs(BIA), FBI, and local 
governments.

Compilation of census data

The data presented was compiled from the 
Census of Tribal Justice Agencies for 2002. 
Federally recognized tribes across the 
United States responded to the questionnaires. 
Policy Studies, Inc., collected the data on 
behalf of BJS.  

Justice and criminal jurisdiction background 
in Indian country

Criminal jurisdiction -- the governmental powers 
to make and/or enforce laws -- in Indian country 
is divided among the Federal, State, and tribal 
governments. Jurisdiction in a specific incident 
depends on the nature of the offense, whether the 
offender or victim was a tribal member, and the 
State in which the crime occurred.  

Public Law 83-280 (commonly referred to as Public 
Law 280 or P.L. 280) conferred jurisdiction the 
Federal Government to six State governments. 
Congress extended criminal jurisdiction over 
tribal lands to California, Minnesota (except 
the Red Lake Reservation), Nebraska, Oregon 
(except the Warm Springs Reservation), Wisconsin, 
and Alaska. These are mandatory P.L. 280 States. 

Public Law 280 also permitted other States to 
acquire jurisdiction at their option. These 
States could take partial jurisdiction until the 
1968 amendment to the law. The optional P.L. 280 
States assumed jurisdiction either in whole or in 
part over Indian country within their boundaries: 
Nevada, Idaho, Iowa, Washington, South Dakota, 
Montana, North Dakota, Arizona, and Utah operate 
under this arrangement.

In States where P.L. 280 does not apply, the Federal
Government retains criminal jurisdiction for major
crimes committed under the "Indian Country" Crimes 
Act (Title 18, United States Code, Section 1152), 
the Indian Country Major Crimes Act (Title 18, 
United States Code, Section 1153), and the 
Assimilative Crimes Act (Title 18, United States 
Code, Section 13). The 1994 Crime Act expanded 
Federal criminal jurisdiction in Indian country
in such areas as guns, violent juveniles, drugs, 
and domestic violence.

Tribal authority to sentence offenders in Indian 
country is limited to a maximum of 1 year of 
imprisonment and a $5,000 fine or both. (For a 
detailed discussion of criminal jurisdiction and 
sentencing in Indian country, see 18 U.S.C.  
Subsection 13; 1151; 1152; 1153; 1162; and 25 
U.S.C. Subsection 1302.).  

American Indians and reservations 
in the United States

In 2000, American Indians and Alaska Natives
accounted for 4.3 million, or 1.5%, of the 281 
million persons in the United States. This 
population includes persons who reported their 
race as "American Indian or Alaska Native" with 
or without another racial category. About 2.5 
million (0.9%) of the U.S. population, listed
only American Indian or Alaska Native, and 1.8 
million, as American Indian or Alaska Native as 
well as one or more additional races. 

An estimated 43.5% or 1,021,747 of all American
Indians who identified themselves as American 
Indian or Alaska Native indicated they resided on 
a Federal reservation or in a tribal statistical 
area during Census 2000. 

This report summarizes the BJS results from
participants in the 2002 Census of Tribal Justice
Agencies. Participation by Alaska Native tribes or
villages was not extensive enough to enable their
inclusion. Ninety-two percent (314) of the 341 
tribes in the continental United States 
participated.

The majority (65%) of the 314 tribes are located 
within "mandatory" (123) or "optional" (81) P.L. 
280 States. About 110 tribes are located in 
non-PL 280 States.  

About 188 tribes reported they have some form of 
a justice system. More than a fifth (39)of those 
tribes supported the services of an indigenous 
court; almost a quarter received judicial 
services from a BIA-operated Court of Indian 
Offenses (CFR); and a majority (175) of the 
tribes had tribal courts.

Almost 75%(140) of the tribes relied on the 
States for some justice services (for 
example, correctional and counseling 
services).  

Law enforcement

Law enforcement in Indian country

Adding to jurisdictional complexities in Indian 
country, law enforcement authority is dispersed 
among Federal, State, local and tribal agencies. 

Among the tribes' inherent powers are the authority 
to exercise criminal jurisdiction over all tribal 
members and the authority to arrest and detain non-
Indians for delivery to State or Federal authorities 
for prosecution. These tribal police powers are 
generally limited to the reservation. The work of 
tribal police is often critical to resolving criminal 
cases referred to State and Federal agencies because 
tribal police usually discover the crime, interview 
witnesses, and grasp the circumstances involved. 
Often tribal police refer cases to U.S. attorney's 
offices for investigation, as tribal courts 
generally hear only misdemeanor cases.  

The Federal Government -- Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA) and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) --
investigates crimes and directly enforces the law 
in Indian country. BIA also affects law enforcement
indirectly by providing funding to tribal
governments.***Office of Associate Attorney General,
U.S. Department of Justice, Indian Country Law
Enforcement Review, December 1999. The BIA
funds many tribal governments to conduct their own
law enforcement through what is called a 638
contract  or compact (P. L. 93-638, the Indian
Self-Determination Act (1975)).*** Public Law 93-
638, the Indian Self-Determination of Act 1975, 
affords tribes -- through Federal grants and
contracts -- the opportunity to provide for their 
own police departments and other institutional 
services.

Public safety on reservations in P.L. 280 States 
is primarily the responsibility of local and tribal
law enforcement. BIA directly provides policing 
for those tribes that request services and do not 
have 638 contracts and that are not in P.L. 280 
States. 

Tribal law  enforcement agencies 

In 2001 half the tribes employed at least 1 full-
time sworn officer with general arrest powers.

* About 95 (58%) of the 165 tribes with at least 
1 full-time sworn officer were in a mandatory or 
optional P.L. 280 State.

* Nearly 80% (130) of the 165 tribes with at least 
1 sworn officer indicated that their law enforcement
agencies operated through a P.L. 93-638 contract or
self-governance compact.   

* Among the tribes operating with P.L. 638 
contracts, about 56% (73) were located in 
a mandatory or optional P.L. 280 State.

Cross deputization agreements

Cross deputization agreements have been used 
to enhance law enforcement capabilities in 
areas where State and tribal lands were 
contiguous and intermingled. Under some 
agreements, Federal, State, county/local, 
and/or tribal law enforcement officers have 
the power to arrest Indian and non-Indian 
wrongdoers wherever the violation of law 
occurs.  

* About 99% of the 165 tribal law enforcement
agencies with at least one sworn officer with 
arrest powers have cross deputization 
agreements with BIA law enforcement, neighboring 
tribes/villages, neighboring nontribal authorities, 
or Federal law enforcement agencies other than BIA .

* Among the 163 tribes that reported having cross
deputization agreements, over half (84) of the
agreements were with neighboring nontribal
authorities.

* An estimated 53% (86) of the tribal police with 
cross deputization agreements were in mandatory or
optional P.L. 280 States.
                   
Tribal and State law enforcement reciprocating
authority

Sometimes only one governmental unit, State or
tribal, is willing to cross-deputize. In such 
instances, States have recognized tribal police 
to have peace officer authority -- to arrest 
tribal offenders off the reservation or detain 
nontribal offenders on the reservation.

* About 57% (93) of the 165 tribes with tribal 
law enforcement officers reported being 
recognized by the State to have peace officer 
authority. 

* Among the 93 tribes with police officers 
recognized by the State, 54% were in mandatory 
or optional P.L. 280 States.

* About 74 (45%) of the tribes with law enforcement
personnel had arrest authority over tribal members
off the reservation, with 55% in mandatory or 
optional P.L. 280 States.

* Almost 101 (62%) tribes with at least 1 sworn 
officer reported having arrest authority over non-
Indians on tribal reservations. The majority (60%) 
of tribes with arrest authority over non-Indians 
on the reservation were in mandatory or optional 
P.L. 280 States.

For an in depth discussion on tribal law 
enforcement, see the BJS report Tribal Law 
Enforcement, 2000 http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/abstract/pdf/tle00.htm>.

Courts

Courts, caseloads, and special 
judicial services 

The complexity of criminal jurisdiction in Indian 
country among the Federal, State, and tribal 
authorities also carries forward to the forums 
that decide criminal cases in Indian country. 
Some issues are handled directly by indigenous 
forums or tribal courts; others are sent through 
the Federal court system; and still others are 
handled by State courts.

Tribal justice systems in Indian country 
 
The court systems operating in Indian country 
vary by tribe. The Indian country judicial system 
revolves around a core of four legal institutions: 
Court of Indian Offenses (Code of Federal 
Regulations or CFR), tribal courts of appeal, 
tribal courts of general jurisdiction, and
indigenous forums (also known as traditional 
courts). In 2002, about 60% (188) of all the 
tribes had some form of a tribal justice system. 

Indigenous forum

Historically, most tribes addressed criminal 
activity by consensus through "indigenous forum"-- 
often referred to as peacemaking, council of 
elders, and sentencing circles. Indigenous courts 
have served one of the most important roles 
exercised by tribal government: resolving disputes 
in the community, which may also extend to non- 
members who consent.

A primary goal of the indigenous courts has been
dispute resolution, to mediate the case to the
satisfaction of all parties. In 2002 about 39 
(21%) of all tribes with a justice system 
reported operating an indigenous court in their 
tribal jurisdiction.  

Court of Indian Offenses

The U.S. Department of Interior initially set up 
the Court of Indian Offenses (CFR) to handle less 
serious criminal offenses and to resolve disputes 
between tribal members in Indian country. In 1883 
the CFR Courts were made a regular part of the BIA 
activities on the reservations, operating under 
written guidelines set down in the Code of Federal 
Regulations. Between the 1880's and 1934, the CFR 
court system operated in about two-thirds of all 
reservations.

In 2002, about 46 tribes operated under a CFR 
court on their reservation. Among the 188 tribes 
with some form of tribal justice system, about 
25% (46) had CFR courts. 

Tribal courts

Passage of the Indian Reorganization Act in 
1934, encouraged tribes to enact their own 
laws and establish their own modern tribal 
courts. Tribes that could not afford to set 
up their own courts retained CFR courts
operated by BIA, but the majority of tribes 
have established a formal tribal court 
system.

Modern tribal courts, unlike the CFR courts, are 
under tribal control and are directly oriented 
to the needs of tribal members. Some tribes have 
developed a hybrid or blended judicial system 
that incorporates the dispute resolution 
elements of indigenous or CFR courts and the
more modern focus to ensure due process. 

Tribal courts were designed to operate and enforce
tribal constitutions and codes. About 175 (56%) 
of all tribes operated tribal courts on their 
reservation in 2002. Appeals from tribal trial 
courts are rare, although most tribes do provide 
some form of judicial review in criminal cases. 
Fifty-eight percent (103) of the tribal courts 
also had an appellate court. 

Inter-tribal court system 

Where it is economically and administratively 
feasible, a consortium of tribal governments 
(small or remotely located tribes) share a
court (for example, the Northwest Inter-tribal 
Court System and the Southwest Inter-tribal 
Court of Appeals). Member tribes of an intertribal 
court have joined their limited resources to ensure 
that each tribe is able to have a court by sharing 
judges, prosecutors, and related court services.  

About 15 (8%) of the 188 tribes that had some form 
of tribal justice system, were members of an 
intertribal justice system in 2002. Some member 
tribes of the intertribal court consortium were 
entitled to appeal matters to a court of last 
resort. 

Types of cases and courts

The types of cases handled by the tribal justice 
systems vary with the tribes and types of courts 
operating in Indian country. In 2002 about 84% of 
all tribes with some form of tribal justice system 
handled criminal misdemeanor cases.

Most tribal courts heard traffic cases (160), 
juvenile (157), family law cases (147), domestic 
violence protective orders (157), civil matters 
(182), probate (115), and wildlife offenses (123). 

Over half (174) of all tribes indicated they had at 
least one general jurisdiction tribal court. Twenty-
five percent (80) had a juvenile court, and 16%(51) 
had a separate family court.  

Full-time court employees and services for juvenile
and family cases

In 2002 an estimated 200 judges, 153 prosecutors,
and 20 peacemakers were employed full time in Indian
country. 

On account of limited personnel and resources, some
tribes relied on State courts for judicial services.  
About 140 (45%) of all tribes relied on State court 
judicial services in some form.  

An estimated 179 (57%) of all tribes in Indian 
country ordered treatment in juvenile and/or 
family cases using county/municipal social 
service agencies (not shown in table).

Child support enforcement program

Just under a third (97) of all the tribes reported 
having a child support enforcement program. A third 
of the tribes had tribal family codes for establishing 
paternity (115), codes for establishing a child 
support order (119), codes for enforcing a child 
support order (120), and codes for modifying or 
adjusting a child support order (115). 

Corrections

Sentencing, sanctions and supervision
    
Criminal sentencing in tribal courts is generally
limited to a maximum of 1 year of imprisonment
and a $5,000 fine or both [25 U.S.C sec 1302(7)
(3)].  By constitution, some tribes further
restrict the types of sentences imposed in their
respective courts. 
  
Detention in Indian country

The detention of offenders for offenses that occur
in Indian country varies by crime, the State's P.L.
280 status, and the existence of a tribal jail. In
2002 nearly 68% (212) of the tribes were provided
detention services from a local county government.  

About 23% (71) of all tribes provided their own
detention function. Among the 175 tribes that had
their own tribal courts, an estimated 35% (62) 
had detention facilities for persons who committed
offenses on the reservation. 

Adult intermediate sanctions

Intermediate sanctions include restitution,
reconciliation, substance abuse programs,
community service, counseling, fines, and other
types of sentences without incarceration. In 
2002 slightly less than half of all tribes 
provided some intermediate sanctions against 
adults for criminal violations in Indian country. 

Over two-fifths of 314 tribes participating in 
the census provided monetary fines without
incarceration; counseling or therapy; alcohol
rehabilitation; some type of community service;
drug rehabilitation; restitution without 
incarceration; and victim-offender reconciliation.

The provision of intermediate sanctions for adults
varied by the type of justice forum operating in 
the tribal jurisdiction.  The majority of the 
tribes with a justice forum provided intermediate 
sanctions to adults that included drug or alcohol 
rehabilitation, counseling or therapy to the 
offender, and some type of community service.

For the 175 tribes operating their own tribal 
courts, 84% provided monetary fines without
incarceration; 79%, counseling or therapy; 
79%, alcohol rehabilitation; 78%, some type of
community service; 74%, drug rehabilitation; 
74%, restitution without incarceration; and 22%,
victim-offender reconciliation for adults. 
   
Juvenile intermediate sanctions

Out of 314 participating tribes, 45% provided
counseling or therapy; 44%, alcohol rehabilitation;
44%, monetary fines without incarceration; 43%,
some type of community service; 41%, drug
rehabilitation; 36%, restitution without
incarceration; and 12%, victim-offender
reconciliation for juveniles. As with the adults, 
a majority of the tribes operating a tribal court
provided intermediate sanctions to juveniles that
included drug or alcohol rehabilitation, counseling
or therapy to the offender, and some type of
community service.

Among the 175 tribes operating their own tribal
courts, about 75% provided counseling or therapy;
74%, alcohol rehabilitation; 73%, some type of
community service; 71%, monetary fines without
incarceration; 70%, drug rehabilitation; 62%,
restitution without incarceration; and 21%,
victim-offender reconciliation for juvenile
offenders. 

Probation
    
Probation in Indian country, similar to that 
imposed by Federal and State courts, is a part 
of the sentencing process providing an alternative 
to imprisonment by allowing a convicted offender 
to stay in the community, usually under conditions
and the supervision of a probation officer. A
violation of the probation terms can lead to its
revocation and to imprisonment.   

Forty-one percent of all tribes (314) maintained a
probation function for adults (not shown in table).
Thirty-nine percent provided probation for
juveniles. The provision of probation for adults 
and juveniles varied slightly by the type of justice
system. Among the 175 tribes operating their own
tribal courts, about 70% offered probation to
adults, and 66% to juveniles.  

Residential programs

In 2002 less than 10% of all tribes (314) reported
having their own juvenile residential facility (not
shown in table). For juveniles who had committed
offenses on tribal land, tribes were more likely to
use the residential facilities of the local county 
or non-tribal agencies than the facilities of 
another tribe. About 41% indicated the use of a 
county facility or that of a non-tribal agency to 
place juveniles; about 17% used the residential 
facility of another tribe.

On the 175 reservations with a tribal court system,
about 13% had their own juvenile residential
facility. Approximately 26% of the tribes with 
their own tribal court system used the juvenile
residential facilities of another tribe, and 68%
placed juveniles in county or non-tribal agency
facilities.

For an indepth analysis of correctional facilities 
on reservations, see BJS Bulletin, Jails in Indian
Country, 2003,(NCJ 208597) at <http://www.ojp.
usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/abstract/jic03.htm>.

Criminal history records

Collection and sharing of data 
for criminal justice statistics

Tribes differ in their access to State and 
national record systems, in how they measure 
incidents of crime, and in how they integrate 
and share criminal justice information.  

The National Crime Information Center

Operated by the FBI, the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) is a computerized 
index of criminal justice information (for 
example, files on criminal history, fugitives, 
stolen property, and missing persons). Data 
indexed by NCIC are provided by the Federal, 
State, local, and foreign criminal justice 
agencies and by authorized courts. NCIC is 
available to law enforcement agencies 365 
days a year. 

About 55% of the tribes had access to NCIC.
Seventy-two percent of tribes did not submit
criminal history records to the State or 
Federal repositories. Almost 18% (55) of the 
tribes reported submitting criminal history 
records to a State and 17% to the FBI.   

National Sex Offender Registry

The FBI's National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR)
is a network of State sex offender registries 
across the United States. Initially each State 
registry was responsible for registering and 
tracking the movements of sex offenders within 
its jurisdiction. However, when registered 
offenders moved from one State to another, 
individual States could not track them.

The Lychner Act of 1996 imposed two major
obligations on the FBI effective October 3, 
1997: 

1. To establish a national database at the FBI to
track each person convicted of a criminal offense
against a minor or of a sexually violent offense.

2. To register and verify the addresses of sex
offenders who reside in States that do not have 
a "minimally sufficient" sex offender registry
program.

For most offenders, address verification is yearly,
but for those who have been designated as a sexually 
violent predator, address verification is required 
every 90 days. (For a detailed discussion of the 
NSOR, see <http://www.fbi.gov>.) In 2002, 54 tribes 
(18%) reported they submit offender information to 
the NSOR.   
Number and types of crime 
  
Nearly 70% (213) of the tribes recorded the
number and types of criminal incidents occurring
in their jurisdiction. The method of tribal 
recording of crime on the reservations was 
manual (29%), electronic (24%), or both (47%).

Among all tribes with a tribal justice system, 
there was an average of 784 criminal cases and 523
civil cases filed during the prior calendar year. 
The Navajo reservation had the largest number of
criminal (31,057) and civil (46,876) cases filed
during 2001. 

The tribal justice agencies reported that the
majority of the criminal and civil offenses filed 
in the last calendar year were against American
Indians.  However, on average 5 criminal and 44
civil cases involved a non-Indian defendant in the
prior calendar year. The Saginaw Chippewa Indian
Tribe of Michigan reported the largest number of
criminal (500) and civil (1,500) cases filed 
against non-Indian defendants during 2001. 

Integrated justice information systems

An integrated criminal justice information system
uses technology to allow the seamless sharing of
information at critical decision points throughout
the justice system. In many tribes today,
integration efforts are under way to link tribal
agencies not only to State and Federal record
systems but also to other tribal agencies.

The information shared can include all criminal
justice related data, such as photographs,
fingerprints, DNA identification records, case
records, court calendars, electronic messages,
and documents. Integration allows a single agency
-- like a tribal police department, a prosecutor's
office, a court, or a corrections program -- to
distribute information among its own personnel
and to share that information with multiple justice
agencies. 

In 2002 less than 10% (27) of the tribes reported
their justice agencies were electronically
networked with other justice agencies on the
reservation. About 12% (36) of the tribes indicated
justice agencies in the tribe were electronically
networked with justice agencies outside the tribe.

About 12 tribes reported they routinely shared
crime statistics with neighboring local
governments; 14, with the State government; and
13, with the FBI. Tribes were least likely to 
report routinely sharing crime statistics with 
other tribes (6).                                                              
 
                                                            
End of file
12/14/05 ih
   