U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin

April 2000, NCJ 179451

Contract Trials and Verdicts
in Large Counties, 1996

-------------------------------------------------------------------
This report updates Contract Cases in Large Counties:
Civil Justice Survey of State Courts, 1992.


This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ctvlc96.htm.

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 																																																																																																																																																																																																																																																												
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to																																																																																																																																																																																																																																																												
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ctvlc		
-------------------------------------------------------------------



By Lea S. Gifford
Carol J. DeFrances, Ph.D.,
and Marika F. X. Litras, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

----------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*  In 1996 an estimated 4,850 contract cases were disposed of by
trial in State courts in the Nation's 75 largest counties.
Sixty-one percent of contract cases were decided by a judge and
36% by a jury.

*  The most common type of contract trial case involved an
individual suing a business (34%), followed by a nonindividual
(an organization) suing a business (26%).  In 18% of the
contract cases an individual sued another individual.  

*  Plaintiffs were seeking payment owed to them (seller
plaintiff) in over half of the contract lawsuits brought by
construction companies (71%), banks (68%), sellers of goods
(58%), sellers of services (54%), and manufacturers (53%). 

*  Plaintiffs won 62% of contract trial cases.  They were more
likely to win cases decided by a judge (68%) than by a jury
(56%).

*  Jury trial awards:  Juries awarded a median of $80,000 in
final award amounts to plaintiff winners in contract cases.
Plaintiffs won 48% of employment discrimination cases disposed
of by jury trial and were awarded a median final award amount of
$250,000. The median final award amount for seller plaintiff
winners was $62,000.

*  Bench trial awards:  Half of the plaintiff winners in contract
cases disposed of by bench trial were awarded final amounts of
$25,000 or more.  The median final award for plaintiff winners
in fraud cases disposed of by bench trial was $32,000, in
rental/lease cases it was $28,000.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In 1996 State courts of general jurisdiction in the Nation's 75
largest counties disposed of approximately 15,638 tort,
contract, and real property rights cases by jury or bench trial.
Contract cases accounted for about a third of all trial cases
disposed. 

This report provides an in-depth examination of contract cases
decided by a jury or judge in the Nation's 75 largest counties.
For purposes of this report, contract disputes involve fraud,
employment discrimination or dispute,  tortious interference,
or allegations of unfulfilled agreements between buyers and
sellers, lenders and borrowers, or landlords and tenants. 
***Footnote 1: Tortious interference cases are tort
claims arising out of contractual disputes.***

This report is the second in a series based on data collected
from the Civil Justice Survey of State Courts, 1996.  The first
report of the series, Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large
Counties, 1996 (NCJ 173426), provided a general overview of
tort, contract, and real property cases decided by jury or bench
trial.  The sample of civil cases excluded cases that did not go
to trial, trials in Federal courts, trials in State courts of
limited jurisdiction, and trials in counties outside the 75
largest. 

Types of cases and dispositions

Cases involving contract disputes comprised 31% of all tort,
contract, and real property rights trial cases disposed of in
general jurisdiction courts in the Nation's 75 largest counties.
The most frequent type of contract dispute involved a seller
plaintiff seeking compensation from a buyer or borrower (34%),
followed by buyer plaintiff (17%) and fraud (14%) (table 1).

Of the approximately 4,850 contract cases tried in 1996, 61%
were decided by a judge, 36% by a jury.  The remaining 3% were
disposed of by directed verdict, judgment notwithstanding, or
jury verdicts for defaulted defendants.  (See page 13 for
definitions.)

Types of litigants

The approximately 4,850 contract trial cases in the Nation's 75
largest counties involved over 15,800 litigants about 6,300
plaintiffs and 9,500 defendants).  About 22% of all contract
trial cases involved multiple plaintiffs, making an overall
average of 1.3 plaintiffs per case.  About half of the contract
trial cases involved more than one defendant.  There were on
average two defendants per case (not shown in table). General
jurisdiction courts decided slightly more than 5 contract trial
cases per 100,000 residents of the 75 counties (not shown in
table).

In more than half of the contract trial cases disposed of, the
primary plaintiff was an individual (not shown in a table).   A
business was the plaintiff 43% of the time.  About two percent
of the contract trial cases involved a hospital or government as
plaintiff.  A business was the defendant in 63% of contract
trial cases, an individual in 32%, a government in nearly 4%,
and a hospital in about 1%.  ***Footnote 2: Litigant type for each 
case is whichever type appears first in this list: (1) hospital
medical organization, (2) business, (3) government agency, (4) 
individual.  For example, a case involving a hospital plain-
tiff is categorized as a hospital plaintiff case even if there 
were also business, individual, or government plaintiffs.***

Individuals were buyer plaintiffs (23%) more often than were
businesses (10%).  Individuals also were more often the
plaintiffs in fraud cases (17%) than were businesses (10%).
Businesses were seller plaintiffs (51%) more often than were
governments (15%) or individuals (20%) (table 2).

Individuals were the most likely defendants in seller plaintiff
contract trials (46%).  Businesses were the most likely
defendants in buyer plaintiff trials (23%).  Governments were
more likely than individuals, businesses, or hospitals to be the
defendant in employment discrimination contract trials.  

Business plaintiffs and defendants

In 1996 businesses were plaintiffs in 2,091 contract trial cases
in the Nation's 75 largest counties.  Over half of the contract
lawsuits brought by construction companies (71%), banks (68%),
sellers of goods (58%), sellers of services (54%), and
manufacturers (53%), were those in which a business was seeking
payment from a buyer or borrower (seller plaintiff) (table 3).

Fifty-six percent of the contract cases brought by real estate
development companies involved rental/lease agreement cases.
About a quarter of the contract lawsuits initiated by insurance 
companies involved fraud and an additional third involved seller
plaintiff cases. 

Businesses were named as defendants in 3,051 contract cases in
1996.  Fifty-seven percent of the cases that involved an
insurance company as defendant were buyer plaintiff cases, in
which a purchaser of goods or services, seeks return of their
money, recision of the contract or delivery of the specified
goods.

About a third of the contract lawsuits brought against
construction companies (37%), sellers of goods (37%), and real
estate development companies (33%) were seller plaintiff cases. 

More than half of the cases in which manufacturers were named as
defendants were seller plaintiff (28%) or employment
discrimination (28%) cases.

Primary litigant pairings

Individuals sued businesses in 34% of all contract cases,
including 44% of fraud cases, 58% of buyer plaintiff cases
(table 4), and 64% of employment discrimination cases (not shown
in a table).  Individuals sued other individuals in 18% of all
contract cases, including 23% of fraud cases and 30% of
rental/lease agreement cases (not shown in a table).

Nonindividuals (businesses, governments, or hospitals) sued
individuals in 13% of all contract cases, including 24% of
seller plaintiff cases.  Nonindividuals sued businesses in 26%
of all contract cases. 

Plaintiff winners and awards

Plaintiffs won about 62% of contract cases disposed of by trial
in the Nation's 75 largest counties during 1996 (table 5).

Overall, plaintiffs won more often in contract cases decided by
a bench trial (68%) than a jury trial (56%).  Plaintiffs were
more likely to win in seller plaintiff, rental lease, and buyer
plaintiff cases decided by a judge.  In employment
discrimination cases, however, plaintiffs won more jury trials
(48%) than they did bench trials (26%).

Approximately 3,000 plaintiff winners received a total of $919
million in final awards.  Half of the plaintiff winners received
final awards of $37,000 or more. 

Six percent (189 cases) of the plaintiff winners were awarded
punitive damages totalling about $174 million.   Half of these
plaintiff winners received $40,000 or more.

Although plaintiffs won more often in bench trials, plaintiffs
won larger award amounts in jury trials.  Plaintiff winners in
jury trials received median final awards of $80,000 compared
with median awards of $25,000 in bench trials.  

Plaintiffs who won employment discrimination cases were awarded
total final award amounts of $52.5 million by juries compared to
$1.5 million by judges in bench trials.

Trial awards by litigant pairings

Nonindividuals (businesses, governments, or hospitals) who sued
individuals won 73% of contract trials during 1996 (table 6).
They won 69% of contract trials against businesses.  

Individuals won 64% of contract trials brought against other
individuals, compared to 55% of contract trials brought against
businesses. 

The median final award to nonindividual plaintiff winners who
won suits against businesses was $47,000.  Punitive damages were
awarded in an estimated 21 out of 1,245 cases in which a
nonindividual sued a business. The median punitive damage award
was $61,000. 

In the 75 largest counties in 1996, juries and judges awarded an
estimated $211 million to individual plaintiff winners who
successfully sued businesses.  Half of these individual
plaintiff winners were awarded $41,000 or more.  Punitive
damages were awarded in an estimated 104 cases in which an
individual sued a business.  The median punitive damage award
was $49,000.

Among specific types of cases in which an individual sued a
business, the individual won in two-thirds of seller plaintiff
(66%) and rental/lease cases (66%) (table 7).  Half of the
individual plaintiff winners who brought employment
discrimination cases against businesses were awarded $272,000 or
more. In 52% of these employment discrimination cases, the final
award was over $250,000 and in 16% of the cases, it was $1
million or more.

Nonindividuals suing businesses won in 77% of both fraud and
seller plaintiff cases.  The median final award to nonindividual
plaintiff winners in fraud cases was $64,000 and in seller
plaintiff cases $40,000.  Thirty-six percent of the
nonindividual plaintiff winners in tortious interference cases
won final awards over $250,000, and 19% won final awards of $1
million or more.

Case processing time

Half of contract cases decided by a jury took 23 months or less
to go from filing of the complaint to final verdict or judgment,
compared to about 17 months or less for bench trials (table 8).
Juries disposed of 54% of the contract cases in less than two
years, and judges about 72%.

The longest processing time for a contract case recorded in the
sample was 145 months (table 9); in that case an individual sued
another individual.  Among cases in which an individual sued a
business, the case with the longest processing time from filing
of the complaint to final verdict or judgment was about 100
months.

Jury trials for contract cases lasted about 6 days on average
compared to about 2 days for bench trials.  Among jury trials,
employment discrimination trials were the longest, averaging
about 9 days, while  mortgage foreclosures were the shortest,
averaging about 3 days (not shown in a table).  

Contract cases tried in Federal 
courts, 1996 

*  Contract cases can be filed in U.S. district court when (1) 
the U.S. government is a plaintiff, (2) the U.S. government is a 
defendant, (3) the case constitutes a Federal question, or (4) the 
citizenship or state residency of the litigants differ.

*  During 1996 about 33,000 contract cases were terminated in
U.S. district courts.  About 3% of these were terminated by a
jury or bench trial.  

*  Contract cases related to insurance issues accounted for about
29% of contract trial cases disposed of in U.S. district courts
during 1996.

*  More than 9 in 10 contract cases disposed of by trial in U.S.
district courts were between private parties. The U.S. Government 
(as either plaintiff or defendant) was involved in about 5% of cases.

*  A jury decided 47% of contract trial cases disposed of in U.S.
district courts during 1996.  Insurance related contract cases
were more likely to be decided by a jury (59%) relative to other
types of contract cases.

*  Plaintiffs won about 56% of contract cases disposed of by
trial in U.S. district courts during 1996.   Plaintiffs were
successful in 48% of insurance related trials.


Plaintiff winners were awarded monetary damages in 78% of
contract cases disposed of by trial in U.S. district courts,
with monetary damages totaling $459 million. The median award
was $143,000.  

Contract cases terminated in U.S. 
district courts, 1996

Federal
contract
cases
terminated
33,094

Jury or bench trials
849
(3% of 33,094)

Non-trial cases
33,253
(98% of 33,094)

Plaintiff winner
417
(56% of 750
known cases)

Monetary awards
326
(78% of 416
known cases)

Contract trials with final awards 
of $1 million or more 

*  Plaintiffs won $1 million or more in 138 contract trial cases
in the Nation's 75 largest counties during 1996.  A jury decided
76% of these cases.   

*  A business was the plaintiff winner in 56% of the $1 million
or more cases, and an individual was the plaintiff winner in
43%.  About 39% of these cases involved more than one plaintiff
winner.  

*  Punitive damages were not awarded in the majority (81%) of the
cases in which a plaintiff was awarded $1 million or more in
total damages.

*  Plaintiff winners were awarded $1 million or more in 20% of
fraud cases and 19% of seller plaintiff cases.

Contract trials in which a defendant won

*  In cases with claims and counterclaims, the distinction
between plaintiff and defendant becomes less clear.  It is
possible that one party originally named as a defendant
counter sues the plaintiff and actually wins damages.


*  In 5% of the 4,850 contract trial cases, the defendant won on
a counterclaim.  Neither the plaintiff nor the defendant won in
33% of the cases, while plaintiffs won 62% of the contract cases.

*  Fifteen percent of the defendant winner cases involved a buyer
plaintiff countersuit, and 14% involved a rental/lease agreement
countersuit.

*  Defendants in contract cases won an estimated $83 million in
compensatory and punitive damages.  The median award amount was
$20,000.  About 12% of the defendants winning damages in a
countersuit won more than $250,000.  

Punitive damages totalling $2.5 million were awarded to 14
defendant winners in contract trials.  Thirteen of these were
decided by a jury.

Comparison of 1992 and 1996 jury 
trial contract cases

*  In 1992 jury trials in the Nation's 75 largest counties
disposed of almost 2,200 contract cases compared to about 1,700
in 1996.  This decrease in the overall number of jury contract
cases, however, was not statistically significant.

*  Overall, plaintiffs were more likely to win in contract cases
in 1992 (63%) than in 1996 (56%).  Among specific types of
contract cases, plaintiffs were more successful in buyer
plain-tiff and rental/lease cases in 1992 compared to 1996 
(not shown in table).(*For a complete listing of final award
and punitive damage amounts by county, see Civil Trial
Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 1996, NCJ 173426.)


*  Individuals suing other individuals in contract disputes were
more likely to win in 1992 (69%) compared to 1996 (57%).  The
median final awards for these individual plaintiff winners,
however, were similar for the two time periods ($42,000 in 1992
and $47,000 in 1996).

*  In 1996 nonindividual plaintiffs were just as successful
whether they sued an individual (58%) or a business (57%).  In
1992 nonindividual plaintiffs were more likely to win in
contract disputes involving individuals (82%) compared to
businesses (66%).    

*  In 1996 juries in the 75 largest counties awarded over $570
million to plaintiff winners in contract cases compared to $915
million in 1992.

Methodology

Disposition type definitions:

Jury trial:  A trial held before and decided by a jury of
laypersons and presided over by a judge culminating in a verdict
for the plaintiff(s) or defendant(s).

Bench trial (non-jury trial):  A trial held in the absence of a
jury and decided by a judge culminating in a judgment for the
plaintiff(s) or defendant(s).

Directed verdict:  In a case in which the party with the burden
of proof has failed to present a prima facie case for jury
consideration, a trial judge may order the entry of a verdict
without allowing the jury to consider it, because, as a matter
of law, there can be only one such verdict. 

Judgment notwithstanding the verdict:  ("JNOV" Judgment non
obstante veredicto)  A judgment rendered in favor of one party
notwithstanding the finding of a verdict in favor of the other
party.

Jury trials for defaulted defendants:  Some states make
provisions for a jury to be empaneled even if the defendants in
a case fail to appear and enter a defense.  The purpose of a
trial is to decide issues such as amount of damages.  See
Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.500, section (e).

Contract case type definition:

Contracts:  Cases which include all allegations of breach of
contract.  Specific case types include seller plaintiff (sellers
of goods or services, including lenders, seek payment of money
owed to them by a buyer, including  borrowers);  buyer plaintiff
(purchaser of goods or services seeks return of their money,
recision of the contract, or delivery of the specified goods);
mortgage contract/foreclosure (foreclosures on real property,
commercial, or residential; because the title to real property
is transferred to the lender if the claim is successful it could
be included under real property cases); fraud (financial damages 
incurred due to intentional or negligent misrepresentation 
regarding a product or company; also considered a type of tort 
claim, but because it arises out of commercial transactions, it 
was included under contracts); employment discrimination 
(claim against an employer for unfair treatment or denial of normal 
privileges due to race, gender, religion, age, handicap and/or 
nationality); other employment dispute (claim against an employer 
for wrongful termination not based on discrimination or by the 
employer or the employee claiming contractual failure of the other 
party); rental/lease agreement; tortious interference with a commercial 
or contractual relationship (this tort consists of four elements:
existence of a valid contract, defendant's knowledge of that
contract, defendant's intentional procuring of breach of that
contract and damages); and other contract claims (any
contractual dispute other than the case categories used in this
study such as partnership claims, stockholder claims, and
subrogation issues). 

Source: Definitions were developed by the National Center for
State Courts through consultation with NCSC Staff Attorneys, law
professors, and from Black's Law Dictionary.


Sample

The sample design for the 1996 civil trial study was the same
one used for the 1992 civil jury study.  The sample is a 2-stage
stratified sample with 45 of the 75 most populous counties
selected at the first stage.  The 75 counties were divided into
4 strata based on civil  disposition data for 1990 obtained
through telephone interview with court staff in the general
jurisdiction trial courts.  Stratum 1 consisted of the 14
counties with the largest number of civil case dispositions.
Every county in stratum 1 was selected for the sample.  Stratum
2 consisted  of 15 counties with 12 chosen for the sample.  From
strata 3, 10 of the 20 counties were selected. Nine of the 26
counties in stratum 4 were included in the sample.  The second
stage of the sample design involved generating lists of cases
that would be subsequently coded.  Prior to drawing the 1996
case sample, each participating jurisdiction was asked to
identify a list of cases that had been disposed by jury trial or
bench trial between January 1, 1996 and December 31,1996.  Trial
cases were to meet the definitional criteria for jury and bench
trials as defined in Black's Law Dictionary: (1) A jury trial
was defined as "a trial held before and decided by a jury of
laypersons and presided over by a judge culminating in a verdict
for the plaintiff(s) or defendant(s)," and (2) A bench trial
was defined as "a trial held in the absence of a jury and
decided by a judge culminating in a judgment for the
plaintiff(s) or defendant(s)."  Cases that did not meet these
definitional criteria were not to be included in the jury and
bench lists.

The study plan was to obtain approximately 300 jury and 300
bench cases from the court of general jurisdiction in each of
the counties selected for the study.  In courts that reported
approximately 300 or less jury or bench trials, all trials were
to be coded.  In courts that reported more than 300 jury or 300
bench trials, a list of cases was to be provided to project
staff and a random sample of 275 drawn from the jury and bench
trial case list.  For jury and bench case lists in which the
case type was known, any remaining medical malpractice,
professional malpractice and product liability cases not
initially selected were to be included in the sample in order 
to oversample these case types.

At the second stage of sampling for jury cases, all tort,
contract, and real property rights cases disposed by jury
verdict between January 1, 1996 and December 31, 1996 were
selected in 39 jurisdictions.  In the 3 jurisdictions where the
total number of jury cases disposed exceeded 300 and where case
type could be identified, a random sample of about 275 cases was
drawn from a list of tort, contract and real  property jury
trials provided by the court. 

Any remaining medical malpractice, professional malpractice and
product liability cases not initially chosen in the initial
sample also were included.  In the 3 jurisdictions where the
total  number of jury cases disposed exceeded 300 and case type
could not be identified, a random sample of about 275 cases was
selected from the list of jury trials.

At the second stage of sampling for bench cases, all tort,
contract, and real property rights cases disposed by bench
verdict between January 1, 1996 and December 31, 1996 were
selected in 41 jurisdictions.  In the 1 jurisdiction where the
total number of bench cases disposed exceeded 300 and the case
type could be identified, a random  sample of about 275 cases
was drawn from a list of tort, contract and real property bench
trials.  Any remaining medical malpractice, professional
malpractice and product liability cases not initially chosen in
the random sample also were included.  In the 3 jurisdictions
where the total number of bench cases disposed exceeded 300
and case type could not be identified, a random sample of
about 275 tort, contract and real property rights cases were
selected from the list of bench trials.

During the coding process in all sites, it was discovered that 
some courts included in their list some jury and bench trials that 
did not meet the study definitional criteria of a trial.  These cases 
that did not meet the study criteria were excluded from the data base.  
By excluding cases that did not meet the study criteria, some 
jurisdictions in which sampling was utilized have final sample sizes 
of less than 275 cases.

Data on 6,713 civil jury trial cases and 2,312 civil trial bench
cases that met the study criteria were collected in the 45
courts. The final sample consisted of 9,025 tort, contract and
real property rights case disposed of  by jury or bench verdict.

Populations of jury and bench trials

In jurisdictions where second stage case sampling was not used,
the populations of jury and bench trials reported were based
on applying the study criteria in each site and excluding cases
that did not meet the study definitions.

In the jurisdictions where second stage sampling was used, the
true population of trial verdicts according to the study
definitions could not be known.  It was impossible to know the
number of cases that failed to meet the definitional criteria
of a trial among the cases that did not make it into the sample.
The true population within each of these jurisdictions,
therefore, was estimated by applying the same rejection rate
generated from the selected sample after it was coded.  For
example, Orange County reported 340 jury trials in 1996.  A
random sample of 275 cases was chosen and when coded according
to study criteria produced 221 jury trial verdicts.  This
translates into a rejection rate of 20% of the cases since 20%
did not meet the definitional criteria of a jury trial. Applying
this rejection rate to the original list of 374 jury trial cases
provided by the jurisdiction resulted in an estimated population
of 301 jury trials.

Sampling error

Since the data in this report came from a sample, a sampling
error (standard error) is associated with each reported number.
In general, if the difference between 2 numbers is greater than
twice the standard error for that difference, there is
confidence that for 95 out of 100 possible samples a real
difference exists and that the apparent difference is not simply
the result of using a sample rather than the entire population. 
All differences discussed in the text of this report were
statistically significant at or above the 95 percent
confidence level. 

Data recoding and unobtainable 
information

For each sampled case, a standard coding form was manually
completed by on-site court staff to record information about the
litigants, case type, processing time and award amounts.

Information for which data were not available or collected
included the cost of litigation for the parties involved, as
well as for others; the actual disbursement of awards; and the
number of cases appealed. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

This BJS Bulletin presents the second release of findings in a
series of reports from the Civil Justice Survey of State Courts,
1996.  Lea S. Gifford, Carol J. DeFrances, and Marika F.X.
Litras wrote this report.  Kevin J. Strom provided statistical
review.  Data collection was supervised by the National Center
for State Courts (NCSC); David B. Rottman and Brian J. Ostrom
were the project co-directors.  John Goerdt, formerly with the
NCSC, was the initial project director.  David B. Rottman and
Neil LaFountain of the NCSC provided comments.  Neil LaFountain
also provided data assistance.  Tom Hester produced and edited
it.  Jayne Robinson administered final production.

April 2000, NCJ 179451

This report and others from the Bureau of Justice Statistics, as
well as graphical figures and spreadsheets, are available
through the Internet  http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
---------------------------------------------------------------
Data from the Civil Justice Survey of State Courts, 1996 (ICPSR
2883) can be obtained from the National Archive of Criminal
Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960.  The
archive can also be accessed through the BJS website.


End of file
3/27/00 ih


