U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics                                                   
                
---------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cvusst.htm.

Earlier editions of printed  reports are available at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ncvs
---------------------------------------------------------

Appendixes

I.   Survey instrument

II.  Changes to data reporting procedure
     Reason for change
     How the change affects 
       NCVS estimates

III. Survey methodology
     Data collection
     Sample design and size
     Estimation procedure
     Series victimizations
     Accuracy of estimates
     Computation and application
        of standard errors 

IV.  Glossary

Appendix I
Survey  instrument

A screen questionnaire (form NCVS-1) and a crime incident report
(form NCVS-2) are used to obtain information about households,
individuals, and the relevant crimes they have experienced.  The
first form, NCVS-1, is designed to obtain demographic
characteristics and to screen for any crime incidents.  Each
household member age 12 or older is interviewed individually,
unless a proxy is used.  Proxy interviews are used for children
age 12 or 13 when the parents object to an individual interview,
as well as for persons who are absent during the entire
interviewing period and persons who are otherwise incapable  of
answering for themselves.

After the first form is completed, the interviewer fills out a
second form, the NCVS-2 form, for each reported incident.  Along
with general questions about the incident, the NCVS-2 form
includes questions about the extent     of physical injury,
economic loss, offender characteristics, and notification of
police. 

Appendix II
Changes to data reporting procedure

The estimates presented in this report will correspond to 1995
estimates presented in the BJS Bulletin Changes in Criminal
Victimization 1994-95, but will differ from the 1995 estimates
presented in the BJS Bulletin Criminal Victimization 1996:
Changes 1995-96 with Trends 1993-96.  Beginning with the 1996
Bulletin, all NCVS reports will be based on data collected in
interviews conducted during the calendar year being estimated.  
Previous reports presented estimates based on crimes occurring
during the given calendar year.

Reason for change

The change in data reporting procedure was undertaken in an
effort to expedite the annual publication of NCVS data.  NCVS
respondents are interviewed every 6 months and asked to recall
any crime incidents that have occurred in the 6 months since the
previous interview.  For this reason, 6 months of data
collection beyond the end of the calendar year are needed to
gather information on all incidents occurring during a calendar
year. 

For example, as shown below, this report required 17 months of
data collection (February 1995-June 1996) to collect information on 
all the incidents that occurred during 1995 (figure 1).  This reporting 
procedure is referred to as a "data year." 

To publish more timely estimates from the survey, beginning with
data for 1996, all NCVS publications will present estimates
based upon interviews conducted during the calendar year. This
reporting procedure is referred to as a "collection year." Under
the collection year procedure estimates for any given year will
include some incidents that actually took place during the
previous calendar year and will exclude some incidents that
would have been reported in interviews conducted in the
following calendar year.

How the change affects NCVS 
estimates

While 1995 data year estimates (presented in this report) differ
slightly from 1995 collection year estimates (presented in the
Bulletin Criminal Victimization 1996), the differences are not
statistically significant (table 1).  In general, collection
year estimates will be higher than data year estimates during
times of declining crime rates, and lower than data year
estimates during times of increasing crime rates.

Appendix table 1.  Comparison of 1995 data year to collection year estimates,
by type of crime
                                                       Victimization rates
(per
                                                       1,000 persons age 12 or
                            Number of                  older or per 1,000
                            victimizations (1,000's)   households)
                             Collection  Data year     Collection  Data year
Type of crime                year 1995   1995          year 1995   1995
 
All crimes                       39,926     38,452           ....
 
Personal crimes                  10,436      9,970          48.5      46.2
 
Crimes of violence               10,022      9,605          46.6      44.5
Complete violence                 2,960      2,786          13.8      12.9
Attempted/threatened violence     7,061      6,819          32.8      31.6
Rape/Sexual assault                 363        340           1.7       1.6
Rape/attempted rape1                251        234           1.2       1.1
Rape                                153        141           0.7       0.7
Attempted rape1                      99         94           0.5       0.4
Sexual assault2                     112        106           0.5       0.5
Robbery                           1,171      1,142           5.4       5.3
Completed/property taken            753        745           3.5       3.5
With injury                         224        218             1         1
Without injury                      529        527           2.5       2.4
Attempted to take property          418        397           1.9       1.8
With injury                          84         95           0.4       0.4
Without injury                      335        302           1.6       1.4
Assault                           8,487      8,122          39.5      37.7
Aggravated                        2,050      1,883           9.5       8.7
With injury                         533        507           2.5       2.3
Threatened with weapon            1,517      1,376           7.1       6.4
Simple                            6,437      6,240          29.9      28.9
With minor injury                 1,426      1,300           6.6         6
Without minor injury              5,012      4,940          23.3      22.9
Personal theft                      414        365           1.9       1.7
 
Property crimes                  29,490     28,482         290.5     279.5
 
Household burglary                5,004      4,822          49.3      47.3
Completed                         4,232      4,070          41.7      39.9
Forcible entry                    1,570      1,507          15.5      14.8
Unlawful entry without force      2,662      2,563          26.2      25.2
Attempted forcible entry            773        752           7.6       7.4
Motor vehicle theft               1,717      1,654          16.9      16.2
Completed                         1,163      1,098          11.5      10.8
Attempted                           554        555           5.5       5.5
Theft                            22,769     22,006         224.3       216
Completed                        21,857     21,153         215.3     207.6
Less than $50                     8,652      8,240          85.2      80.9
$50-$249                          7,712      7,591            76      74.5
$250 or more                      4,270      4,163          42.1      40.9
Attempted                           911        853             9       8.4
 
Note:  Detail may not add to totals shown because of rounding.
1/Includes verbal threats of rape.
2/Include threats.

Appendix III
Survey methodology

The survey results contained in this report are based on data
gathered from residents living throughout the United States, including 
persons living in group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses,
and religious group dwellings.  Crew members of merchant vessels, 
Armed Forces personnel living in military barracks, and institutionalized 
persons, such as correctional facility inmates, were not included in the 
scope of this survey.  Similarly, U.S. citizens residing abroad and foreign 
visitors to this country were excluded.  With these exceptions, individuals
age 12 or older living in units selected for the sample were eligible to be 
interviewed.

Data collection

Each housing unit selected for the National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS) remains in the sample for 3 years, with each of
seven interviews taking place at 6-month intervals.  An NCVS
interviewer's first contact with a housing unit selected for the
survey is in person.  The interviewer may then conduct
subsequent visits, except for the fifth, by telephone.

To elicit more accurate reporting of incidents, NCVS uses the
self-respondent method which calls for the direct interviewing
of each person 12 years or older in the household.  An exception
is made to use proxy interviewing instead of direct interviewing
for the following three cases:  12- and 13-year-old persons when
a knowledgeable household member insists they not be interviewed
directly, incapacitated persons, and individuals absent from the
household during the entire field-interviewing period.  In the
case of temporarily absent household members and persons who are
physically or mentally incapable of granting interviews,
interviewers may accept other household members as proxy
respondents, and in certain situations nonhousehold members may
provide information for incapacitated persons. 

As noted in the sample design section, about 30% of the
interviews in the 1995 sample were conducted using
Computer-Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI), a data
collection mode which involves interviewing from centralized
facilities and using a computerized instrument.  In the
CATI-eligible part of the sample, all interviews are done by
telephone whenever possible, except for the first and fifth
interviews, which are still primarily conducted in person.  The
telephone interviews are conducted by the CATI facilities
(Hagerstown, Maryland, and Tucson, Arizona).

Sample design and size

Survey estimates are derived from a stratified, multi-stage
cluster sample.  The primary sampling units (PSU's) composing
the first stage of the sample were counties, groups of counties,
or large metropolitan areas.  Large PSU's were included in the
sample automatically and are considered to be self-representing
(SR) since all of them were selected.  The remaining PSU's,
called non-self-representing (NSR) because only a subset of them
was selected, were combined into strata by grouping PSU's with
similar geographic and demographic characteristics, as
determined by the 1990 census.

The 1995 NCVS sample households were drawn from both the 1980-
and 1990-based sample design.  The 1990 design consists of 92 SR
PSU's and 153 NSR strata, with 1 PSU per stratum selected with
probability proportionate to population size.  The NCVS sample
design continues use of both 1980- and 1990-based sample through
1997.  Beginning in 1998 only 1990-based sample remains.

In the second stage of sampling, each selected stratification
PSU is divided into four frames (unit, area, permit, and GQ)
from which NCVS independently selects its sample.  From each
selected stratification PSU, clusters of approximately four
housing units or housing unit equivalents are selected from each
frame.  For the unit and GQ frames, addresses come from the 1990
census files.  For the permit frame, addresses come from
building permit data obtained from building permit offices.  For
the area frame, sample blocks come from the 1990 census files. 
Then, addresses are listed and sampled in the field.

Approximately 58,520 housing units and other living quarters
were designated for the sample.  In order to conduct field
interviews, the sample is divided into six groups, or rotations,
and each group of households is interviewed once every 6 months
over a period of 3 years.  The initial interview is used to
bound the interviews (bounding establishes a time frame to avoid
duplication of crimes on subsequent interviews), but is not used
to compute the annual estimates.  Each rotation group is further
divided into six panels.  A different panel of households,
corresponding to one sixth of each rotation group, is
interviewed each month during the 6-month period.  Because the
survey is continuous, newly constructed housing units are
selected as described, and assigned to rotation groups and
panels for subsequent incorporation into the sample.  A new
rotation group enters the sample every 6 months, replacing a
group phased out after being in the sample for 3 years.

For these 58,520 sample households, complete interviews were
obtained for about 47,750 households in 1995, about 94.7% of all
eligible housing units.  Within the interviewed households some
89,900 persons, or about 91.1%, provided responses; the other
individuals for the most part either refused or were unavailable
or unable to answer and no proxy was available.  The remaining
10,770 housing units were not interviewed because they were
ineligible -- vacant, demolished, or otherwise ineligible -- for
the survey (about 8,110 units), or the occupants could not be
reached or refused to participate (about 2,660 units).

Selection of cases for CATI

About 30% of the 47,750 households obtained in the 1995 sample
were interviewed using the CATI technique.  Currently, the NCVS
sample PSU's fall into three groups of CATI usage:  maximum-CATI
PSU's, where all the segments in the PSU are CATI-eligible;
half-CATI PSU's, where half of the segments in the PSU are
randomly designated to be CATI-eligible; and no-CATI PSU's,
where none of the segments are CATI-eligible.  The level of CATI
usage for each PSU was established with concern toward an
optimal workload for the field interviewers.  In the "half-CATI"
PSU's, a random sample of about 50% of the segments in each PSU
is taken and designated as CATI-eligible.  The sample cases in
CATI-eligible segments from the max-CATI and the half-CATI PSU's
are interviewed from CATI facilities while the other sample
cases are interviewed by the standard NCVS field procedures.

Estimation procedure

Annual estimates of the levels and rates of victimization are
derived by accumulating four quarterly estimates, which in turn
are obtained from 17 months of field interviewing, ranging from
February through June of the following year.  The population and
household figures shown on victimization rate tables are based
on an average for these 17 months, centering on the ninth month
of the data collection period, in this case October 1995.

Sample data from 8 months of field interviewing are required to
produce estimates for each quarter.  (Quarterly estimates are
not published since there may not be sufficient observations to
ensure their reliability.)  For example, data collected between
February and September are required to estimate the first
quarter of any given calendar year (see accompanying chart). 
Each quarterly estimate is composed of equal numbers of field
observation from the months during the half-year interval prior
to the time of interview.

Therefore, incidents occurring in January may be reported in a
February interview (1 month between the crime and the
interview), in a March interview (2 months), and so on up to 6
months ago for interviews conducted in July.  This arrangement
minimizes expected biases associated with the tendency of
respondents to place victimizations in more recent months of a
6-month reference period rather than the month in which they
actually occurred. **(footnote:  As described in Appendix II,
the annual estimation procedure changes with the publication of 
1996 estimates).** 

The estimation procedure begins with the application of a base
weight to the data from each individual interviewed.  The base
weight is the reciprocal of the probability of each unit's
selection for the sample, and provides a rough measure of the
population represented by each person in the sample.  Next, an
adjustment is made to account for households and individuals in
occupied units who were selected for the survey but unavailable
for interview.

In addition to adjusting for unequal probabilities of selection
and observation, the final weight also includes a ratio adjustment
to known population totals based on the adjusted counts from the
1990 Decennial Census.  Specifically, the final person weight is
the product of the values of the following six component weights; 
the final household weight is the product of all components except 
the within-household non-interview adjustment component detailed 
below:

Probabilities of selection 

*  Base weight:  the inverse of the sampling rate of that unit
(person or household) within the stratum. 

*  Weighting control factor:  adjusts for any subsampling due to
unexpected events in the field, such as unusually high growth in
new construction, area segments larger than anticipated, and
other deviations from the overall stratum sampling rate.

Probabilities of observation 
(Nonresponse)

*  Household non-interview adjustment:  adjusts for nonresponse
at the household level by inflating the weight assigned to
interviewed households so that they represent themselves and
non-interviewed households.

*  Within-household non-interview adjustment:  adjusts for
nonresponse at the person level by inflating the weight assigned to the
interviewed persons so that they represent themselves and the
missed interviews.

Post-stratification ratio adjustment to 
known population totals

The distribution of the sample population may differ somewhat
from that of the total population in terms of age, race, sex,
residence, and other characteristics.  Because of this, two
stages of ratio estimation are employed to bring the two
distributions into closer agreement, thereby reducing the
variability of the sample estimates.

* First-stage factor:  the first stage of ratio estimation is
applied only to non-self-representing PSU's.  Its purpose is to
reduce sampling error caused by selecting one PSU to represent
an entire stratum.  It adjusts for race and zone of residence
differences between the sample non-self-representing PSU's and
the population non-self-representing PSU's. (For self-representing 
PSU's this factor is set to 1.)

*  Second-stage factor:  the second stage of ratio estimation is
applied on an individual basis to bring the distribution of
individuals in the sample into closer agreement with independent
current estimates of the population according to age, sex, and
racial characteristics.2  **(footnote:  Armed Forces personnel
who are eligible to be interviewed are not included in the
second-stage estimate and receive a factor of 1.)**  This factor is 
defined for each person to adjust for the difference between weighted 
counts of persons (using the above five weight components) and 
independent estimates of the number of persons, within the defined cells.  
These independent estimates are projections based on the 1990 Census 
population controls adjusted for the undercount.

For household crimes the characteristics of the wife in a
husband-wife household and the characteristics of the head of
household in other types of households are used to determine the
ratio adjustment factors.  This procedure is considered more
precise than simply using the characteristics of the head of
household because sample coverage is generally better for
females than males.

For estimates involving incidents rather than victimizations,
further adjustments are made to those cases where an incident
involved more than one person.  These incidents have more than
one chance of being included in the sample so each
multiple-victimization is reduced by the number of victims. 
Thus, if two people are victimized during the same incident, the
weight assigned to that incident is the person weight reduced by
one-half so that the incident cannot be counted twice.  However,
the details of the event's outcome as they related to the victim
are reflected in the survey results.  No adjustment is necessary
in estimating data on household crimes because each separate
crime is defined as involving only one household.

Series victimizations

A series victimization is defined as six or more similar but
separate crimes which the victim is unable to recall
individually or describe in detail to an interviewer. These
series crimes have been excluded from the tables in this report
because the victims were unable to provide details for each
event.  Data on series crimes are gathered by the calendar
quarter(s) of occurrence, making it possible to match the time
frames used in tabulating the data for non-series crimes.

Appendix table 1 shows the counts of regular and series
victimizations for 1995, as well as the results of combining the
two, with each series tallied as a single event.  A total of
622,350 personal series crimes and 312,260 property series
crimes were measured in 1995.  Series crimes tended to be crimes
of violence.

The effect of combining series and non-series crimes, counting
each of the series crimes as a single victimization based on the
details of the most recent incident, was included in the initial
release of the 1980 data. **(footnote: See Criminal Victimization 
in the United States; 1979-80 Changes, 1973-80 Trends, BJS Technical
Report, NCJ 80838, July 1982)** The report showed that victimization 
counts and rates were higher in 1979 and 1980 when the series crimes were 
added.  However, rate changes between these 2 years were basically in the 
same direction and significantly affected the same crimes as those affected 
when only non-series crimes were analyzed.

Accuracy of estimates

The accuracy of an estimate is a measure of its total error,
that is, the sum of all the errors affecting the estimate: 
sampling error as well as nonsampling error.

The sample used for the NCVS is one of a large number of
possible samples of equal size that could have been obtained by
using the same sample design and selection procedures. 
Estimates derived from different samples would differ from one
another due to sampling variability, or sampling error.

The standard error of a survey estimate is a measure of the
variation among that estimate from all possible samples. 
Therefore, it is a measure of the precision (reliability) with
which a particular estimate approximates the average result of
all possible samples.  The estimate and its associated standard
error may be used to construct a confidence interval.  A
confidence interval is a range of numbers which has a specified
probability that the average of all possible samples, which is
the true unknown value of interest in an unbiased design, is
contained within the interval.  About 68% of the time, the
survey estimate will differ from the true average by less than
one standard error.  Only 10% of the time will the difference be
more than 1.6 standard errors, and just 1 time in 100 will it be
greater than 2.5 standard errors.  A 95% confidence interval is
the survey estimate plus or minus twice the standard error, thus
there is a 95% chance that the result of a complete census would
fall within the confidence interval.

In addition to sampling error, the estimates in this report are
subject to nonsampling error.  While substantial care is taken
in the NCVS to reduce the sources of nonsampling error through
out all the survey operations, by means of a quality assurance
program, quality controls, operational controls, and error-correcting 
procedures, an unquantified amount of nonsampling error remains still.

Major sources of nonsampling error are related to the inability
of the respondents to recall in detail the crimes which occurred
during the 6 months prior to the interview.  Research based on
interviews of victims obtained from police files indicates that
assault is recalled with the least accuracy of any crime
measured by the NCVS.  This may be related to the tendency of
victims to not report crimes committed by offenders who are not
strangers especially if they are relatives.  In addition, among certain
groups, crimes which contain elements of assault could be a part
of everyday life, and are therefore forgotten or not considered
important enough to mention to a survey interviewer.  These
recall problems may result in an understatement of the actual
rate of assault. 

Another source of nonsampling error is the inability of some
respondents to recall the exact month a crime occurred, even though 
it was placed in the correct reference period.  This error source is
partially offset by interviewing monthly and using the estimation 
procedure described earlier.  

Telescoping is another problem in which incidents that occurred
before the reference period are placed within the period.  The
effect of telescoping is minimized by using the bounding
procedure previously described.  The interviewer is provided
with a summary  of the incidents reported in the preceding
interview and, if a similar incident is reported, it can be
determined whether or not it is a new one by discussing it with
the victim.  Events which occurred after the reference period are set 
aside for inclusion with the data from the following interview. 

Other sources of nonsampling error can result from other types
of response mistakes, including errors in reporting incidents as
crimes, misclassification of crimes, systematic data errors
introduced by the interviewer, errors made in coding and
processing the data.  Quality control and editing procedures
were used to minimize the number of errors made by the
respondents and the interviewers.

Since field representatives conducting the interviews usually
reside in the area in which they interview, the race and
ethnicity of the field representatives generally matches that of
the local population.  Special efforts are made to further match
field representatives and the people they interview in areas
where English is not commonly spoken.  About 90% of all NCVS
field representatives are female.

Standard errors measure only those nonsampling errors arising
from transient factors affecting individual responses completely
at random (simple response variance); they do not reveal any
systematic biases in the data.  As calculated in the NCVS, the standard 
errors would partially measure nonsampling error arising from some 
of the above sources, such as transient memory errors and accidental
errors in recording or coding answers.

Computation and application 
of standard errors

The results presented in this report were tested to determine
whether or not the observed differences between groups were
statistically significant.  Differences were tested for
significance at the 90% confidence level, or roughly 1.6
standard errors.  Most of the comparisons in this report were
significant at the 95% confidence level (about 2.0 standard
errors, meaning that the difference between the estimates is
greater than twice the standard error of the difference). 
Comparisons which failed the 90% test were not considered
statistically significant.  Comparisons qualified by the phrase
"some evidence" or "slightly different" had a significance level
between 90% and 95%.

Deriving standard errors which are applicable to a wide variety
of items and which can be prepared at a moderate cost requires a
number of approximations.  Therefore, three generalized variance
function (gvf) constant parameters (identified as "a", "b", and
"c" in the following section) were developed for use in
calculating standard errors.  The parameters provide an
indication of the order of magnitude of the standard errors
rather than the precise standard error for any specific item.

The gvf represents the curve fitted to the individual standard
errors, which were calculated using the Jackknife Repeated
Replication technique on 1994 data.  The 1995 gvf values for the
"a", "b", and "c" parameters remain the same as 1994 since the
sample design and size did not change.

GVF parameters from 1995 data year estimates  

Generalized variance functions           a                 b            c
1995 parameter set                      
Overall person crime estimates      -0.00004144           2008        1.612
Person crime domain estimates       -0.00006269           2278        1.804
Overall  property crime estimates   -0.00008894           1501        1.276
Property crime domain estimates     -0.00005292           2185        1.153
1994 parameter set
Overall person crime estimates      -0.00004144           2008        1.612
Person crime domain estimates       -0.00006269           2278        1.804
Overall  property crime estimates   -0.00008894           1501        1.276
Property crime domain estimates     -0.00005292           2185        1.153
1993 parameter set
Overall person crime estimates      -0.00005221           2530        2.031
Person crime domain estimates       -0.00007899           2870        2.273
Overall  property crime estimates   -0.00011206           1891        1.608
Property crime domain estimates     -0.00006668           2753        1.453
 
Parameter set # 1 is used for the overall person crime estimates (table 1).
These are the person crime estimates by crime category for the whole
population, not disaggregated by any victim, offender, or incident
characteristics, nor any variable related to reporting to police.  Parameter
set #2 is used for the person crime domain estimates.  These are the person
crime estimates disaggregated by victim, offender, or incident
characteristics, or any variable related to reporting to police.  Parameter
set #3 is used for the property crime estimates for the whole population
(table 1).  These are the property crime estimates by crime category for the
whole population, not disaggregated by any household characteristics, nor any
variable related to reporting to police.
 
Parameter set # 4 is used for the property crime domain estimates.  These are
the property crime estimates disaggregated by household characteristics, or
any variable related to reporting to police.  For the statistic from table 1
that corresponds to the crime category "all crimes" (person and property
crimes together), parameter set # 3 should be used.  When the person and
property estimates are combined (all crimes) and disaggregated by victim, 
household, incident characteristics, as well as any variable related to
reporting to police, parameter set #4 should be used for the best estimate of
the corresponding variance.

NOTATION

x =  the estimated number (level) of personal or household 
victimizations or incidents 

y = the base; either the total number of persons or households
(for victimization rates) or the total of all victimizations
(for incident characteristics)

rho= the estimated proportion, resulting from dividing the number
of victimizations into the base.  Also, the percentage or rate
expressed in decimal form.  The percentage is 100p and the rate per
thousand is 1000p.

Formula 1.  Levels:  Standard errors for the estimated number of
victimizations or incidents may be calculated by using the
following formula:  Standard error of 'x' equals the square root of
('a' times 'x' squared plus 'b' times 'x' plus 'c' times 'x' raised 
to the exponent 3 divided by 2)

The following example illustrates the proper use of Formula 1. 
Table 1 (page 8) shows 744,810 completed robberies in 1995; this
estimate and the appropriate parameters are substituted in the
formula as follows:  Standard error of 744,810 robberies equals
the square root of (negative .004144 times 744810 squared plus
2008 times 744810 plus 1.612 times 744810 raised to the exponent
3 divided by 2).  s(x) = 50,088

Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around the estimated
number of robbery victimizations is about equal to 744,810 plus
or minus twice (1.96) the standard error, or plus or minus
98,172: an interval of 646,638 to 842,982.

Formula 2. Proportions, Percentages, and Rates:  Standard errors
for the estimated victimization rates or percentages are
calculated using the following formula:  Standard error of 'p'
equals the square root of (('b' times percentage 'p' times (1
minus the percentage p) divided by y) plus (('c' times percentage
'p' times the square root of p minus p) divided by the square root
of y))

The following example demonstrates the use of Formula 2.  Table
3 (page 10) shows an estimated robbery rate of 10.8 per 1,000
persons between the ages of 20 and 24, based on a total of
17,813,630 persons in this age range.  Substituting the
appropriate values into the formula yields:   The standard error
of 10.8 robberies per 1,000 persons age 20-24 equals the square
root of ( (2278 times .0108 times (1 minus .0108) )divided by
17813630) plus ((1.084 times .0108) times ((the square root of .0108)
minus .0108) divided by the square root of 17813630)

= 0.0013 or 1.3 per thousand

Thus, the 95% confidence interval is 10.8 per 1,000 plus or
minus 2.6:  an interval of 8.2 to 13.4 per 1,000.

Formula 3.  Difference in rates or percentages with different
bases:  The standard error of a difference between two rates or
percentages having different bases is calculated using the
formula:  Standard error of the difference between percentage 1
and percentage 2 equals the square root of the variance of
percentage 1 plus the variance of percentage 2 minus 2 times
rho times the standard deviation of percentage 1 times the 
standard deviation of percentage 2

rho is the year-to-year correlation between p1 and p2 (see
chart, page 151); and var (p1) and var (p2) are the square of
the standard error of p using Formula 2 for each rate and
substituting:

p1 = first percent or rate (expressed as a proportion in decimal
form)

y1 = base from which first percent or rate was 
derived

p2 = second percent or rate (expressed as a proportion in
decimal form)

y2 = base from which second percent or rate was 
derived 

If estimates are uncorrelated, rho= 0.  Hence, omitting the term
containing r in the formula will provide an accurate standard
error for the difference between uncorrelated estimates.  On the other 
hand, if the two estimates have a strong positive correlation, omitting 
the last term will cause overestimation of the true standard error.  If
the numbers have a strong negative correlation, this will cause
underestimation of the actual standard error.

The following example illustrates the use of Formula 3.  Table 4
(page 11) lists the victimization rate for aggravated assault
for males as 11.8 per 1,000 and the rate for females as 5.9 per 1,000.  
The total number of males in the population is 104,268,820 and the total
of females, 111,709,450.  Noting that rho= 0 because the two
estimates are for the same year and placing the appropriate
values in the formulas yields:  Variance of percentage 1 equals
((2278 times .0118 times (1 minus .0118)) divided by 104268820)
plus (1.804 times .0108 times (square root of .0118) minus .0118) 
divided by the square root of 104268820

which equals 0.000000457

Variance percentage 2 equals ((2278 times 0.0059 times (1 minus
0.0059)) divided by 111709450) plus ((1.804 times .0059 times
(the square root of 0.0059) minus 0.0059) divided by the square
root of 111709450) 

which equals 0.000000191

The standard error of the difference equals the square root of
(0.000000457 plus 0.000000191) which equals .80 per thousand

The ratio of a difference to the standard error of the
difference is the "z score," which is associated with a given
statistical level of significance.  For example, a ratio with an
absolute value of 2.0 (1.96, to be exact) or greater indicates
that the difference is significant at the 95% confidence level
(or greater); a ratio with an absolute value between 1.6 and 2.0
indicates the difference is significant at a confidence level
between 90% and 95%; a ratio with an absolute value less than
1.6 denotes a confidence level less than 90%.  In the previous
example, the ratio of the difference (.0059) to the standard
error (.00080) is 7.38.  Thus the aggravated assault rate for
males and females was significantly different at a confidence
level exceeding 95%.

Formula 4.  Differences in percentages of a single response
variable with the same base:  The standard error of the
difference between two percentages derived from a single
response variable with the same base is calculated using the
formula:  Standard error of the difference between percentage 1
and percentage 2 equals the square root of the (variance of
percentage 1 plus the variance of percentage 2 minus (2 times
'p' times the standard deviation of percentage 1 times the
standard deviation of percentage 2))

Where

'p' equals negative square root of ((percentage 1 times percentage 2)
divided by ((1 minus percentage 1) times 1 minus percentage 2))

all other terms are as defined in Formula 3,
except that y1 and y2 are the same common base, y.


The following example, which uses Table 43,
illustrates the use of Formula 4.  The proportion of single-offender 
violent crime victimizations involving relatives was 11.6% and the 
proportion involving acquaintances (well-known or casual) was 42.7%, 
out of a total of 7,287,440 single-offender violent crime victimizations.  
Substituting the appropriate values into the
formula gives:

Year-to-year correlation between estimates

Because of the year-to-year overlap in the sample, the same households and 
persons contribute to annual estimates for different years.  This year-to-year
correlation between estimates is measured by p. In general:

    P = 0 when estimates are for the same year

    P + 0 for year-to-year comparisons


    When comparing estimates that are 1 year apart, use rho as shown below.
    When comparing estimates that are 2 years apart, multiply rho by 1/2.
    When comparing estimates that are more than 2 years apart, assume p=0.
 
Following are NCVS year-to-year correlation values for major crime categories 
for 1993-95.
 
                              1994-95       1993-95
 Type of crime                correlation   correlation
 
Total crimes                       0.41       0.20
Total personal crimes              0.30       0.15
Crimes of violence                 0.31       0.15
Rape/Sexual assault                0.04       0.02
Robbery                            0.04       0.02
Assault                            0.30       0.15
Purse snatching/Pocket picking     0.03       0.01
Total property crimes              0.38       0.19
Burglary                           0.21       0.10
Motor vehicle theft                0.08       0.04
Theft                              0.34       0.17

The confidence interval around the difference at one standard
error is from -32.7% to -29.5% (-31.1% plus or minus 1.6%).  
The ratio of the difference (-0.311) to its standard error (0.016)
is -19.44.  Since 19.44 is greater than 2.0, the difference between 
these two percentages is statistically significant at a confidence
level exceeding 95%.

Appendix IV
Glossary

Age -- The appropriate age category is determined by the
respondent's age on the last day of the month before the
interview.

Annual household income -- The total income of the household
head and all members of the household for the 12 months
preceding the interview.  Includes wages, salaries, net income
from businesses or farms, pensions, interest, dividends, rent,
and any other form of monetary income.

Aggravated assault -- Attack or attempted attack with a weapon,
regardless of whether or not an injury occurred and attack
without a weapon when serious injury results.

With injury -- An attack without a weapon when serious injury
results or an attack with a weapon involving any injury. 
Serious injury includes broken bones, lost teeth, internal
injuries, loss of consciousness, and any unspecified injury
requiring two or more days of hospitalization.

Threatened with a weapon -- Threat or attempted attack by an
offender armed with a gun, knife, or other object used as a
weapon, not resulting in victim injury.

Assault -- An unlawful physical attack or threat of attack. 
Assaults may be classified as aggravated or simple.  Rape,
attempted rape, and sexual assaults are excluded from this
category, as well as robbery and attempted robbery.  The
severity of assaults ranges from minor threat to incidents which
are nearly fatal.

Household burglary -- Unlawful or forcible entry or attempted
entry of a residence.  This crime usually, but not always,
involves theft.  The illegal entry may be by force, such as
breaking a window or slashing a screen, or may be without force
by entering through an unlocked door or an open window.  As long
as the person entering has no legal right to be present in the
structure a burglary has occurred.  Furthermore, the structure
need not be the house itself for a burglary to take place;
illegal entry of a garage, shed, or any other structure on the
premises also constitutes household burglary.  If breaking and
entering occurs in a hotel or vacation residence, it is still
classified as a burglary for the household whose member or
members were staying there at the time the entry occurred.

Completed burglary -- A form of burglary in which a person who
has no legal right to be present in the structure successfully
gains entry to a residence, by use of force, or without force. 

Forcible entry -- A form of completed burglary in which force is
used to gain entry to a residence.  Some examples include
breaking a window or slashing a screen.

Unlawful entry without force -- A form of completed burglary
committed by someone having no legal right to be on the
premises, even though no force is used.

Attempted forcible entry -- A form of burglary in which force is
used in an attempt to gain entry.

Collection year -- The set of victimizations reported to NCVS in
interviews conducted during the same calendar year.  This set
may include victimizations which occurred in the previous
calendar year, due to the retrospective nature of the NCVS
interview.  See "Data year" and Appendix II.

Commercial crimes -- Crimes against commercial establishments of
any type are not included in the survey. Commercial
establishments include stores, restaurants, businesses, service
stations,  medical offices or hospitals, or other similar
establishments.  For victimizations occurring in commercial
establishments, the crime is included or not included depending
upon whether the survey respondent was threatened or harmed in
some way or personal property was taken. 

Crime classification -- Victimizations and incidents are
classified based upon detailed characteristics of the event
provided by the respondent. Neither victims nor interviewers
classify crimes at the time of interview. During data
processing, a computer program classifies each event into one
type of crime, based upon the entries on a number of items on
the survey questionnaire.  This ensures that similar events will
be classified using a standard procedure.  The glossary
definition for each crime indicates the major characteristics
required to be so classified. If an event can be classified as
more than one type of crime, a hierarchy is used which
classifies the crime according to the most serious event that
occurred. The hierarchy is: rape, sexual assault, robbery,
assault, burglary, motor vehicle theft, theft.

Data year -- The set of victimizations reported to NCVS all of
which occurred within the same calendar year. Data presented in
this report are for data year 1995.  See "Collection year" and
Appendix II.

Ethnicity -- A classification based on Hispanic culture and
origin, regardless of race.

Head of household -- A classification which defines one and only
one person in each housing unit as the head.  Head of household
implies that the person rents or owns (or is in the process of
buying), the housing unit.  The head of household must be at
least 18, unless all members of the household are under 18, or
the head is married to someone 18 or older.

Hispanic -- A person who describes himself as Mexican-American,
Chicano, Mexican, Mexicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central
American, South American, or from some other Spanish culture or
origin, regardless of race.

Household -- A person or group of people meeting either of the
following criteria:  (1) people whose usual place of residence
is the same housing unit, even if they are temporarily absent
(2) people staying in a housing unit who have no usual place of
residence elsewhere.

Incident -- A specific criminal act involving one or more
victims and offenders.  For example, if two people are robbed at
the same time and place, this is classified as two robbery
victimizations but only one robbery incident.

Marital status -- Every person is assigned to one of the
following classifications:  (1) married, which includes persons
in common-law unions and those who are currently living apart
for reasons other than marital discord (employment, military
service, etc.); (2) separated or divorced, which includes
married persons who are legally separated and those who are not
living together because of marital discord; (3) widowed; and (4)
never married, which includes persons whose marriages have been
annulled and those who are living together and not in a
common-law union.

Metropolitan area -- See "Metropolitan Statistical Area."

Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) -- The Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) defines this as a population nucleus of 50,000
or more, generally consisting of a city and its immediate
suburbs, along with adjacent communities having a high  degree
of economic and social integration with the nucleus.  MSA's are
designated by counties, the smallest geographic units for which
a wide range of statistical data can be attained.  However, in
New England, MSA's are designated by cities and towns since
these subcounty units are of great local significance and
considerable data is available for them.  Currently, an area is
defined as an MSA  if it meets one of two standards:  

(1) a city has a population of at least 50,000 (2) the Census
Bureau defines an urbanized area of at least 50,000 people with
a total metropolitan population of at least 100,000 (or 75,000
in New England).  The Census Bureau's definition of urbanized
areas, data on commuting to work, and the strength of the
economic and social ties between the surrounding counties and
the central city determine which counties not containing a main
city are included in an MSA.  For New England, MSA's are
determined by a core area and related cities and towns, not
counties.  A metropolitan statistical area may contain more than
one city of 50,000 and may cross State lines.

Motor vehicle -- An automobile, truck, motorcycle, or any other
motorized vehicle legally allowed on public roads and highways.

Motor vehicle theft -- Stealing or unauthorized taking of a
motor vehicle, including attempted thefts.

Completed motor vehicle theft -- The successful taking of a
vehicle by an unauthorized person.

Attempted motor vehicle theft -- The unsuccessful attempt by an
unauthorized person to take a vehicle.

Multiple offenders -- Two or more persons inflicting some direct
harm to a victim.  The victim-offender relationship is
determined by the offender with the closest relationship to the 
victim.  The following list ranks the different relationships
from closest  to most distant:  spouse, ex-spouse, parent,
child, other relative, nonrelative well-known person, casual 
acquaintance, or stranger.  (See Nonstranger and Stranger.)

Non-Hispanic -- Persons who report their culture or origin as
something other than "Hispanic" as defined above.  This
distinction is made regardless of race.

Nonstranger -- A classification of a crime victim's relationship
to the offender.  An offender who is either related to, well
known to, or casually acquainted with the victim is a
nonstranger.  For crimes with more than one offender, if any of
the offenders are nonstrangers, then the group of offenders as a
whole is classified as nonstranger.  This category only applies
to crimes which involve contact between the victim and the
offender; the distinction is not made for crimes of theft since
victims of this offense rarely see the offenders.

Offender -- The perpetrator of a crime; this term usually
applies to crimes involving contact between the victim and the
offender.

Offense -- A crime.  When referring to personal crimes, the term
can be used to refer to both victimizations and incidents.

Personal crimes -- Rape, sexual assault, personal robbery,
assault, purse snatching and pocket picking.  This category
includes both attempted and completed crimes.  

Place of occurrence of crime -- The location at which a crime
occurred, as specified by the victim. Survey measures of crimes
occurring in commercial establishments, restaurants, nightclubs,
public transportation and other similar places include only
those crimes involving NCVS measured crimes against persons, not
the establishments.  Crimes against commercial establishments
and other places are not measured by the survey.

Property crimes -- Property crimes including burglary, motor
vehicle theft, or theft.  This category includes both attempted
and completed crimes.

Purse snatching/Pocket picking -- Theft or attempted theft of
property or cash directly from the victim by stealth, without
force or threat of force. 

Race -- Racial categories for this survey are white, black, and
other.  The "other" category is composed mainly of Asian Pacific
Islanders, and American Indian, Aleut, and Eskimo.  The race of
the head of household is used in determining the race of the
household for computing household crime demographics.

Rape -- Forced sexual intercourse including both psychological
coercion as well as physical force.  Forced sexual intercourse
means vaginal, anal or oral penetration by the offender(s). 
This category also includes incidents where the penetration is
from a foreign object such as a bottle.  Includes attempted
rapes, male as well as female victim and both heterosexual and
homosexual rape.  Attempted rape includes verbal threats of rape.

Rate of victimization -- see "Victimization rate."

Region -- The States have been divided into four groups or
census regions:

Midwest -- Includes the 12 States of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota,
Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

Northeast -- Includes the 9 States of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont.

South -- Includes the District of Columbia and the 16 States of
Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.

West -- Includes the 13 States of Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon,
Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. 

Robbery -- Completed or attempted theft, directly from a person,
of property or cash by force or threat of force, with or without
a weapon, and with or without injury.  

Completed/property taken -- The successful taking of property
from a person by force or threat of force, with or without a
weapon, and with or without injury.

Completed with injury -- The successful taking of property from
a person, accompanied by an attack, either with or without a
weapon, resulting in injury.

Completed without injury -- The successful taking of property
from a person by force or the threat of force, either with or
without a weapon, but not resulting in injury.

Attempted to take property -- The attempt to take property from
a person by force or threat of force without success, with or
without a weapon, and with or without injury.

Attempted without injury -- The attempt to take property from a
person by force or the threat of force without success, either
with or without a weapon, but not resulting in injury.

Attempted with injury -- The attempt to take property from a
person without success, accompanied by an attack, either with or
without a weapon, resulting in injury.

Rural area -- A place not located inside the Metropolitan
Statistical Area.  This category includes a variety of
localities, ranging from sparsely populated rural areas to
cities with populations less than 50,000. 

Sample  -- The set of housing units selected by the U. S. Census
Bureau to be interviewed for the survey.  All occupants of the
household age 12 or older are interviewed. See Appendix III,
page 144 for sample inclusions and exclusions.

Series -- Six or more similar but separate events, which the
respondent is unable to describe separately in detail to an
interviewer.

Sexual assault -- A wide range of victimizations, separate from
rape or attempted rape.  These crimes include attacks or
attempted attacks generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between victim and offender.  Sexual assaults may or may not
involve force and include such things as grabbing or fondling. 
Sexual assault also includes verbal threats.

Simple assault -- Attack without a weapon resulting either in no
injury, minor injury (for example, bruises, black eyes, cuts,
scratches or swelling) or in undetermined injury requiring less
than 2 days of hospitalization.  Also includes attempted assault
without a weapon.

With minor injury -- An attack without a weapon resulting in
such injuries as bruises, black eyes, cuts or in undetermined
injury requiring less than 2 days of hospitalization.

Without injury -- An attempted assault without a weapon not
resulting in injury. 

Stranger -- A classification of the victim's relationship to the
offender for crimes involving direct contact between the two. 
Incidents are classified as involving strangers if the victim
identifies the offender as a stranger, did not see or recognize
the offender, or knew the offender only by sight.  Crimes
involving multiple offenders are classified as involving
nonstrangers if any of the offenders was a nonstranger.  Since
victims of theft without contact rarely see the offender, no
distinction is made between strangers and nonstrangers for this
crime.

Suburban areas -- A county or counties containing a central
city, plus any contiguous counties that are linked socially and
economically to the central city.  On data tables, suburban
areas are categorized as those portions of metropolitan areas
situated "outside central cities."

Tenure -- The NCVS recognizes two forms of household tenancy: 
(1) owned, which includes dwellings that are mortgaged, and (2)
rented, which includes rent-free quarters belonging to a party
other than the occupants, and situations where rental payments
are in kind or services.

Theft -- Completed or attempted theft of property or cash
without personal contact. Incidents involving theft of property
from within the sample household would classify as theft if the
offender has a legal right to be in the house (such as a maid,
delivery person, or guest).  If the offender has no legal right
to be in the house, the incident would classify as a burglary. 

Completed -- To successfully take without permission property or
cash without personal contact between the victim and offender.  

Attempted -- To unsuccessfully attempt to take property or cash
without personal contact.

Urban areas -- The largest city (or grouping of cities) in a
Metropolitan Statistical Area (see definition of Metropolitan
Statistical Area).

Victim -- The recipient of a criminal act, usually used in
relation to personal crimes, but also applicable to households.

Victimization -- A crime as it affects one individual person or
household.  For personal crimes, the number of victimizations is
equal to the number of victims involved.  The number of
victimizations may be greater than the number of incidents
because more than one person may be victimized during an
incident.  Each crime against a household is assumed to involve
a single victim, the affected household.

Victimization rate -- A measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specified population group.  For personal
crimes, this is based on the number of victimizations per 1,000
residents age 12 or older.  For household crimes, the
victimization rates are calculated using the number of incidents
per 1,000 households.

Victimize -- To commit a crime against a person or household. 

Violence, crimes of -- Rape, sexual assault, personal robbery or
assault.  This category includes both attempted and completed
crimes.  It does not include purse snatching and pocket picking.
Murder is not measured by the NCVS because of an inability to
question the victim.

Completed violence -- The sum of all completed rapes, sexual
assaults, robberies, and assaults.  See individual crime types
for definition of completed crimes.

Attempted/threatened violence -- The unsuccessful attempt of
rape, sexual assault, personal robbery or assault.  Includes
attempted attacks or sexual assaults by means of verbal threats.
See individual crime types for definition of attempted crimes.

Violence, crimes of -- Rape, sexual assault, personal robbery or
assault.  This category includes both attempted and completed
crimes.  It does not include purse snatching and pocket picking.
Murder is not measured by the NCVS because of an inability to
question the victim.

Completed violence -- The sum of all completed rapes, sexual
assaults, robberies, and assaults.  See individual crime types
for definition of completed crimes.

Attempted/threatened violence -- The unsuccessful attempt of
rape, sexual assault, personal robbery or assault.  Includes
attempted attacks or sexual assaults by means of verbal threats.
See individual crime types for definition of attempted crimes.


End of file
5/10/00 ih
 

