U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics 
Special Report

Defense Counsel in Criminal Cases


November 2000, NCJ 179023


-----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/dccc.htm
-----------------------------------------------------------------

By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

-----------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

At felony case termination, court-appointed counsel represented 82% 
of State defendants in the 75 largest counties in 1996 and 66% of 
Federal defendants in 1998

                                  Percent of defendants
                                  Felons    Misdemeanants
75 largest counties
Public defender                    68.3%           --
Assigned counsel                   13.7            --
Private attorney                   17.6            --
Self (pro se)/other                 0.4            --
 
U.S. district courts
Federal Defender Organization      30.1%          25.5%
Panel attorney                     36.3           17.4
Private attorney                   33.4           18.7
Self representation                 0.3           38.4
 Note:  These data reflect use of defense
counsel at termination of the case.
--Not available.

*  Over 80% of felony defendants charged with a violent crime in the 
country's largest counties and 66% in U.S. district courts had publicly
financed attorneys.
*  About half of large county felony defendants with a public defender 
or assigned counsel and three-quarters with a private lawyer were 
released from jail pending trial.

Defendants with publicly financed or private attorneys had 
the same conviction rates

Case                   Public      Private
disposition            counsel     counsel
75 largest counties
 
Guilty by plea          71.0%        72.8%
Guilty by trial          4.4          4.3
Case dismissal          23.0         21.2
Acquittal                1.3          1.6
 
U.S. district courts
 
Guilty by plea          87.1%        84.6%
Guilty by trial          5.2          6.4
Case dismissal           6.7          7.4
Acquittal                1.0          1.6
 
*  In State courts in the largest counties, 3 in 4 defendants with 
either court-appointed or private counsel were convicted; in Federal 
courts 9 in 10 felony defendants with public or private attorneys were 
found guilty.

*  In Federal court 88% of felony defendants with publicly financed 
attorneys and 77% with private lawyers received a prison sentence.

Except for State drug offenders, Federal and State inmates received 
about the same sentence on average with appointed or private legal 
counsel

                State prison              Federal prison
                inmates                   inmates
                Public      Private       Public     Private
Offenses        counsel     counsel       counsel    counsel
 Total           155 mo       179 mo       126 mo      126 mo
Violent          223          231          164         162
Property         118          128           59          59
Drug              97          140          126         132

*  Three-fourths of State and Federal inmates with an appointed 
counsel and two-thirds with a hired counsel had pleaded guilty.
------------------------------------------------------------------

Almost all persons charged with a felony in Federal and large State 
courts were represented by counsel, either hired or appointed.  But 
over a third of persons charged with a misdemeanor in cases terminated 
in Federal court represented themselves (pro se) in court proceedings 
prior to conviction, as did almost a third of those in local jails.

Indigent defense involves the use of publicly financed counsel to 
represent criminal defendants who are unable to afford private counsel.  
At the end of
their case approximately 66% of felony Federal defendants and 82% 
of felony defendants in large State courts were represented by public
defenders or assigned counsel.

In both Federal and large State courts, conviction rates were the same 
for defendants represented by publicly financed and private attorneys. 
Approximately 9 in 10 Federal defendants and 3 in 4 State defendants in 
the 75 largest counties were found guilty, regardless of type of attorney.

However, of those found guilty, higher percentages of defendants with 
publicly financed counsel were sentenced to incarceration.  Of defendants
found guilty in Federal district courts, 88% with publicly financed counsel
and 77% with private counsel received jail or prison sentences; in large 
State courts 71% with public counsel and 54% with This report uses 
information from Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) data collections 
that, although gathered for wider purposes, present information about 
the type of counsel defendants and inmates used in their criminal case.  
Data are from --
*  U.S. district court statistics for persons accused of Federal crimes
(fiscal year 1998), 
*  pretrial records for felony defendants in the Nation's 75 largest 
counties (1992-96),
*  State court prosecutors' information gathered nationwide (1990-94), 
*  the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (1998), and 
*  personal interviews with nationally representative samples of 
inmates in local jails (1996) and State and Federal prisons (1997).  
For more information on the data used in this report, see Data sources, 
page 11.

In this report the type of counsel for Federal and State defendants 
was the type at case termination.  Other counsel may have represented 
the defendant earlier.  Data describing counsel at filing or initiation 
were not used because they were incomplete or unavailable.  The terms
"publicly financed attorneys," "public attorney," and "appointed attorney"
used in this report include public defenders, panel attorneys, assigned
counsel, contract attorneys, and any other government-funded attorney 
programs for those unable to provide their own attorney.  

Right to counsel is in the U.S. 
Constitution 

The sixth amendment to the U.S. Constitution, a part of the Bill of 
Rights, provides that "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused 
shall...have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence."  

In the 1960's and 1970's, the Supreme Court expanded this clause by
recognizing a constitutional right to counsel at public expense for 
those unable to pay a private attorney.  In Gideon v. Wainwright 
(372 US 335 (1963)) the Supreme Court held that the sixth amendment 
requires indigent defendants in State court proceedings to have appointed
counsel.  Gideon involved a felony, but in another case, Argersinger 
v. Hamlin (407 US 25 (1972)), the Court ruled that an indigent defendant 
may not be imprisoned, even for a misdemeanor, unless afforded the right 
to counsel.  

Two types of programs provide 
indigent representation in Federal 
cases 

Pursuant to the Criminal Justice Act of 1964 (18 USC ' 3006 A), the 
Defender Services Division of the Administrative Office of the U.S. 
Courts oversees spending for Federal defendants through two types of 
programs:  

*  Panel attorneys, appointed by the court from a list of private 
attorneys on a case-by-case basis.  At the end 
of 1998 all 94 U.S. district courts used such panels, including 20 
districts in which only panel attorneys were used.
*  Federal defender organizations (FDO's), take one of two forms:
--Federal public defender organizations staffed with Federal 
Government employees and headed by a public defender appointed by 
the court of appeals

or 
--Community defender organizations that are incorporated, nonprofit 
legal service organizations receiving grants from the Administrative 
Office of the U.S. Courts.

At the end of 1998, 63 Federal or community defender organizations 
served 74 of the 94 U.S. district courts.***Footnote 1: Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts, Judicial Business of the United States
Courts, 1998.***     

Workloads rose more than 
spending for the Defender 
Services Division

The panel attorney and FDO programs can represent defendants at any 
time from arraignment through appeal and during supervised release.  
The Defender Services Division counts use of these publicly financed 
attorneys in terms of representations.  

Total representations by panel attorneys and FDO's rose 26% from 
80,200 in fiscal year 1994 to 101,200 in fiscal 1998.   The number of 
criminal representations grew substantially during the period (25%), 
with the FDO workload increasing 35% and the panel attorney workload 17%.  
The Defender Services Division estimates that court-appointed counsel
represent 85% of criminal defendants at some time during the conduct of 
their case (unpublished correspondence).  
    
From fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998, spending grew 20% in 
constant 1998 dollars from $293 million to $353 million.  

Criminal Justice Act obligations, 1994-98 (in
1998 dollars)
 
1994       $293,342,000
1995       $296,794,000
1996       $316,884,000
1997       $338,028,000
1998       $352,837,000
 
Note: An obligation is generally defined as a
legal commitment for goods or services ordered
or received by the government.
 
Source: Unpublished data, Administrative Office
of the U.S. Courts, Defender Services Division.
 
All felony defendants in cases 
terminated in U.S. district court 
had an attorney in 1998

Nearly all defendants facing a felony charge terminated in U.S. 
district court in 1998 and almost two-thirds with a misdemeanor charge 
had lawyers to represent them in court.  Felony defendants were more 
likely than misdemeanants to have publicly financed counsel.  Sixty-six
percent of those facing a felony charge and 43% with a misdemeanor 
charge had used either a FDO or panel attorney. 

Defendants charged with a felony (33%) were also more likely than those
charged with a misdemeanor (19%) to have private representation.  About a
third of misdemeanants represented themselves during judicial proceedings.

White collar Federal defendants 
most likely to use private counsel

Most likely to have a private attorney were defendants charged with a 
white collar offense, primarily fraud or a regulatory offense. Having 
private counsel were 43% of fraud defendants and 63% of those charged 
with a regulatory offense -- violations of laws pertaining to agriculture,
antitrust, food and drug, transportation, civil rights, communications,
customs, and postal delivery.  By contrast, about 2 in 10 defendants 
charged with a violent crime used private attorneys.

                    Type of counsel
 Disposition        Public*     Private
 
Guilty
By plea               87.1 %     84.6 %
By trial               5.2        6.4
 
Acquittal              1.0        1.6
Dismissal              6.7        7.4
 
Number of
defendants          37,188     18,709
 
*Includes Federal Defender Organizations
 (FDO's) and panel attorneys.
 
Source:  Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, Criminal Master File, FY 1998.

9 in 10 Federal defendants found 
guilty regardless of type of attorney

In 1998, 92% of defendants with public counsel and 91% with private 
counsel either pleaded guilty or were found guilty at trial.    

                             Type of counsel
Sentence                  Public*       Private
 
Incarceration               87.6 %        76.5 %
Probation only              12.1          22.4
Fine only                    0.3           1.1
 
Number of defendants      33,068        16,622
 
*Includes Federal Defender Organization
(FDO's) and panel attorneys.
 
Source:  Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, Criminal Master File, FY 1998.

Incarceration more likely for Federal
defendants with public counsel than 
for those with private attorneys 

Defendants found guilty after using a FDO or panel attorney were 
more likely to be sentenced to prison (about 88% of defendants found 
guilty) than those with private attorneys (77%).  The difference in
incarceration rates is explained in part by the likelihood of prison 
after conviction for different types of offenses.  As has been shown, 
public counsel represented a higher percentage of violent, drug, and
public-order (excluding regulatory crimes) offenders, who were very 
likely to receive a sentence to serve time, and private counsel 
represented a higher percentage of white collar defendants, who are not 
as likely to receive incarceration sentences.***Footnote 2: Compendium
of Federal Justice Statistics, 1998, BJS report, NCJ 180258, table 5.1.*** 

Federal defendants with private 
attorneys had longer average 
sentences than defendants 
with publicly financed attorneys 

Defendants with private attorneys were sentenced to an average of 62 
months in prison, and those with publicly financed attorneys, to 58 
months.  The primary differences in average sentence length were between
offenses, not between the types of attorney.  Other factors not shown 
may also have had a role.  

Among those sentenced to incarceration, drug offenders who used 
publicly financed counsel had shorter sentences on average than 
those who used private attorneys -- an average of 75 months compared 
to 84 months.

Among Federal violent and regulatory offenders, those with private 
attorneys received shorter sentences than those with public lawyers.  
Violent offenders who used private attorneys were given 74 months on 
average, and those with public counsel, 84 months.  Similarly, those 
sentenced for a regulatory offense with a private lawyer had an average
sentence of 23 months, and those with a public attorney, 33 months.

Most criminal defendants are tried 
in State courts

The bulk of the task of providing counsel for the indigent has fallen 
to lawyers working in State courts. Approximately 95% of criminal 
defendants are charged in State courts, with the remainder tried in 
Federal courts. 

Two-thirds of State prosecutors 
reported that their courts used 
public defenders 

Three systems now serve as the primary means for providing defense 
services to indigent criminal defendants charged in State court.

*  Under a public defender system, salaried staff attorneys render 
criminal indigent defense services through a public or private non-
profit organization or as direct government employees.  In 1994, 68% 
of State court prosecutors reported that a public defender program was 
used to defend indigents in cases they prosecuted.

*  In an assigned counsel system, courts appoint attorneys from a 
list of private bar members who accept cases on a judge-by-judge,
court-by-court, or case-by-case basis.  About 63% of prosecutors 
in State criminal courts reported an assigned counsel program in
their jurisdiction.

*  In contract attorney systems, private attorneys, bar associations, law
firms, groups of attorneys, and nonprofit corporations provide indigent
services based on legal agreements with State, county, or other local
governmental units.  Approximately 29% of prosecutors indicated that in 
their jurisdiction contracts were awarded to attorney groups to provide
indigents with legal representation.

Although the Supreme Court in Gideon mandated that the States must provide
counsel for indigents accused of serious crimes, the court did not specify 
how such services were to be provided.  State court prosecutors increasingly
report that their jurisdictions use more than one type of program to defend
indigents.  In 1990, 31% of prosecutors' offices reported that their courts
used a combination of public defenders, assigned counsel, and contract
attorneys; in 1994 -- the last time BJS asked prosecutors about their 
indigent defense systems -- 53% of the courts relied on more than 
one program.          

In 1994 about 6% of prosecutors reported the court of their jurisdiction 
using all three systems:  public defenders, assigned counsel, and contract
attorneys.  The most prevalent combination of two programs was public
defenders and assigned counsel -- indicated by almost a third of 
prosecutors' offices.

8 in 10 felony defendants in large 
State courts used publicly financed 
attorneys

In 1992 and 1996 about 80% of defendants charged with a felony in 
the Nation's 75 most populous counties reported having public defenders 
or assigned counsel while nearly 20% hired an attorney.  Between 1992 
and 1996 the percentage of felons in large counties using public defenders
increased from 59% to 68% and the percentage with assigned counsel 
decreased from 21% to 14%. 

Defendants charged with violent, property, and drug crimes were more 
likely to have been represented by public defenders or assigned counsel
(81%-84%) than those charged with public-order offenses (73%).  
Public-order offenses include weapons, driving-related, flight/escape, 
parole or probation, prison contraband, habitual offender, obstruction of
justice, rioting, libel, slander, treason, perjury, prostitution/pandering,
bribery, and tax law violations.

State defendants with a criminal
record more likely than other 
defendants to use public counsel

Felony defendants with prior convictions were more likely than those 
without a criminal record to have used a publicly financed lawyer.  
According to criminal history records available to the court, 86% with 
a previous conviction and 77% without had public defenders or assigned
counsel.   When arrested for their current charge, about 86% of those 
already on criminal justice status -- for example, on pretrial release,
probation, or parole   and 79% not on criminal justice status used 
appointed counsel. 

Pretrial release less common for 
State defendants with public 
attorneys

About half of defendants using a public defender or assigned counsel, 
compared with over three-quarters employing a private attorney, were 
released from jail prior to trial.
 
Release on bail, a payment to a court to guarantee the defendant's 
appearance at subsequent court dates, was awarded to 57% of defendants 
with public counsel and to 65% with a private lawyer.  Of those allowed 
bail, about a third with a public attorney and three-quarters with a hired
attorney were released before adjudication.

About 3 in 4 State defendants with 
public or private attorneys were 
found guilty

Conviction rates were about the same for defendants with court-appointed
attorneys (75%) and for those who hired private counsel (77%) .  Of those
convicted, about 8 in 10 were convicted of a felony and the remainder of a
misdemeanor, regardless of type of attorney.  

Almost a quarter of defendants with publicly financed or private attorneys 
had their cases dismissed or were acquitted.  Just over a fifth had charges
dismissed and around 2% were acquitted.

State defendants with public 
counsel sentenced more often to 
prison or jail but for shorter terms 
than those with private lawyers

Convicted defendants represented by publicly financed counsel were 
more likely than those who hired a private attorney to be sentenced to
incarceration. About 7 in 10 with appointed counsel and 5 in 10 with a 
private attorney were sentenced to a prison or jail term. 

Of defendants sentenced to serve time, those using publicly financed 
attorneys had shorter sentences than those with private counsel.  Those 
with publicly financed attorneys were sentenced to an average of 2 1/2 years 
of incarceration and those with private counsel to 3 years. 

Similar to drug offenders convicted in Federal court, those sentenced 
for drug offenses with court-appointed attorneys had shorter sentences 
(2 years) than those who hired their attorneys (3 years).  For other 
offense categories, sentences were about the same for defendants with 
public and private attorneys.       

Local jail inmates described their 
experiences with the criminal justice 
system

In addition to gathering information on defendants in Federal and State
courts, BJS sponsors interviews of inmates in local jails and State and
Federal prisons.  Nationally representative samples of inmates describe 
their personal experiences with the criminal justice system.  Jail inmates
either may be awaiting trial or sentencing or may be serving their sentence;
prison inmates are serving a sentence.
  
In the 1996 Survey of Inmates in Local Jails, most inmates charged with a
felony reported they were represented by counsel; 97% had an attorney -- 
77% a court-appointed counsel and 20% a private attorney.  Over a quarter of
jail inmates charged with a misdemeanor had no attorney, and over half used
public counsel.

The percent of all jail inmates who had been represented by a publicly
financed attorney rose from 64% in 1989 to 68% in 1996. 

Defendants in jail for homicide most 
likely to hire their own attorneys

About 40% of jail inmates charged with homicide hired their own attorney, 
as did 25% charged with rape or sexual assault, 28% driving while 
intoxicated, and 25% weapons offenses.
  
Public-order defendants were more likely than other defendants to represent
themselves in legal proceedings.  About 4 in 10 charged with a public-order
offense such as obstruction of justice, a traffic violation, drunkenness, 
or a violation of probation or parole represented themselves.  Two in ten
charged with driving while intoxicated reported that they had no lawyer.

1 in 4 convicted jail inmates with 
public counsel and with bail set 
were released before trial

Whether their attorney was appointed or hired, about three-quarters of
convicted jail inmates charged with a felony had bail or bond set for them. 
Of inmates with bail set, a quarter with a court-appointed attorney and
two-thirds with hired attorneys were released on bond before their trial.  
The lack of financial assets that prevented hiring a private attorney may 
have also impeded posting bond.

Convicted jail inmates with a public attorney were more likely than those 
with private counsel to have entered a guilty plea after reaching an 
agreement with the prosecutor to plead guilty to a lesser charge or fewer
counts.  An estimated 54% with a publicly financed attorney and 49% with a
hired attorney plea bargained.

Prison inmates -- those already 
convicted -- reported their 
experience with their attorneys

In 1997 publicly financed attorneys had represented in court proceedings 
3 in 4 inmates in State prison and 6 in 10 in Federal prison.  About 1%-2%
represented themselves rather than using a lawyer.

From 1991 to 1997 the percentage of State inmates with appointed counsel
remained the same, while that of sentenced Federal inmates increased from 
54% to 60%.

Prison inmates spoke to court- 
appointed lawyers later and less 
often than to private attorneys 

Of inmates with court-appointed counsel, 37% of State inmates and 54% of
Federal inmates spoke with their attorneys within the first week.  In
contrast, of those with hired counsel, about 60% of State inmates and 75% of
Federal inmates had contact with their attorneys within a week of arrest.

Few inmates said they never spoke to their attorneys.  Of those with 
appointed counsel, about 5% of State inmates and 2% of Federal inmates 
did not discuss their cases with an attorney; of those with hired 
attorneys, 1-2% never spoke to them.

Inmates with appointed lawyers spoke to them less frequently than inmates 
with private lawyers.  About 26% of State inmates and 46% of Federal inmates
with court-appointed attorneys discussed their cases with counsel at least
four times.  An estimated 58% of State inmates and 65% of Federal inmates who
employed their own attorneys talked with them four or more times about their
charges.

Inmates who used public counsel were less likely to proceed to trial than
those employing private attorneys.   A quarter of both State and Federal
inmates with public counsel pleaded not guilty, as did about a third of 
those with hired attorneys. 

In an Alford plea the defendant agrees to plead guilty because he or she
realizes that there is little chance to win acquittal because of the strong
evidence of guilt.  About 17% of State inmates and 5% of Federal inmates
submitted either an Alford plea or a no contest plea, regardless of the type
of attorney.  This difference reflects the relative readiness of State courts,
compared to Federal courts, to accept an alternative plea.

State and Federal inmates who used public attorneys were less likely than
those with private attorneys to have been tried by jury.  Among State inmates
17% who used appointed counsel and 22% who employed a private lawyer were
tried before a jury.  Among Federal inmates 21% of those with appointed
lawyers and 27% with privately hired counsel had jury trials.

State and Federal inmates with public attorneys and those with private 
lawyers were equally likely to have pleaded guilty to a lesser offense or
fewer counts than originally charged.  About half had plea bargained,
regardless of the type of attorney or the jurisdiction of the court.

State inmates with public attorneys 
had shorter sentences than inmates 
with private counsel
  
On average State inmates who used appointed counsel expected to serve over 7
years on sentences of 13 years, while those who hired their attorneys expected
to remain in prison 8 years on sentences of 15 years.  Federal inmates
expected to serve an average of almost 9 years for sentences of 10 1/2 years,
whether they had appointed attorneys or hired their own.

Drug offenders in State prison who had appointed counsel expected shorter
prison stays on shorter sentences than those who hired their own lawyers.  The
average length of stay expected by State drug offenders who used appointed
counsel was 4 years while that expected by those who employed their own
lawyers was almost 5 years.

Federal public-order offenders with appointed counsel had on average shorter
sentence lengths than those with private counsel (9 versus 10 years).   
  
Minority inmates were more likely 
than whites to have appointed 
counsel 

In State prisons, while 69% of white inmates reported they had lawyers
appointed by the court, 77% of blacks and 73% of Hispanics had public
defenders or assigned counsel.  In the Federal system, blacks also were more
likely to have public defenders or panel attorneys than other inmates; 65% of
blacks had publicly financed attorneys.  About the same percentage of whites
and Hispanics used publicly financed attorneys (57% of whites and 56% of
Hispanics).

Lower educational attainment among inmates was associated with higher use of
court appointed attorneys.  Over 7 in 10 with less than a high school diploma
or GED used government financed attorneys.  Sixty-one percent of State inmates
and 50% of Federal inmates who had attended at least some college also had
appointed lawyers.

Inmates who were unemployed were 
more likely than other inmates to 
use court-appointed attorneys

About 8 in 10 State inmates without a job before their most recent arrest,
compared to 7 in 10 employed full time, had appointed counsel.  Among Federal
inmates two-thirds who were not employed and half who were employed full time
had publicly financed attorneys.

Over three-quarters of State inmates with monthly personal incomes of less
than $1,000 had publicly financed defenders.  Less than two-thirds of those
with incomes of $2,000 or more per month had publicly financed lawyers.  Over
two-thirds of Federal inmates with incomes less than $1,000 and nearly half
with incomes of $2,000 or more per month had publicly supported attorneys.
For both State and Federal inmates, 9 in 10 who were homeless at any time in
the year before their most recent arrest had court-appointed counsel.

Type of counsel for prison inmates 
varied by conviction offense

Among State offenders, those serving  sentences for burglary, larceny, fraud,
or robbery had relatively high rates of court appointed attorneys; about 8 in
10 had publicly financed counsel. Similarly in the Federal system, 8 in 10
robbery or burglary offenders used public defenders or panel attorneys. 

State inmates convicted of serious violent and drug offenses made less use of
publicly financed attorneys.  Approximately two-thirds of those convicted of
homicide, sexual offenses, drug trafficking, and drug possession reported
using public defenders or assigned counsel.

Among Federal offenders about half convicted of fraud (46%), drug trafficking
(55%), or drug possession (56%) reported using public defenders or panel
attorneys.  Over 8 in 10 sentenced for rape or other sexual crime, robbery,
and burglary used publicly financed attorneys.

Methodology 

Data sources

This report uses a variety of data sources.  

*  Data on Federal court representations were published by the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts (AOUSC) in their annual, Judicial Business of the
United States Court.  The AOUSC's Defender Services Division supplied
additional unpublished data. 
 
*  The AOUSC also provides BJS with data from their Criminal Master File. 
This dataset includes defendants in cases terminated each year in the Federal
court system. Tables from the data are published each year in the Compendium
of Federal Justice Statistics. BJS makes these data available on its Federal
Justice Statistics web- site <http://fjsrc.urban.org/index.shtml>. 

*  In the National Survey of State Court Prosecutors, BJS has surveyed local
prosecutors' offices biennially and several times has asked about types 
of indigent attorney programs in their jurisdictions.  For more information,
see the publication Prosecutors in State Courts, 1996 (July 1998, NCJ 170092). 
The data, together with the code sheet and documentation, are available at
<http://www.icpsr.umich. edu/NACJD/bus.html#nps>.

In 1999 BJS fielded the National Survey of Indigent Defense Systems to collect
data from providers of criminal indigent services.  Results are published in
Indigent Defense Services in Large Counties, 1999 (BJS Bulletin, NCJ 184932).

*  In the State Court Processing Statistics data (formerly known as the
National  Pretrial Reporting Program)   BJS collects a sample of records for
felony cases filed in the Nation's 75 most populous counties in the United
States.  This survey includes information on the type of attorney used by the
defendants.  For more information, see Felony Defendants in Large Urban
Counties, 1996 (October 1999, NCJ 176981).  Data are available at
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/bjs.html#scps>.

*  Every 5 to 6 years BJS sponsors surveys of inmates in State prisons,
Federal prisons, and local jails.  In hour-long personal interviews with a
nationally representative sample of inmates, respondents are asked about their
current and prior offenses, personal and family characteristics, and the
processes that resulted in their current incarceration.  For further
information, see Profile of Jail Inmates, 1996 (April 1998, NCJ 164620) and
Substance Abuse and Treatment of State and Federal Prison Inmates, 1997
(December 1998, NCJ 172871).  

Documentation, codebook, questionnaire, and the public use data files can be
accessed at <http://www.icpsr. umich.edu/NACJD/bjs.html#silj> for the Survey
of Inmates in Local Jails and at <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/bjs.html#siscf> 
for the Surveys of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities.
 
Standard errors and accuracy 
of the estimates

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this report for the State Court
Processing Statistics, Survey of Inmates in Local Jails, and the Surveys of
Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities depend on the size of the
sampling error.  This error, as measured by an estimated standard error,
varies with the size of the estimate and the size of the base population. 
Estimates of the standard error for selected characteristics have been
calculated for each survey.  These standard errors may be used to construct
confidence intervals around percentages.

For example, using standard errors from appendix table 1, the 95% confidence
interval for the estimated 68% of jail inmates using court appointed counsel
is calculated as 68.1% " 1.96(.83), or 66.5-69.7%.

The standard error of the difference of two percentages is the square root of
the sum of the squared standard errors for each group.  For example, also
using standard errors from appendix table 1, the 95% confidence interval for
the estimated difference in the percentage with appointed counsel for jail
inmates charged with a felony (76.6%) or misdemeanor (56.3%) is calculated as
20.3 " 1.96(2.1), or 16.2 to 24.4.

Because this interval does not include zero, we can conclude with 95%
confidence that the percentages of those charged with a felony or misdemeanor
using public counsel are actually different. 

All relationships discussed in the text of this report are significant at the
95% confidence level.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific topic in depth from one or more
datasets that cover many topics.

Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote this report under the supervision of Allen J. Beck. 
In BJS, Carol DeFrances consulted extensively on research approaches and
reviewed the State prosecutor data analysis; John Scalia provided numbers and
reviewed the items dealing with Federal defendants; Tim Hart reviewed the
section from State Court Processing Statistics; David Levin assisted in
accessing the SCPS dataset; Tracy Snell provided a statistical review of
material from the surveys of inmates in State or Federal prisons or local
jails; and Greg Steadman reviewed the standard error calculations.

William Sabol, formerly of Urban Institute, verified the Federal data from the
Criminal Master File.  Staff of the  Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts,
Steven R. Schlesinger and Catherine Whitaker of the Statistical Division, and
Theodore J. Lidz, Steven G. Asin, George M. Drakalich, and Stephan C.
Macartney of the Defender Services Division, provided and verified data and
reviewed text.  Tom Hester and Ellen Goldberg produced and edited the report. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final printing.

November 2000  NCJ 179023

End of file
11/22/00 ih                   


