U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Status Report

Data Collections for the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003


June 30, 2004 NCJ  206109

--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of th tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphic in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/dcprea.htm
--------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------
Highlights of Public Law 108-79

*  Sec. 4 (a)(1). The Bureau of Justice Statistics ... shall carry 
out, for each calendar year, a comprehensive statistical review 
and analysis of the incidence and effects of prison rape. The
statistical review and analysis shall include, but not be limited 
to the identification of the common characteristics of —-
                                                                             
(A) both victims and perpetrators of prison rape; and
                                                                               
(B) prisons and prison systems with a high incidence of prison 
rape.

*  Sec. 4 (a)(4). The review and analysis ... shall be based on a 
random sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not 
less than 10 percent of all Federal, State, and county prisons, 
and a representative sample of municipal prisons.

*  Sec. 4 (a)(6). Federal, State, or local officials or facility
administrators that receive a request from the Bureau ... will
be required to participate in the national survey and provide 
access to any inmates under their legal custody.

*  Sec. 4 (b)(3)(A)... there is established, within the Department 
of Justice, the Review Panel on Prison Rape ....  The duty of the 
Panel shall be to carry out, for each calendar year, public hearings
concerning the operation of the three prisons with the highest
incidence of prison rape and the two prisons with the lowest 
incidence of prison rape within each category of facilities ....

*  Sec. 4 (c)(1)... Not later than June 30 of each year, the 
Attorney General shall submit a report on the activities of the
Bureau and the Review Panel, with respect to prison rape, for the 
preceding calendar year ....

*  Sec. 4 (c)(2)... The report required under paragraph (1) shall 
include ... 

(B)(ii) a listing of those institutions in the representative sample,
separated into each category ...and ranked according to the
incidence of prison rape in each institution; and

(C) a listing of any prisons in the representative sample that did not
cooperate with the survey ...

*  Sec. 8 (c)(4). For each fiscal year, any amount that a State 
receives for that fiscal year under a grant program covered by this 
subsection shall not be used for prison purposes ... unless the
chief executive of the State submits to the Attorney General a 
certification that neither the State, nor any political
subdivision or unit of local government within the State, is 
listed in a report ... pursuant to section 4(c)(2)(c).
---------------------------------------------
                                                  
On September 4, 2003, President George W. Bush signed into law the
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003(P.L. 108-79). The legislation 
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to develop a new 
national data collection on the incidence and prevalence of
sexual assault within correctional facilities. This report updates
Implementing the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003, dated 
February 5, 2004.
                                                  
There have been only a few studies on the prevalence of sexual 
assault within correctional facilities. These studies are
typically small in scale, covering only a few facilities, and 
generalizations to the national correctional population are not
appropriate. The magnitude of sexual assault among prisoners is 
not currently well understood. BJS is tasked with developing 
reliable methods to measure the problem so that it can be 
addressed and eliminated.

Victimization, particularly sexual assault by a same-sex perpetrator, 
is a sensitive event that introduces complexities for collecting 
self-report data. There are ethical concerns, a need to insure
respondent confidentiality to ease fears of reprisal, and a 
general reluctance to fully report past incidents. Data collection
from juveniles also requires consent from parents or legal 
guardians.     Corrections administrators have concerns about legal 
liability, reliability of self-reports, and potential disruption 
of facility operations. 
                                                  
BJS is developing new methods to
address current deficiencies

At present there is no reliable collection methodology for measuring 
prison rape.  Most prior attempts to measure the prevalence of 
prison rape relied on either personal interviews of inmates or use 
of mail-in, self-administered inmate questionnaires. Personal 
interviews of inmates have generally yielded low positive response 
rates (below 1%). These low rates of reporting do not permit further 
analyses of victim, perpetrator, and facility characteristics. More 
recent studies with self-administered questionnaires have yielded 
higher prevalence rates (around 20% with a broad definition of sexual
assault). However, the credibility of such studies remains in question 
due to low questionnaire completion rates (e.g., 25% response rate) 
and loss of control over who completes the forms and under what 
settings.
                                                  
To address existing deficiencies, BJS is developing and testing the 
use of Audio Computer-Assisted Self-Interviews (known as "audio-CASI"). 
The audio-CASI methodology involves inmates responding to a computer
questionnaire using a touch-screen, following audio instructions 
delivered via headphones. It is anticipated that removing the presence 
of a personal interviewer will increase an inmate's willingness to 
report sensitive information. Audio-CASI also permits inmates with 
limited literacy to report victimization. At the same time, the
conditions under which inmates complete the survey can be controlled,
unlike past surveys in which inmates completed a written questionnaire 
in various environments.
                                                  
To identify the best measurement strategy, BJS will test audio-CASI 
in two interview settings: (1) inmates in prisons and jails and 
residents in juvenile facilities; and (2) inmates and residents who 
are soon-to-be released.
              
BJS will also test supplemental survey methodologies, including
computer-assisted interview methods (CAI) and paper and pencil 
interviews (PAPI), to collect information from soon-to-be-released 
jail inmates and recently released prisoners in parole offices. 
Despite the expected improvements from audio-CASI, inmates may 
still perceive that their responses will not be kept confidential 
and may continue to fear retribution as long as they remain in 
prison or jail. BJS will test various methods of surveying released
inmates to determine if rates of sexual assault differ by 
incarceration status.                                        
                                             
---------------------------------------------
How will rape be measured?
                                                  
Section 10 of the Prison Rape Elimination Act defined the term 
"rape" as: 
... the carnal knowledge, oral sodomy, sexual assault with an object, 
or sexual fondling of a person, forcibly or against that person's 
will; or not forcibly or against the person's will, where the victim 
is incapable of giving consent because of his or her youth or his 
or her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity; or
...the carnal knowledge, oral sodomy, sexual assault with an object, 
or sexual fondling of a person achieved through the exploitation of
the fear or threat of physical violence or bodily injury.
                                                  
After consulting with experts in sexual victimization, prison rape
researchers, and corrections administrators and practitioners, BJS 
intends to operationalize this definition by disaggregating sexual 
assault into three categories of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence 
and all incidents of staff sexual misconduct.

Categories of sexual violence will reflect uniform definitions 
formulated by the National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control, in "Sexual Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions 
and Recommended Data Elements," Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC).  
                                                  
These categories are: 1) completed non-consensual sexual acts; 2)
attempted non-consensual sexual acts; and 3) abusive sexual 
contacts. Inmate-on-inmate non-consensual sexual acts include:
                                                  
*  contact of any inmate without his or her consent, or of an inmate 
who is unable to consent or refuse; and 
*  contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the anus 
involving penetration, however slight; or
*  contact between the mouth and the penis, vulva, or anus; or
*  penetration of the anal or genital opening of another person by a 
hand, finger, or other object.
                                                  
Inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual
contacts include:
                                                  
*  contact of any inmate without his or her consent, or of an inmate 
who is unable to consent or refuse;
*  intentional touching, either directly or through the clothing, of 
the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks of an 
inmate.

All sexual acts involving staff are considered misconduct and are 
covered under the Act, including:

*  any behavior of a sexual nature directed toward an inmate by
an employee, volunteer, official visitor, or agency representative;
*  all completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts
between staff and inmates;
*  any incident of intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, 
groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, 
arouse, or gratify sexual desire;
*  incidents of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy for sexual
gratification, or staff voyeurism.
----------------------------------------
                                                  
Multiple measures of sexual
assault will be used to assess
reliability and to rank facilities
                                                  
Due to the complexities associated with collecting sensitive data 
within correctional facilities serving a variety of functions and 
supervising different populations, BJS will obtain multiple
measures of sexual assault victimization. BJS will disaggregate 
the number of incidents by type of facility and distinguish non-
consensual acts from abusive sexual contacts. (See box on page 2.) 
This approach will permit BJS to analyze the validity of
different data collection methodologies as well as their impact 
on facility-level estimates. 
                                                  
The need to provide anonymity to victims and to give assurances 
of confidentiality of their responses prevents validating reports 
of sexual assault through follow-ups and official records. Instead,
by incorporating multiple measures within the audio-CASI surveys 
and comparing results across multiple modes of data collection, 
BJS will attempt to validate victim self-reports through 
independent measures.
                                                  
The audio-CASI surveys will include questions about victimizations 
other than sexual assault. These questions will be used to assess 
the reliability of the victim self-reports. Also to assess 
reliability, victims will be asked a series of questions about the
circumstances surrounding each incident.  
                                                  
BJS will conduct an annual 
administrative records collection
                                                  
Concurrent with developing and testing self-report survey
methodologies, BJS will conduct an annual administrative records 
collection. During 2004 BJS will survey all Federal and State
prison systems, State juvenile systems, and a representative sample 
(not less than 10%) of local jails and privately or locally operated 
juvenile facilities. The administrative records collection is
expected to include 3,269 of the 8,727 facilities covered by the
Act. 
                                                  
The main objectives of the administrative collection are to 
determine:
*  the number of reported incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
violence and staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct, by gender;
*  how prison systems and facilities record these incidents (e.g., in
disciplinary, grievance, investigative, or  medical files); 
*  what information is recorded (e.g., allegations, confirmed incidents, 
only incidents involving serious bodily harm, or threats);
*  where the incidents occur (e.g., in the victim's cell/room, in a 
common area, or outside of the facility);
*  what additional data are available (for purposes of administrative
collections in future years).
                                                  
The 2004 administrative collection will provide an understanding of what
corrections officials know, what information is recorded, how allegations
and confirmed incidents are handled, what disciplinary or administrative 
and legal sanctions are imposed on perpetrators, and what treatment is
provided to victims of sexual assault.
                                                  
The results from this collection will provide BJS with system- and             
facility-level estimates of the incidents of sexual assault for 
calendar year 2004.  As required under the Act, BJS will report the 
findings at a facility level when possible and at a system level when
facility-level estimates are not appropriate. Facilities and systems 
with the highest and lowest rates of sexual assault will be identified. 
                                                  
Findings from the 2004 administrative collection will also be used in 
future surveys. In 2005 the administrative survey will be expanded to 
collect information on individual incidents of sexual assault 
occurring in State and Federal prisons and State juvenile
systems. In 2006 the survey will collect data on incidents 
occurring in local jails and privately or locally operated juvenile
facilities. The incident-level data collections will provide 
detailed data on circumstances surrounding each reported incident. 
These data will enable BJS to analyze in depth the incidence and 
effects of sexual victimization within correctional facilities.
                                                  
BJS has identified agents to assist in the 
data collections
                                                  
The Governments Division of the U.S. Census Bureau will act as BJS'
collection agent for the 2004, 2005, and 2006 surveys of 
administrative records. BJS has developed separate questionnaires 
for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, State prison systems, local jail
jurisdictions, State juvenile systems, and local and private
facilities. BJS and Census staff are currently testing these 
questionnaires and developing optimal sampling designs. Data
collection will begin in early 2005, following approval from the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
                                                  
In April 2004 after a competitive award process, BJS selected the 
Research Triangle Institute (RTI) to design, develop, and test the 
audio-CASI surveys for use in adult prisons and jails. The 
cooperative agreement award with RTI covers a 24-month period.
                                                  
BJS and RTI staff are currently developing a draft questionnaire to 
include detailed items that measure the incidence of physical and
sexual victimization during a 12-month reference period. These
items are based on BJS' National Crime Victimization Survey and 
have been adapted for use in correctional facilities.  The draft 
questionnaire will undergo cognitive testing in six facilities in
September 2004. The cognitive tests will evaluate the question 
wording and comprehension of the survey concepts by inmates. Results 
of the cognitive tests will be used to revise the draft audio-CASI
questionnaire. The draft questionnaire and supporting survey
methods will be submitted to OMB for review and approval.
                                                  
Upon approval by OMB, the survey will be field-tested in spring 
2005. The field test will include approximately 2,500 respondents 
from up to 25 State and Federal prisons and local jails. 
                                                  
A separate data collection agent will
measure juvenile victimization

To address the complexities of collecting data from youth under the
supervision of juvenile justice authorities, BJS has solicited a 
separate collection agent to develop and test audio-CASI methods in 
juvenile facilities. A formal announcement of an 18-month
cooperative agreement is expected in July 2004. 
                                                  
Efforts to collect data from youth have the additional burden of 
obtaining consent from parents or legal guardians prior to the 
participation in the survey. While administrators in some juvenile
facilities are able to consent on behalf of the parent or guardian, 
other administrators are not, depending on the laws of the State 
or locality. A further complication is that most State child abuse 
reporting laws require disclosure of an incident of sexual assault 
to the appropriate authorities. These legal and ethical requirements 
pose special challenges in designing survey methods that will satisfy 
internal review boards (IRBs) and guarantee confidentiality to
the youth.
                                                  
The cooperative agreement will include developing and testing 
supplemental PAPI or suitable CAI surveys. These surveys are 
needed because of the high turnover rates of juveniles in 
facilities.  BJS staff and the collection agent will work 
collaboratively to develop procedures for interviewing youth 
who flow through sampled facilities over a 12-month period to 
produce accurate facility-level prevalence rates.
                                                  
Cognitive tests are expected to occur in up to 10 juvenile facilities 
in late 2004, followed by a national pretest in up to 30 facilities 
in mid-2005.  Based on the pretest results, the collection agent will
formulate a national implementation plan that describes strategies for
overcoming the legal, ethical, and logistical complexities related to 
the juvenile data collection.
                                                  
Census Bureau to assist in data
collection from former inmates

Finally, BJS is finalizing an interagency agreement with the 
Demographic Surveys Division (DSD) of the U.S. Census Bureau for 
the development and testing methodologies for collecting data on 
sexual assault from former prisoners under active parole supervision 
and soon-to-be-released jail inmates. A final agreement is expected 
in July 2004. 
                                                  
DSD will assist BJS staff in designing and testing PAPI and other CAI 
survey methods. Although the surveys will be self-administered, Census 
field staff will oversee survey procedures to ensure respondent
confidentiality and the integrity of the parolee and jail inmates
samples. Field staff will coordinate with jail and parole office 
staff the selection of the sample and the distribution and collection
of survey forms.

-----------------------------------------
Data collections and agents
                                                  
*  Administrative Records Collection:  Governments Division of the 
U.S. Census Bureau will conduct surveys in 2004, 2005, and 2006. 
The 2004 survey will collect data from the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 
all State prison and juvenile systems, and a sample of local jails 
and private facilities. Detailed data will be collected on incidents 
reported to State and Federal prison officials and State juvenile 
systems in 2005 and on incidents in sampled local jails in 2006.
                                                    
*  Self-reports by inmates in adult correctional facilities: Research
Triangle Institute was awarded a 24-month cooperative agreement to 
design, develop, and test audio-CASI in adult correctional facilities. 
The project includes cognitive testing, conducting a national pretest, 
and delivering a national implementation plan in 2006.  

*  Self-reports by persons in juvenile facilities:  A data
collection agent has been identified for an 18-month cooperative 
agreement to design, develop, and test audio-CASI and other
supplemental survey methodologies in juvenile facilities. A
national implementation plan is expected in 2006.
                                                    
*  Self-reports by soon-to-be-released jail inmates and former
State prisoners:  BJS is finalizing an 18-month interagency
agreement with Demographic Surveys Division of the U.S. Census 
Bureau to design, develop, and test PAPI and other CAI survey
methods for use with inmates at time of discharge from local 
jails and for former State prisoners on active parole supervision.
---------------------------------------
                                                  
Cognitive tests are planned for late 2004 followed by a field test 
with up to 30 jails and 20 State parole offices in mid-2005. 
                                                  
The data collected from former inmates will permit BJS to evaluate 
whether incarceration status has an effect on self-reported 
victimization.  Should there be an effect, additional methods will 
be developed to link reports of former inmates to specific 
facilities and prison systems.
                                                                         
BJS has hired experts to provide
support for data collection activities
                                                  
BJS is currently finalizing agreements with two individuals to 
provide expertise in sexual assault research and the juvenile 
justice system.  
                                                  
Richard Tewksbury, Ph.D., is a professor at the University of 
Louisville in the Department of Justice Administration. Dr. 
Tewksbury has authored many publications on sexual assault 
within correctional facilities. He joined BJS under the BJS 
Visiting Fellows Program in June 2004 for an 18-month term.
                                                  
Howard Snyder, Ph.D., is the Director of Systems Research for the 
National Center for Juvenile Justice (NCJJ). Dr. Snyder possesses 
a unique knowledge of juvenile delinquents and their movement 
within the juvenile justice system. He will work as a consultant 
on juvenile justice issues with BJS for an 18-month period. BJS 
may hire or retain additional subject matter experts as necessary 
to support data collection activities. 
                                                  
National implementation has begun and 
will be fully operational in 2006
  
To meet the requirements of the Act, BJS will conduct an initial
administrative records collection in 2004. This collection will 
provide facility and system-level estimates of sexual assault
for calendar year 2004. Similar collections are planned for 2005 
and 2006, with additional details from official records on each 
reported incident of sexual assault.   
                                                  
It is anticipated that the audio-CASI, PAPI, and other CAI surveys
of current and former inmates will be fully operational for a 
national data collection by the end of 2006. Test results of
audio-CASI, PAPI, and CAI surveys will be made available in June 
2006.
                                                  
In 2006 BJS will issue solicitations seeking data collection agents 
to conduct the national implementation of all four survey components. 
The first facility-level measures of sexual assault using victim 
self-reports from a national sample of Federal and State prisoners,
local jail inmates, persons held in juvenile facilities, and
former inmates will be collected for calendar year 2006.
                                                  
In meeting the requirements of the Act, BJS is relying upon the
support of correctional administrators nationwide. It will be 
difficult to obtain accurate and reliable data on sexual
assault, especially in facilities that house juveniles. 
Through extensive development and testing, BJS is seeking
to identify reliable methods in order to begin national
implementation.
                                                  
Better information on the extent of the problem will inform 
policy-makers in their efforts to eliminate sexual victimization 
within correctional facilities. The challenge is formidable,
but with the cooperation of corrections professionals,
requirements of the Act will be met and the objectives achieved.

End of file
07/15/04 ih