U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
special Report

Effects of NIBRS
on Crime Statistics


July 2000, NCJ 178890

--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/enibrsc.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

By Ramona R. Rantala
BJS Statistician
with technical support from
Thomas J. Edwards
FBI Systems Analyst

--------------------------------------------------------    
Highlights

Differences between 
Summary UCR and NIBRS

Summary UCR
* Consists of monthly aggregate crime 
counts for eight Index crimes
*  Records one offense per incident as 
determined by hierarchy rule
*  Hierarchy rule suppresses counts of 
lesser offenses in multiple-offense incident
*  Does not distinguish between attempted and 
completed crimes
*  Applies hotel rule to burglary
*  Records rape of females only
*  Collects weapon information for murder, 
robbery, and aggravated assault
*  Provides counts on arrests for the 8
Index crimes and 21 other offenses.

NIBRS
*  Consists of individual incident records 
for the 8 Index crimes and 38 other offenses 
with details on --

*  Offense         * Victim
*  Offender        * Property
*  Records each offense occurring in 
incident
*  Distinguishes between attempted and 
completed crimes
*  Expands burglary hotel rule to include 
rental storage facilities
* Records rape of males and females
* Restructures definition of assault
* Collects weapon information for 
all violent offenses
* Provides details on arrests for the 8 
Index crimes and 49 other offenses.

Sources of data discrepancies 
between Summary UCR and NIBRS

Human error
Misclassifications of --
*  Aggravated assault
*  Motor vehicle theft
*  Larceny

Hierarchy
*  Suppression of multiple offenses by 
hierarchy rule

Operational
*  Modified offense definitions
*  Converting State penal code 
to FBI crime definitions
*  Over-reporting because of  State practices
*  Recording every possible offense with which 
offender may be charged

Computer
*  Inadequate programming
---------------------------

When comparing data from the same year for the 
jurisdictions in this study, NIBRS rates differ 
only slightly from Summary UCR --

*  Murder rates are the same
*  Rape, robbery, and aggravated assault rates 
in NIBRS are about 1% higher, on average, than 
in Summary UCR
*  NIBRS burglary rates are lower by an average 
0.5%
*  NIBRS larceny rates are higher by an average 
3.4%
*  NIBRS motor vehicle theft rates are higher by 
an average 4.5%.

----------------------------------------------------------

In 1929 the FBI began the Summary Uniform 
Crime Reporting (UCR) system, a voluntary 
program to collect aggregate counts of Index 
crimes -- murder, rape, robbery, aggravated 
assault, burglary, motor vehicle theft, larceny, 
and, after 1978, arson.

" . . . [T]he Summary system of the UCR Program 
has been very serviceable since its inception in 
1929, " the FBI notes, "but it pales next to the 
capabilities and potential of the National Incident
-Based Reporting System (NIBRS).***Footnote"1: FBI, 
CJIS Newsletter, NIBRS edition, 4, 1, p 1.***

"In developing NIBRS, UCR Program managers have 
provided law enforcement agencies with a 
standardized, electronic blueprint for storing 
the NIBRS data within their individual records
management systems....  The goals of NIBRS are 
to enhance the quantity, quality, and timeliness 
of crime data collection ...and to improve the 
thodology used in compiling, analyzing, auditing, 
and publishing the collected crime 
statistics.***Footnote"2: CJIS Newsletter, p.2.***

As jurisdictions switch from the Summary UCR 
system to NIBRS, many have expressed concern 
about the effects incident-based reporting will 
have on crime statistics.  Under Summary UCR 
agencies report only the most serious Index 
offense per incident of crime.  Because of 
the new type of crime classification procedures 
in NIBRS, in a multiple-offense incident more 
than one offense will be reported.  Jurisdictions 
are concerned about the effect this more thorough 
reporting will have on their crime statistics.  

Comparing crime rates from 
Summary UCR and NIBRS

Research for this report measured differences 
between estimats of the aggravated assault rate, 
comparing NIBRS to summary format, and identified 
possible causes of those differences. Differences 
in the rates for six other Index crime categories
are examined to compare with aggravated assault.  
Arson, which the FBI reports in the "Modified 
Index" but not the Index crime figures, is not 
included.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) selected 
jurisdictions with full-year NIBRS reporting and 
nonzero populations (that is, including agencies 
with a specific population, such as a local police 
department or sheriff's office, and generally 
excluding State or county police).  In 1991, 269 
agencies, covering a population of 4.1 million, 
met the criteria.  By 1996, full-year NIBRS 
participation had increased to 1,082 agencies, 
covering a population of 14.8 million.  The 
data came from nine NIBRS- certified States 
(Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts, Michigan, North 
Dakota, South Carolina, Utah, Vermont, and 
Virginia).

Each agency is represented for each year in 
which it met the selection criteria.  Although 
156 agencies had a single year of data, the 
rest of the agencies met the criteria for more 
than 1 year.  The term "case" in this report 
refers to an "agency-year."  A case includes 
both NIBRS and Summary UCR aggregate crime
counts within each agency for each year an 
agency reported 12 months of NIBRS data.   A 
total of 4,068 cases, comprising 1,131
unique agencies, met these selection criteria.

Two  FBI datasets were used.  In the first 
dataset, the FBI provided NIBRS offense counts 
aggregated by agency from 1991 to 1996.  Ten 
crime categories, as defined in the Summary UCR
program, were included.

Through a computer program the FBI applied the 
hierarchy rule and converted the NIBRS counts 
to Summary UCR counts.  This process resulted 
in two crime counts, NIBRS and Summary UCR, for
each crime category, agency, and year. 

The second data set was the 1996 NIBRS incident 
file.  This file provided detail at the incident 
level, such as which crimes occurred in 
combination for multiple offense incidents and 
the number of victims and offenders.  These 
details help explain some of the crime rate 
differences.  

Overall results

When the crime rates were calculated from NIBRS 
and Summary UCR data, the average difference 
between estimates was small.  On average the 
NIBRS Index crime rate was 2% higher.  The 
violent crime rate was higher by less than 
1%, and the property crime rate was higher 
by  slightly more than 2%, on average.

---------------------------------- 
Table 2. Offense categories for Summary 
UCR and NIBR 

Summary UCR

Offenses and arrests are reported  
for the following, listed in hierarchical  
order:
Part I (Index) offenses
 
Murder
Forcible rape
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Burglary C breaking or entering
Motor vehicle theft
Larceny
Arson (not subject to the hierarchy 
rule)
 
Arrests only are reported for the 
following:
Part II offenses
 
Curfew and loitering law violations
Disorderly conduct
Driving under the influence
Drug abuse violations
Drunkenness
Embezzlement
Forgery and counterfeiting
Fraud
Gambling
Liquor laws
Offenses against family and children
Other assaults
Prostitution and commercial vice
Runaways
Sex offenses (except forcible rape
and prostitution)
Stolen property: buying, receiving, possess
Suspicion
Vagrancy
Vandalism
Weapons: carrying, possessing, other
All other offenses (except traffic)
 
NIBRS

Offenses and arrests are reported for the
following, for which a hierarchy does not
apply:
Group A offenses

Arson
Assault offenses
Bribery
Burglary/breaking and entering
Counterfeiting/forgery
Destruction/damage/vandalism
of property
Drug/narcotic offenses
Embezzlement
Extortion/blackmail
Fraud offenses
Gambling offenses
Homicide offenses
Kidnaping/abduction
Larceny/theft offenses
Motor vehicle theft
Pornography/obscene material
Prostitution offenses
Robbery
Sex offenses, forcible
Sex offenses, nonforcible
Stolen property offenses
Weapon law violations
 
Arrests only are reported for
the following:
Group B offenses
 
Bad checks
Curfew/loitering/vagrancy
Disorderly conduct
Driving under the influence
Drunkenness
Nonviolent family offenses
Peeping Tom
Runaways
Trespassing
All other offenses
------------------------------

For murder, rates from NIBRS and Summary 
UCR are the same because both systems count 
each homicide and manslaughter victim and 
exclude justifiable homicide.

Rape, robbery, and aggravated assault rates 
each had an average difference of less than 
1% between NIBRS and Summary UCR statistics.  

NIBRS burglary rates were lower an average 
of 0.5%.  Burglary is the only individual 
crime category in which the NIBRS rate can
be lower than Summary UCR.  (See page 5.)  
Larceny rates were higher by slightly more 
than 3% and motor vehicle theft rates by
4.5%, on average.

Individually, most cases studied showed only 
slight differences between NIBRS and Summary 
UCR estimates.  For murder, 100% of the cases 
had identical murder rates from the two counting 
methods.

                       NIBRS crime rates differ
                       from Summary UCR
                       by 5.5% or less
                        Number      Percent of
                        of cases*   all cases
All Index offenses        3,661        90%
 
Violent offenses          3,937        97
Murder                    4,068       100
Rape                      3,957        97
Robbery                   3,954        97
Assault                   3,970        98
 
Property offenses         3,643        90
Burglary                  3,953        97
Motor vehicle theft       3,234        80
Larceny                   3,569        88
 
*Cases are "agency-years" C agencies
that submitted 12 months of NIBRS data
for a year.
 
In 3,970 cases of aggravated assault, 98% 
of all cases, the difference between the 
rates from NIBRS and Summary UCR was 5.5%
or less. Results for rape, robbery and 
total violent crime were similar, with 
97% of cases showing differences of 5.5% 
or less 

The results for property crime varied.  
The proportion of cases having a rate 
change of 5.5% or less was 97% for burglary, 
80% for motor vehicle theft, and 88% for 
larceny.  Overall, 90% of cases showed rate 
changes of 5.5% or less for both total
property and total index crime.  

Jurisdictions with little crime tend to show 
exaggerated changes in crime rates.  For 
example, a jurisdiction that experienced in
a year two robberies, one of which was in 
conjunction with a murder, would count one 
robbery under Summary UCR and two under
NIBRS.  Though the actual count differed by 
one, the percent difference was 100%.  Such 
jurisdictions should rely on the actual 
numbers rather than percent differences to 
express changes in measurement or over time.

Differences in data collection and 
crime classification between
NIBRS and Summary UCR 

Data collection

In Summary UCR, for each of the seven Index crime
classifications monthly totals are reported on 
five elements: offenses reported or known to police 
(including "unfounded" offenses and attempts); 
unfounded, that is, false or baseless complaints; 
number of actual offenses (including attempts);
total offenses cleared by arrest or exceptional 
means; and number of clearances involving only 
persons under age 18.  

UCR collects weapon information for murder, 
robbery, and aggravated assault.  Attempts are 
distinguished from completed crimes only for 
forcible rape.  Murder attempts are reported as
aggravated assault for both Summary UCR and 
NIBRS.  Both systems also count each victim 
of violent offenses.  For example, if an
offender with a weapon simultaneously injures 
two victims in an assault, both systems would 
record two aggravated assaults.

In incidents with multiple offenses, Summary 
UCR records only the most serious offense, as 
determined by the hierarchy rule. Reported 
separately, arson is not subject to the hierarchy 
rule and is not included in this study.

Collected information on stolen property provides 
the number of offenses and the monetary value of 
property stolen for each Index crime.  These totals 
are recorded by where a robbery took place; whether 
a burglary occurred at a residence or nonresidence, 
night or day; nature of larcenies; recovery of
motor vehicles.  Summary UCR collects monetary 
value of stolen and recovered property by type 
of property on a supplemental form.

Arrest data are collected for 21 Part II 
offenses as well as the 8 Index crimes.

Instead of collecting aggregate counts 
by offense category, NIBRS collects detailed 
information by crime incident, including 
offense, victim, offender, property and 
arrest information. Each incident is assigned 
a number for identifying all information 
that pertains to it.

Details are collected for each occurrence 
within 8 Index and 38 other specific Group 
A offenses in NIBRS.  (For a list of specific 
Part I, Part II, Group A, and Group B offenses,  
These details include information on weapons, 
location, time of day, alcohol or drug use by 
offender and hate/bias motivation. Attempts 
are distinguished from completed crimes for 
all offenses.  In incidents with multiple 
offenses, all offenses are reported.

Data collected on each victim, offend-er, and 
arrestee include age, sex, and race.  Relationship 
of victim to offender is noted.  NIBRS also 
collects detailed information on type, value,
description and recovery of property; type and 
quantity of drugs; and number of stolen and 
recovered motor vehicles.

Arrest data are collected for 
11 Group B offenses in addition to 
the 22 Group A offense categories.

Crime classification

Summary UCR and NIBRS differ in how they 
classify or define several types of crimes.  

Justifiable homicide is first recorded as murder 
in Summary UCR, then as unfounded.  NIBRS records 
justifiable homicide separately, not including 
it with murder and manslaughter. Neither includes 
justifiable homicide in total counts, so that
homicide statistics are not affected. 

Other differences affect numbers of specific 
offenses.  NIBRS includes male victims of 
female offenders in  forcible rape, which 
would account for part of the higher rate 
that was observed.

----------------------------------
Table 3.  Information that NIBRS records on 
each crime incident
 
Administrative segment:
1 ORI number
2 Incident number
3 Incident date/hour
4 Exceptional clearance indicator
5 Exceptional clearance date
 
Offense segment:
6 UCR offense code
7 Attempted/completed code
8 Alcohol/drug use by offender
9 Type of location
10 Number of premises entered
11 Method of entry
12 Type of criminal activity
13 Type of weapon/force used
14 Bias crime code
 
Property segment:
15 Type of property loss
16 Property description
17 Property value
18 Recovery date
19 Number of stolen motor vehicles
20 Number of recovered motor vehicles
21 Suspected drug type
22 Estimated drug quantity
23 Drug measurement unit
 
Victim segment:
24 Victim number
25 Victim UCR offense code
26 Type of victim
27 Age of victim
28 Sex of victim
29 Race of victim
30 Ethnicity of victim
31 Resident status of victim
32 Homicide/assault circumstances
33 Justifiable homicide circumstances
34 Type of injury
35 Related offender number
36 Relationship of victim to offender
 
Offender segment:
37 Offender number
38 Age of offender
39 Sex of offender
40 Race of offender
 
Arrestee segment:
41 Arrestee number
42 Transaction number
43 Arrest date
44 Type of arrest
45 Multiple clearance indicator
46 UCR arrest offense code
47 Arrestee armed indicator
48 Age of arrestee
49 Sex of arrestee
50 Race of arrestee
51 Ethnicity of arrestee
52 Resident status of arrestee
53 Disposition of arrestee under 18
-----------------------------------
 
Because assault is integral to all violent 
offenses, it is unaffected by the hierarchy 
rule in single-victim incidents. Moreover, 
the definition of aggravated assault is 
essentially the same for both reporting 
systems.  The difference in treatment of 
aggravated assault by the two systems lies 
in classification and recording.  Summary 
UCR collects assaults in five categories:  
firearm; knife or cutting instrument; other
dangerous weapon; hands, fists, feet, and 
so on; and other   simple, not aggravated.  
Though presence of a weapon indicates
aggravated assault, if an incident results 
in only minor injuries and no information 
about the weapon is recorded, then it may 
be misclassified as a simple assault.

NIBRS restructures assault into three categories:  
aggravated, simple, and intimidation.  The 
collection of these characteristics by incident 
and a broader collection of weapon
information reduce the possibility of 
misclassification.  

Expanding the hotel rule for NIBRS had more 
impact on crime statistics.  The hotel rule 
applies to "[b]urglaries of hotels, motels, 
lodging houses, and other places where
lodging of transients is the main purpose 
. . . This principle of scoring dictates that 
if a number of dwelling units under a single 
manager are burglarized and the offenses are 
most likely to be reported to the police by 
the manager rather than the individual tenants, 
the burglary should be scored as one
offense.***Footnote"3: FBI, UCR Hnadbook, 
1984, p.20.***

NIBRS expands the hotel rule to include 
temporary rental storage facilities, such 
as "mini-storage" and "self-storage"
buildings.***Footnote 4: FBI, UCR Handbook,
NIBRS ed., 1992, p. 13.***  If some mini- 
storage lockers under the same management are 
broken into, Summary UCR would count each as 
a separate burglary whereas NIBRS could count 
them as one.  The lower burglary rates in 
NIBRS indicate the frequency of this type 
of break-in.

Distributions

For total Index crime, the distribution of 
rate changes shows that 92.5% of the cases 
have rate difference between -0.5% and 15.5%.  
Burglary rates that were lower in NIBRS than 
in Summary UCR could influence total property 
and total Index crime rates to the degree that 
they also could have negative values.  Almost
48% of the cases differed from -0.5% to +0.5% 
in crime rates, comparing NIBRS to Summary UCR; 
39% of all cases had no change.  Cases whose 
rate was lower when comparing NIBRS counts to
Summary UCR counts comprised 4.9% of all cases 
studied. Overall, 96.4% of all cases had an 
index crime rate difference of +15.5% or less.

For violent crime, the distribution of rate 
differences show that 98.9% of cases have 
differences between 0 and 15.5% for total 
violent crime.  Cases with a difference from 
0 to 0.5% were 84.3% of the total; 82.2% of 
all cases had no difference. 

For total property crime, rates were -0.5% 
to +15.5% higher for 91.7%.  

In 48% of the cases the difference between 
the rates resulting from the two reporting 
systems was -0.5% to 0.5%, 40.1% of all cases 
having no difference.  Cases whose rate was 
lower when comparing NIBRS counts to Summary 
UCR counts comprised 5.1% of all cases studied.  
Overall, a total of  95.8% of cases showed a
property crime rate difference of +15.5% or 
less.  

Jurisdictions with a population 
greater than 25,000

The largest jurisdictions in the dataset 
(1991-96) covered populations between 25,000 
and 250,000.  The overall results of the 378 
cases from these larger jurisdictions are very 
similar to the results from all jurisdictions 
studied (the original 4068 cases).   

The Index crime rate for NIBRS was about  
2% higher than for Summary UCR.   The NIBRS 
violent crime rate was higher by less than 1%, 
and the NIBRS property crime rate was higher 
by slightly more than 2%, on average.  Murder 
rates from NIBRS and Summary UCR were the same.  
The average difference in rates for rape from 
the two systems was slightly more than 1%.  
Robbery and aggravated assault rates were 
higher by an average of less than 1%, going 
from Summary UCR to NIBRS.  

NIBRS burglary rates were lower by an average 
of slightly more than 1%.  NIBRS larceny rates 
were higher than those from Summary UCR by 
slightly over 3%, and NIBRS motor vehicle theft 
rates,  higher by just over 4%, on average.

The distribution of the rate differences 
for large jurisdictions was also similar to 
the results of all jurisdictions studied.
Among cases from large jurisdictions, 92.3% 
had a difference of 5.5% or less (including 
any lower rates) in the total index crime 
rate, as measured by Summary UCR and NIBRS.  
Among cases from jurisdictions with nonzero 
populations, 90.0% had a negligible difference.  

The distribution within this range was spread 
out.  For example, 31.5% of these cases 
experienced an Index crime rate difference
from -0.5% to 0.5%.  A  few large jurisdictions 
(6.3%) showed no difference, and in 9.8% of 
the cases the Index crime rate was lower using 
NIBRS data.

The proportion of cases with a violent crime 
rate change of 5.5% or less is 98.4% for large 
jurisdictions.  More than half of the large 
jurisdictions had a higher rate in 0.5%
or less of cases.  Nearly 40% experienced no 
change in the violent crime rate when using 
NIBRS rather than Summary UCR.

Among cases from populations 25,000 or over, 
93.1% experienced a property crime rate change 
of 5.5% or less, compared to 89.6% of
all cases with nonzero populations.  
The property crime rate did not differ 
for nearly 8% and was lower for more 
than 10% of the large jurisdictions.

Although a smaller proportion of large 
jurisdictions had no change at all, and 
a higher proportion showed lower rates
compared to all nonzero populations, 
similar proportions had a 5.5% or less 
difference in rates, comparing results 
from NIBRS and Summary UCR.  The same 
pattern holds true for proportions of 
jurisdictions with a 15.5% or less 
change in rates.

Results for specific crime 
categories, 1996

Rates for larceny and motor vehicle theft 
were found to be substantially higher and 
that for aggravated assault, a slightly
higher, comparing NIBRS to Summary UCR.  
The 1996 NIBRS incident file was analyzed 
to see what characteristics coincided with
these higher rates.  Incidents with more 
than one victim and/or more than one offender 
were excluded from this analysis. 

Larceny

There were 381,233 incidents in the study 
data with at least one count of larceny in 
NIBRS in 1996.  These can be broken into 
two categories:  369,690 single-offense 
incidents and 11,543 multiple-offense incidents.  
Of the multiple-offense incidents, 9,601 had 
a combination of 1 or 2 larcenies and at least 
1 other Index crime.  The remaining 1,942 
multiple-offense incidents involved 2 or 3 
counts of larceny and no other Index crime.

Under the hierarchy rule of the Summary UCR, 
the incidents involving only larceny would 
each be counted as one incident, regardless 
of whether there were multiple larcenies.  
Because larceny is at the bottom of the 
hierarchy, the 9,601 multiple-offense incidents 
involving larceny and another Index crime 
would be counted under the concurrent Index 
crime, not the larceny.  


From the above figures for 1996, 371,632 
incidents including larceny were counted 
under Summary UCR.  Under the NIBRS system
the number of incidents involving larceny 
increased 2.6%.  This higher rate can be 
attributed to the hierarchy rule.

The total counts of larceny under NIBRS would 
be 383,256 (the number of incidents involving 
1 larceny, plus twice the number of incidents 
involving 2 larcenies, plus 3 times the number 
of incidents involving 3 larcenies, regardless 
of what other Index crimes may have been 
concurrent).  Under Summary UCR, due to the
hierarchy rule, the number of counts of larceny 
equals the number of incidents that involve 
only larceny.  There was a 3.1% difference 
between NIBRS larceny counts and Summary UCR 
larceny counts. 

This 0.5% higher level over the number of 
incidents was due to the reporting of 
multiple counts of larceny within an 
incident.  Three of the nine States with 
NIBRS data had a disproportionate rise 
in larceny rates.  The three States 
together accounted for 17% of all larcenies, 
but for 80% of the burglary- larceny 
combinations and for 65% of the larceny-
larceny combinations.  While the average 
percent difference in larceny rates for 
all nine States was 3.4%, the average for 
the three States was 19.1% (not shown in 
a table).  In multiple-offense incidents 
some records from the three States
included larceny segments contrary to 
FBI instructions.  For example, the FBI 
defines burglary as breaking and entering 
with intent to commit a felony or theft.  
Theft is included in the definition of 
burglary and should not be reported as a
concurrent larceny.***Footnote 5: FBI,
Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook, NIBRS
edition, 1992, p. 13.***

Index crime combinations    Number of
for 1 victim, 1 offender    incidents
  Total                       2,106
 
Violent
 Murder                           5
 Rape                             5
 Robbery                        157
 Assault                         41
 Murder, robbery                  2
 Rape, robbery                    1
 
Violent and property
 Rape, burglary                   1
 Robbery, aggravated assault      3
 Robbery, burglary                5
 Robbery, larceny                 1
 Assault, larceny                 1
 Robbery, aggravated
 assault, burglary                1
 
Property
 Burglary                       723
 Larceny                      1,101
 Burglary, larceny               44
 Larceny, larceny                15
 

Aggravated assault

Index crime combinations    Number of
for 1 victim, 1 offender    incidents
Total                          725
 
Violent
Murder                           3
Rape                            58
Robbery                         75
Rape, robbery                    2
 
Violent and property
Rape, burglary                   7
Robbery, burglary                2
Robbery, motor vehicle theft     3
Robbery, larceny                 1
Robbery, burglary, motor
vehicle theft                    1
 
Property
Burglary                       294
Motor vehicle theft             41
Larceny                        225
Burglary, larceny               10
Motor vehicle theft, larceny     3
 

Combination of assaults that
occurred in incidents with
one or more assaults            Number  of
for 1 victim, 1 offender        incidents
Total                            185,408
 
Aggravated                        35,452
Simple                           118,451
Intimidation                      30,454
 
Aggravated, simple                   393
Aggravated, intimidation             222
Aggravated, simple, 
intimidation                          43
 
Simple, intimidation                 393

In the 1996 data, more than 8,200 incidents 
were recorded as burglary-larceny combinations.  
Though a small number of these may have included 
a count of larceny distinctly separate from
the burglary, the majority of these should 
have been recorded as burglary only. 

Combination of assaults that        Number
occurred in incidents with          of
larceny for 1 victim, 1 offender    incidents
Total                                 1,072
 
Aggravated                              226
Simple                                  707
Intimidation                            123
 
Aggravated, simple                       11
Aggravated, intimidation                  1
Aggravated, simple,                       1
intimidation                              
 
Simple, intimidation                      3

These States have penal codes with reporting 
implications that differ from FBI standards.  
Some State penal codes define burglary as 
breaking and entering only and mandate recording
larceny if property was stolen.  Others mandate 
recording every crime an arrestee might be 
charged with.  As a consequence, the crime 
rates produced by NIBRS in these States 
are erroneously inflated.  

Motor vehicle theft

In the 1996 NIBRS incident file, there were 
40,667 incidents involving motor vehicle theft; 
38,561 were single- offense incidents.  There 
were 2,106 multiple-offense incidents that
involved a single motor vehicle theft and 1 
or more other Index crimes:  1,162 involved 
larceny, 774 involved burglary, and 44
involved all 3 property crimes (burglary, 
larceny, and motor vehicle theft).  Two 
hundred twenty-three incidents of motor
vehicle theft involved one or more violent 
offenses.  

A total of 990 incidents involved motor 
vehicle theft and what Summary UCR would 
classify as a more serious offense, so that
approximately 2.4% of the motor vehicle 
thefts would have been suppressed by the 
hierarchy rule.

Some agencies ranked larceny above motor vehicle 
theft in the hierarchy.  However, incidents 
involving both motor vehicle theft and larceny 
are classified as motor vehicle theft in Summary 
UCR.***Footnote 7: FBI, Uniform Crime Reporting
Handbook, 1984, p. 35.***  These agencies would 
also show more motor vehicle thefts after 
correction of this reporting error.

Aggravated assault

There were 36,110 incidents involving aggravated 
assault in the data file.  Of these, 35,385 were 
single-offense incidents.   The 725 multiple-
offense incidents involved 1 count of aggravated
assault and at least 1 other Index crime.  

In 152 multiple-offense incidents an 
aggravated assault was recorded with at 
least 1 other violent crime.  These cases
comprised 0.4% of all aggravated assaults 
and would be suppressed by the hierarchy 
rule in Summary UCR reporting. Eighty-four 
multiple-offense incidents involved both 
aggravated assault and robbery.  Because 
incidents with only one victim and one 
offender were selected, and assault is 
one element of robbery, reporting both 
appears to be either an error or another
indication of the influence of State penal 
code on classification for UCR data.  

There were 185,408 incidents involving one 
or more types of assault, 184,357 with a 
single count of aggravated assault, simple 
assault, or intimidation.  When multiple-
offense cases were selected in the manner 
described above, 1,051 incidents had some 
combination of aggravated assault, simple 
assault, and intimidation.  There were 
658 incidents of aggravated assault
with at least 1 lesser assault, and 
393 incidents of simple assault with 
intimidation.  

There were 1,072 incidents involving 
larceny and at least 1 type of assault.  
Of these, 226 involved an aggravated 
assault and larceny; 13 involved 
aggravated assault, at least 1 lesser
assault, and larceny; and 833 involved 
1 or 2 lesser assaults and larceny.

Conclusion

Because of the selection criteria and 
the voluntary nature of UCR reporting, 
the cases in this analysis do not constitute 
a random sample.  Although one must be 
careful in drawing conclusions on a national 
level, there is no reason to believe the 
results are skewed.  The large sample 
size (1,131 jurisdictions, 4,068 cases)  
suggests that results may be applicable 
to similar jurisdictions.

To accurately compare NIBRS and Summary UCR 
data, several factors need to be considered:  
artifactual differences, non-uniform reporting 
practices, and reporting errors. Artifactual 
differences between the two reporting systems
include expansion of the hotel rule and 
modified or restructured crime definitions
in NIBRS, and the use of the hierarchy rule 
in Summary UCR. 

By design NIBRS measures different aspects 
of crime than Summary UCR.  Where Summary UCR 
measures the overall number of incidents
for an index of crime, NIBRS measures both 
the overall number of incidents and the 
occurrence of each type of crime within every
incident.  NIBRS reporting gives more detail 
about offenses that occur during the commission 
of a crime without reporting significantly higher 
crime rates in most cases.  However, NIBRS
is more prone to non-uniform reporting 
practices and programming errors, whereas 
Summary UCR is more prone to reporting errors.

Analysis for this report identified  several 
instances of non-uniform reporting practices.  
After 1996 the FBI began a series of data 
edits to help reconcile some of those 
practices. These edits, which were not in 
place at the time the data used in this 
research were collected, identify crime 
combinations that do not comply with FBI 
reporting standards.  A chart denoting these 
combinations on page 115 of Uniform Crime
Reporting National Incident-Based Reporting 
System, Volume 4, Error Message Manual is 
reproduced in .   Incident reports that
contain any of the indicated combinations 
(occurring to the same victim) are sent back 
to the reporting agency for correction.   

The data edits do not cover the non-uniform 
reporting practices that had the most impact 
on the crime statistics in this study.  For 
example, although a combination of burglary 
and larceny in a single incident is contrary 
to FBI standards, this combination is not 
included in the data edits because the FBI 
makes an allowance for the rare occasion in 
which this combination may legitimately be 
reported.  This study found this combination 
in certain jurisdictions because the State 
or local penal code required it.  Consequent 
to this study the FBI began addressing
this issue in its State-level training program.

It is important for jurisdictions to collect 
and maintain data in compliance with their 
penal codes.  Uniformity is also critical for 
data submitted for reporting at the national 
level.   Many States have worked on developing 
a software program that can automatically convert 
the crime codes as defined by State penal codes 
to the appropriate NIBRS crime code.  At least 
one State has successfully implemented an 
automated State-to-NIBRS crime code conversion 
system.  Others have been unsuccessful due
to State codes overlapping more than one NIBRS 
code.  In these cases, the conversion is done 
manually while the States develop new programs 
capable of distinguishing the complex codes.

As noted in pages 2 and 8, the reporting errors 
in Summary UCR identified in this report occur 
largely from undercounting aggravated assault and 
misapplying the hierarchy rule for motor vehicle 
theft.  Further study is required to determine how 
much impact the misapplication of the hierarchy 
rule has on motor vehicle theft and larceny 
statistics. The design of NIBRS automatically 
reduces this type of reporting error.  As 
States and jurisdictions are made aware 
of these potential errors in Summary UCR 
reporting, they can be corrected before 
switching to NIBRS.   

Another concern not addressed by this 
analysis is the effect NIBRS reporting 
might have on the rate of aggravated 
assault. The effects of misclassifying 
aggravated assaults as simple assault 
depend on the proportion of misclassified 
aggravated assaults.  To study such 
effects requires having the original
Summary UCR reported by an agency.  
BJS had NIBRS data that had
been converted to Summary UCR.

It is not meaningful to compare Summary UCR 
data from one year to NIBRS data from another.  
When the two reporting methods are compared 
within a given year, external variables are 
controlled for.  When one year of data is 
compared to another, many more variables, 
such as the prevalence and reporting of 
crime, or errors in applying the hierarchy 
rule are introduced.  Not all of these 
variables can be identified or measured, 
compounding the error in the results.  After 
several years of NIBRS data have been collected, 
it would then be more meaningful to compare
one year of NIBRS data to another.  

The FBI has begun publishing a series of 
topical studies using NIBRS data.  The first 
one, "Juvenile Female Crime: A Special
Study" appeared in Crime in the United States, 
1997, section V; "Incidents of Family Violence" 
appeared in the 1998 report. Studies covering 
various topics will be published in other
sections of Crime in the United States in 
future years.  For the more expansive tables, 
the FBI currently publishes statistics using 
only Summary UCR data and NIBRS data that 
have been converted back to Summary UCR.  
They are preparing a report that compares 
data submitted in Summary UCR format to 
data submitted in NIBRS.  Plans for a
NIBRS publication comparable to Crime in 
the United States are under development.

Methodology

For comparisons the rate per 100,000 
population was calculated for each crime 
category in each case.  For a positive 
percent change to indicate that the NIBRS 
rate is higher than the corresponding 
Summary UCR rate, the following formula 
was used.

  100 x (NIBRS Rate - Summary UCR Rate)
       ------------------------------
             Summary UCR Rate

In a small number of cases for specific 
offenses the Summary UCR count was zero, 
and the NIBRS count was greater than zero.  
The resulting percent difference was 
mathematically undefined. These cases 
were included in the denominators in the 
calculation of percentages of cases.                                        

Negative changes, indicating that the 
NIBRS rate is lower than the corresponding 
Summary UCR rate, are possible for burglary
(and consequently for total property crime 
and total index crime) due to the expansion 
of the hotel rule in NIBRS.  

To clearly see the effect of NIBRS on the 
crime rates of larger jurisdictions, the 
same analysis was done using a subset of
these 4,068 cases.  Jurisdictions with 
populations over 25,000 and that were not 
combined reporters were selected.  Combined
reporters are agencies that report data 
for at least one other jurisdiction in 
addition to their own.  To ensure this 
analysis included only jurisdictions with 
populations over 25,000, combined reporters 
were excluded.  378 cases were selected. 
None of the jurisdictions reporting NIBRS 
data between 1991 and 1996 covered 
populations over 250,000.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific 
topic in depth from one or more data 
sets that cover many topics.

Ramona Rantala, BJS Statistician, wrote 
this report.  Thomas Edwards, FBI 
Systems Analyst, assisted with 
the assembling of NIBRS data and 
converting to the Summary UCR format.  
Victoria Major, Yoshio Akiyama, 
Sharon Propheter, James Nolan, and
Christopher Enourato, all FBI CJIS 
staff, assisted with reviewing this 
report.  Tom Hester edited and 
produced the report, assisted by 
Ellen Goldberg.  Jayne Robinson 
produced the report for final 
printing.

July 2000, NCJ 178890

End of file
ih 7/7/00
revised  2/23/01 ih