U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

State Court Processing Statistics, 2006
Felony Defendants in Large Urban 
Counties, 2006

May 2010   NCJ 228944

-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2193

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=27

-------------------------------------------------------------

Thomas H. Cohen, J.D., Ph.D. and 
Tracey Kyckelhahn, M.A.
BJS Statisticians

In the nation's 75 largest counties, an estimated 58,100
defendants were charged with a felony offense in May 2006.
About two-thirds of these felony defendants were charged with
a drug or property offense, while 23% had charges for violent
offenses, such as murder, rape, robbery, or aggravated
assault (table 1). 

These are some of the findings from the 2006 State Court
Processing Statistics (SCPS) data collection program. Since
1988 the Bureau of Justice Statistics has sponsored a
biennial collection of data on felony cases processed in
state courts in the nation's 75 largest counties. SCPS
collects data on the demographic characteristics, criminal
history, pretrial processing, adjudication, and sentencing of
felony defendants. Federal defendants and defendants charged
with misdemeanor crimes are not included in SCPS data
(although outcomes of felony cases in which charges were
reduced to misdemeanors are included in some tables).

-------------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

*About a fourth of felony defendants were charged with a
violent offense in 2006.

*Forty-three percent of felony defendants had at least one
prior felony conviction.

*Nearly 60% of felony defendants were released prior to
adjudication. The percentage of defendants released pretrial
has remained relatively stable since 1990.

*The most common form of pretrial release was through
commercial surety bond. Since 1998, most pretrial releases of
state court felony defendants have been under financial
conditions requiring the posting of bail.

*About a third of released defendants committed some form of
pretrial misconduct including 18% who were re-arrested for a
new offense committed while they awaited disposition of their
case.

*Sixty-eight percent of felony defendants were eventually
convicted, and 95% of these convictions occurred through a
guilty plea. 

*A majority (72%) of convicted defendants were convicted of
the felony offense with which they were originally charged. 

*Seventy percent of defendants convicted of a felony were
sentenced to incarceration in a state prison or local jail.
-------------------------------------------------------------
Trends 1990-2006

Two-thirds of felony defendants were charged with drug or
property crimes

Between 1994 and 2006, drug defendants comprised the largest
group of felony cases in the 75 largest counties, ranging
from 34% to 37% (figure 2). Property defendants accounted for
29% to 31% of felony cases during this period. From 1990 to
2006, the percentage of felony defendants charged with a
violent offense declined from 27% to 23%, while those charged
with a public-order offense increased from 7% to 11%.

The proportion of felony defendants over age 40 rose from
1990 through 2006

The proportion of defendants age 40 or older rose from 10% in
1990 to 26% in 2006 (figure 3). After 1996 about a third of
defendants were under age 25, a smaller proportion than from
1990 to 1994, when about two-fifths of defendants were this
young. 

More felony defendants have prior felony arrest or conviction
records

The percentage of defendants with one or more prior felony
arrests rose to 64% in 2006, continuing an upward trend that
began after 1992 when 55% had a felony arrest record (not
shown). The percentage with a felony conviction record also
increased from 36% in 1990 to 43% in 2006.

Surety bond surpassed release on recognizance in 1998 as the
most common type of pretrial release

From 1990 to 2002 the percentage of felony defendants
released prior to case disposition remained fairly
consistent, ranging from 62% to 64% (not shown). After 2002
there was a slight decline to 58% of defendants released
before case disposition. A more pronounced trend was observed
in the type of release used (figure 4). From 1990 through
1994, release on recognizance (ROR) accounted for 42% of
releases, compared to 24% released on surety bond. From 2002
through 2006, surety bonds were used for 42% of releases,
compared to 26% for ROR.

Overall conviction rates remained relatively stable at 68%
from 2002 to 2006

The overall proportion of felony defendants convicted of a
felony or convicted of charges reduced to a misdemeanor
remained at approximately two-thirds of all felony defendants
(not shown). Similarly, the incarceration rate for defendants
convicted of a felony remained relatively stable, ranging
from 70% in 1994 to 77% in 1998. 

Felony case processing, 2006

Nearly a fourth of felony defendants were charged with
violent offenses in 2006

The 2006 SCPS collected case processing data for 16,211
defendants charged with a felony during May 2006 in 39
counties. These cases were part of a two-stage sample that
was representative of the estimated 58,100 felony defendants
whose cases were processed in the 75 largest counties during
that month. In 2006, 37% of the U.S. population resided in
these counties. According to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's Uniform Crime Report, these same counties
also accounted for 49% of all serious violent crimes and 41%
of all serious property crimes reported in the United States.

During May 2006 an estimated 13,295 felony defendants were
charged with a violent offense in the nation's 75 largest
counties (23% of all felony defendants) (table 1). About half
of those faced assault charges, and about a fourth were
charged with robbery. Murder defendants comprised 3% of the
defendants charged with a violent felony, while rape
defendants accounted for 5%. (See Methodology for the
specific crimes included in each offense category.)

Nearly two-thirds of felony defendants were charged with
property or drug offenses. Among property defendants,
approximately a third were charged with larceny or theft, and
about a fourth were charged with burglary. Less than half of
drug defendants were charged with drug trafficking.
Public-order offenses were the most serious charge of the
remaining 11% of defendants. At least 52% of felony
defendants charged with a violent, property, or drug crime
were charged with additional crimes as well (see Appendix
table 1).

Felony defendants charged with robbery and weapons offenses
were on average age 27 at arrest

The average age of defendants at the time of arrest was 32
years (table 2). By specific offense, the 
average age ranged from 27 years for robbery and weapons
offense defendants to 36 years for those charged with a
driving-related offense. Thirteen percent of robbery
defendants were under 18 years old, although the age group
represented only 3% of all felony defendants. Thirty-nine
percent of defendants charged with a driving-related offense
were age 40 or older, although this age group represented
only 26% of all felony defendants. 

Forty-five percent of the felony defendants in the 75 largest
counties were non-Hispanic blacks, and 82% of felony
defendants were male (see Appendix tables 2 and 3).

About a third of felony defendants had an active criminal
justice status at the time of arrest

Thirty-one percent of felony defendants were in custody,
awaiting trial, or on probation or parole when arrested on
the current felony charge (table 3). When just the most
serious criminal justice status is considered, 12% of felony
defendants had been released pending disposition of a
previous case, 9% were on probation, and 4% were on parole.

Approximately 40% of felony defendants had previously been
convicted of a felony

The majority of felony defendants had at least one prior
arrest (77%), and 69% had multiple prior arrests (table 4).
Felony defendants charged with a public-order (81%) or drug
(81%) offense were more likely to have been previously
arrested than those charged with a property (74%) or violent
(71%) offense. Felony public-order defendants (66%) and
felony drug defendants (66%) were slightly more likely to
have a conviction record compared to felony defendants
overall (61%). Nearly half of felony drug defendants (49%)
and public-order defendants (47%) had a prior felony
conviction, compared to 43% of all felony defendants. Nearly
3 in 4 defendants with a conviction record had at least one
prior felony conviction, and about half had multiple prior
felony convictions. Appendix tables 4 through 7 offer more
statistics on felony defendants' criminal history.

Nearly 6 out of 10 felony defendants were released before
final case disposition

An estimated 58% of felony defendants in the 75 largest
counties were released before final disposition of their
cases (table 5). Defendants charged with a violent offense
(52%) were less likely to be released than those whose most
serious arrest charge was a public-order (62%) or drug (60%)
offense.

Within the violent offense category, release rates varied
greatly. Just 8% of murder defendants were released, compared
to 59% of those charged with assault. Among defendants
charged with a property offense, less than half of those
charged with burglary (44%) or motor vehicle theft (44%) were
released prior to case disposition. Higher proportions of
those charged with fraud (74%) or larceny or theft (66%) were
released.

The most common form of pretrial release was through
commercial surety bond 

Overall, 70% of felony defendants had a bail amount set by
the court, and were required to post all or part of that
amount to secure release while their case was pending (table
6). The remainder were granted non-financial release (25%),
were ordered held without bail (5%), or were part of an
emergency release (less than 0.5%). 

The most common type of release was surety bond (42% of
released defendants), which involves the services of a
commercial bail bond agent (figure 5). In 2006 an estimated
6% of felony defendants released through surety bond also had
conditions attached to that release, including pretrial
monitoring. Other types of financial release were deposit
bond (8% of released defendants) and full cash bond (5%.)
(See Methodology for definitions related to pretrial
release.) 

Less than half of released defendants were released under
non-financial conditions (not requiring the posting of bail).
The most common types of non-financial release were release
on personal recognizance (28% of released defendants) and
conditional release (12% of released defendants). See
Appendix table 8 for more statistics about pretrial release.

Median bail amounts were 5 times higher for detained
defendants than for released defendants

Bail was set at $10,000 for more than half of defendants who
had bail set (table 7). The overall median bail amount set
for defendants charged with a violent offense was about twice
that amount ($22,000). Defendants detained until disposition
of their cases had a median bail amount set at $25,000
compared to defendants who were released on bail, for whom
bail was set at a median of $5,000. 

Criminal histories associated with lower probability of
pretrial release

Many states have established specific criteria for courts to
consider when setting release conditions, including the
defendant's criminal history and criminal justice system
status at time of arrest. The SCPS data illustrate how
release rates vary with some of these factors. For example,
65% of the defendants without an active criminal justice
status when arrested for the current offense were released
prior to case disposition, compared to 41% of the defendants
with an active criminal justice status who were detained
(table 8).
 
Other criteria considered include prior arrests and previous
failures to appear in court. Seventy-five percent of the
defendants with no prior arrests were released, compared to
53% of those who had been previously arrested. Among
defendants with an arrest record, those who had never missed
a court appearance (61%) had a higher probability of being
released than those who had failed to appear at least once
during a previous case (51%). 

About three-fourths of defendants without a prior conviction
(74%) were released prior to disposition of the current case,
compared to about half of those with a conviction record
(48%). 

A third of released defendants committed some form of
pretrial misconduct

Among defendants who were released prior to case disposition,
33% committed some type of misconduct while on pretrial
release (table 9). Misconduct included failure to appear in
court, an arrest for a new offense, or some other violation
of release conditions that resulted in the revocation of that
release by the court. The proportion of defendants charged
with pretrial misconduct was highest for drug defendants
(37%) and lowest for those released after being charged with
a violent offense (26%).

Overall, 18% of released defendants were re-arrested for a
new offense allegedly committed while they awaited
disposition of their original case. Sixty-three percent of
these defendants, or 11% of all released defendants, were
charged with a new felony. 

Eighty-two percent of defendants who were released prior to
case disposition made all scheduled court appearances. Courts
issued bench warrants for the remaining 18% for failing to
appear. Nearly a fourth of the defendants who failed to
appear in court, or 4% of all released defendants, were still
fugitives at the end of the 1-year study period. The
remainder returned to the court (either voluntarily or not)
before the end of the study.

Almost 9 out of 10 felony defendants' cases were adjudicated
within 1 year

The median time from arrest to adjudication for all felony
defendants was 92 days, yet nearly 4 times longer for murder
defendants (364 days) and about 2.5 times longer for rape
defendants (228 days) (table 10). Defendants charged with a
non-trafficking drug offense had the shortest median time
from arrest to adjudication (50 days). Nearly 90% of all
felony cases were adjudicated within 1 year of arrest.

Approximately two-thirds of felony defendants were convicted

Sixty-eight percent of the defendants whose cases were
adjudicated within 1 year of arrest (or 2 years for felony
murder defendants) were convicted (table 11). Overall, nearly
two-thirds of defendants entered a guilty plea, with 55%
pleading guilty to a felony and 10% pleading guilty to a
misdemeanor.

In most cases where the defendants were not convicted it was
because the charges against the defendants were dismissed.
About a quarter of all cases ended in this way. Defendants
charged with assault (39%) were 3 times or more likely to
have their case dismissed as those charged with a
driving-related offense (11%) or murder (13%).

Guilty pleas accounted for 95% of convictions

Guilty pleas accounted for 95% of the estimated 32,876
convictions obtained within 1 year of arrest. This included
about 26,000 felony pleas and about 5,000 misdemeanor pleas
(not shown). Defendants charged with a driving-related
offense had the highest plea rate (81%) and the highest
felony plea rate (72%) (not shown). More than 6 out of 10
defendants in each offense category except assault (54%)
eventually pleaded guilty to either a felony or a misdemeanor
(figure 6).

Regardless of adjudication method, a majority (72%) of
convicted defendants were convicted of the felony offense
with which they were originally charged (figure 7). More than
three-fourths of defendants convicted of driving-related,
weapons, or murder offenses were convicted of their original
arrest charges. In comparison, about half of convicted rape
defendants were convicted of their original arrest charges.

Almost three-quarters of convicted offenders were sentenced
to incarceration

Seventy-three percent of offenders convicted of a felony were
sentenced to incarceration in a state prison or local jail
(table 12), compared to 57% of those convicted of a
misdemeanor. 

Almost all (98%) sentences for a murder conviction resulted
in a prison sentence, as did a majority of robbery (72%),
rape (67%), and weapons offense (53%) convictions. About a
third of offenders convicted of forgery (38%) or larceny or
theft (32%) were sentenced to prison. Of all misdemeanors,
54% went to jail and 22% were sentenced to probation. Nearly
all incarceration sentences for misdemeanor convictions were
to jail.

Average prison sentences were more than 4 years

Among offenders convicted of a felony and sentenced to
prison, the mean sentence was 49 months and the median was 24
months (table 13). By general conviction offense category,
offenders convicted of a violent felony received the longest
prison sentences (mean of 94 months and median of 48 months),
and those convicted of a public-order felony received the
shortest (mean of 33 months and median of 24 months).

For offenders sentenced to probation without incarceration
for a felony, the median sentence length was 33 months,
compared to 19 months for a misdemeanor. Three percent of
offenders convicted of a felony were given a probation term
of greater than 5 years (not shown).

More than a quarter of felony offenders sentenced to
probation were required to enter a treatment program,
including 41% convicted for felony drug crimes. Nineteen
percent of the offenders who received a probation sentence
were required to perform community service (table 14). 

Convicted offenders with multiple prior felony convictions
were the most likely to be incarcerated

For offenders convicted of a felony on their current charge,
the probability of receiving a sentence to incarceration was
highest if they had multiple prior felony convictions (83%)
(table 15). Seventy-six percent of offenders with just one
prior felony conviction and 70% of those with only prior
misdemeanor convictions were also sentenced to incarceration
following a felony conviction in their current case.

Offenders with no prior convictions of any type (60%) were
generally the least likely to receive a sentence to
incarceration for a felony conviction, although 74% of them
received such a sentence when the conviction was for a
violent felony.

Fifty-four percent of the offenders with more than one prior
felony conviction were sentenced to prison for a new felony
conviction. This included 67% of those whose current
conviction was for a violent felony.

Twenty-six percent of defendants with prior misdemeanor
convictions received a prison sentence for a felony
conviction in the current case only. However, more than
two-fifths of such defendants (44%) received a prison
sentence when the current conviction was for a violent
felony. Appendix tables 9 through 12 provide more statistics
about sentencing.

Methodology

The State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) sample was
designed and selected by U.S. Census Bureau staff. It is a
two-stage stratified sample, with 40 of the nation's 75
largest counties selected at stage one and a systematic
sample of state court felony filings (defendants) within each
county selected at stage two. The 40 counties were divided
into four first-stage strata based on overall population,
arrests, and felony filing information. 

The first stratum was designed to include 10 counties
selected with certainty because of their large number of
court filings; however, one of these counties was dropped
because of problems with data quality. Clark County (NV),
which had been selected as a stratum-one site, was dropped
because of problems with overall completeness of the
electronic case management data received. Specifically, Clark
County was not able to provide pretrial, adjudication, and
sentencing case processing data. Because these problems were
not confirmed until late in the data collection process, it
was too late to find alternative methods for retrieving SCPS
data from this site. Hence, the first-stage weight for
stratum-one counties was changed from 1.00 to 1.111. 

The remaining counties were allocated to the three
non-certainty strata based on the variance of felony court
filings, population, and arrest data.

SCPS first-stage design
                                   
                             Number of counties        
                    
Stratum      Sample       Universe          Weight     
One             9            10              1.111     
Two             7            12              1.714     
Three           9            18              2.000     
Four           14            35              2.500     

The second-stage sampling (filings) was designed to represent
all defendants who had felony cases filed with the court
during the month of May 2006. The participating jurisdictions
provided data for every felony case filed on selected days
during that month. Depending on the first-stage stratum in
which it had been placed, each jurisdiction provided filings
data for 5, 10, or 20 selected business days in May 2006.
Data from jurisdictions that were not required to provide a
full month of filings were weighted to represent the full
month.

SCPS second-stage design
                    
Stratum   Number of days of filings provided   Weight  
One                  5                           4.0   
Two                 10                           2.0   
Three               10                           2.0   
Four                20                           1.0   

The 2006 SCPS collected data for 16,211 defendants charged
with a felony offense during May 2006 in 39 large counties.
These cases were part of a sample that was representative of
the estimated 58,100 felony defendants whose cases were
processed in the nation's 75 largest counties during that
month. Defendants charged with murder were tracked for up to
2 years, and all other defendants were followed for up to 1
year.

This report is based on data collected from the following
jurisdictions: Arizona (Maricopa, Pima); California (Los
Angeles, Orange, San Bernardino, Ventura); Connecticut
(Hartford); Florida (Broward, Miami-Dade, Hillsborough;
Orange); Hawaii (Honolulu); Illinois (Cook); Indiana
(Marion); Maryland (Baltimore, Montgomery, Prince George);
Michigan (Oakland, Wayne); Missouri (Saint Louis); New Jersey
(Essex, Middlesex); New York (Bronx, Kings, Nassau, New York,
Suffolk); North Carolina (Wake); Ohio (Cuyahoga, Franklin,
Hamilton); Tennessee (Shelby); Texas (Dallas, El Paso,
Harris, Tarrant); Utah (Salt Lake City); Washington (King);
and Wisconsin (Milwaukee).

Because the data come from a sample, a sampling error and
confidence intervals are associated with each reported
number. Confidence intervals and standard errors for several
key variables in the SCPS database are reported in appendix
tables 13 and 14. These confidence intervals show where the
reported SCPS numbers would fall 95% of the time under
repeated sampling. For example, the confidence intervals for
the total number of felony defendants in the 75 largest
counties ranges from 53,894 to 62,305 defendants. In other
words, if repeated sampling of felony case processing in the
nation's 75 largest counties were undertaken, there is a 95%
confidence that the number of felony defendants would fall
between 53,894 and 62,305.

Offense Categories

Felony offenses were classified into 16 categories for this
report. These were further classified into the four major
crime categories of violent, property, drug, and
public-order. The following lists are a representative
summary of the crimes in each category; however, these lists
are not meant to be exhaustive. All offenses except murder
include attempts and conspiracies to commit.

Violent offenses

Murder--Includes homicide, non-negligent manslaughter, and
voluntary homicide. Excludes attempted murder (classified as
felony assault), negligent homicide, involuntary homicide, or
vehicular manslaughter, which are classified as other violent
offenses.

Rape--Includes forcible intercourse, sodomy, or penetration
with a foreign object. Does not include statutory rape or
non-forcible acts with a minor or someone unable to give
legal consent, nonviolent sexual offenses, or commercialized
sex offenses.

Robbery--Includes unlawful taking of anything of value by
force or threat of force. Includes armed, unarmed, and
aggravated robbery, car-jacking, armed burglary, and armed
mugging.

Assault--Includes aggravated assault, aggravated battery,
attempted murder, assault with a deadly weapon, felony
assault or battery on a law enforcement officer, and other
felony assaults. This offense category does not include
extortion, coercion, or intimidation.

Other violent offenses--Includes vehicular manslaughter,
involuntary manslaughter, negligent or reckless homicide,
nonviolent or non-forcible sexual assault, kidnapping,
unlawful imprisonment, child or spouse abuse, cruelty to a
child, reckless endangerment, hit-and-run with bodily injury,
intimidation, and extortion.

Property offenses

Burglary--Includes any type of entry into a residence,
industry, or business with or without the use of force with
the intent to commit a felony or theft. Does not include
possession of burglary tools, trespassing, or unlawful entry
for which the intent is not known.

Larceny/theft--Includes grand theft, grand larceny, and any
other felony theft, including burglary from an automobile,
theft of rental property, and mail theft. This offense
category does not include motor vehicle theft, receiving or
buying stolen property, fraud, forgery, or deceit.

Motor vehicle theft--Includes auto theft, receiving and
transferring an automobile, unauthorized use of a vehicle,
possession of a stolen vehicle, and larceny or taking of an
automobile.

Forgery--Includes forging of a driver's license, official
seals, notes, money orders, credit or access cards or names
of such cards or any other documents with fraudulent intent,
uttering a forged instrument, counterfeiting, and forgery.

Fraud--Includes possession and passing of worthless checks or
money orders, possession of false documents or
identification, embezzlement, obtaining money by false
pretenses, credit card fraud, welfare fraud, Medicare fraud,
insurance claim fraud, fraud, swindling, stealing a thing of
value by deceit, and larceny by check.

Other property offenses--Includes receiving or buying stolen
property, arson, reckless burning, damage to property,
criminal mischief, vandalism, criminal trespassing,
possession of burglary tools, and unlawful entry for which
the interest is unknown.

Drug offenses

Drug trafficking--Includes trafficking, sales, distribution,
possession with intent to distribute or sell, manufacturing,
and smuggling of controlled substances. This category does
not include possession of controlled substances.

Other drug offenses--Includes possession of controlled
substances, prescription violations, possession of drug
paraphernalia, and other drug law violations.

Public-order offenses

Weapons--Includes the unlawful sale, distribution,
manufacture, alteration, transportation, possession, or use
of a deadly weapon or accessory.

Driving-related--Includes driving under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, driving with a suspended or revoked
license, and any other felony in the motor vehicle code.

Other public-order offenses--Includes flight/escape, parole
or probation violations, prison contraband, habitual
offender, obstruction of justice, rioting, libel, slander,
treason, perjury, prostitution, pandering, bribery, and tax
law violations.

Pretrial release

Released defendant--Includes any defendant who was released
from custody prior to the disposition of his or her case by
the court. It also includes defendants who were detained for
some period of time before being released and defendants who
were returned to custody after being released because of a
violation of the conditions of pretrial release. The terms
"on pretrial release" and "released pending disposition" are
both used in this report to refer to all released defendants.

Detained defendant--Includes any defendant who remained in
custody from the time of arrest until the disposition of his
or her case by the court. This report also refers to detained
defendants as "not released."

Failure to appear--The bench warrant issued by a court
because the defendant failed to appear as scheduled.

Types of financial release

Surety bond--A bail bond company signs a promissory note to
the court for the full bail amount and charges the defendant
a fee for the service (usually 10% of the full bail amount).
If the defendant fails to appear, the bond company is liable
to the court for the full bail amount. Frequently, the bond
company requires collateral from the defendant in addition to
the fee.

Deposit bond--The defendant deposits a percentage (usually
10%) of the full bail amount with the court. A percentage of
the bail is returned after the disposition of the case, but
the court often retains a small portion for administrative
costs. If the defendant fails to appear in court, he or she
is liable to the court for the full bail amount.

Full cash bond--The defendant posts the full bail amount in
cash with the court. If the defendant makes all court
appearances, the cash is returned. If the defendant fails to
appear in court, the bond is forfeited.

Property bond--Involves an agreement made by a defendant as a
condition of pretrial release requiring that property valued
at the full bail amount be posted as an assurance of his or
her appearance in court. If the defendant fails to appear in
court, the property is forfeited. It is also known as
"collateral bond."

Types of nonfinancial release

Release on recognizance (ROR)--The court releases some
defendants on a signed agreement that they will appear in
court as required. In this report, the ROR category includes
citation releases in which arrestees are released pending
their first court appearance on a written order issued by law
enforcement or jail personnel.

Unsecured bond--The defendant pays no money to the court but
is liable for the full amount of bail upon failure to appear
in court.

Conditional release--Defendants are released under specified
conditions. A pretrial services agency usually conducts
monitoring or supervision, if ordered for a defendant. In
some cases, such as those involving a third-party custodian
or drug monitoring and treatment, another agency may be
involved in the supervision of the defendant. Conditional
release sometimes includes an unsecured bond.

Other type of release

Emergency release--Defendants are released in response to a
court order placing limits on a jail's population.

Note on pretrial release of other drug defendants

The detention/release of "other drug defendants" was not
reported due to issues associated with properly coding the
release status of these defendants. Differing coding
practices were applied to the release/detention status of
other drug defendants in instances involving alternative
adjudications. For this reason, the pretrial
release/detention status of other drug defendants produced
results that were inconsistent with prior SCPS iterations.
The other drug crime defendants, however, are included in the
totals for drug defendants and for all felony defendants.
Additionally, statistics reporting bail amounts, time from
arrest to release, and pretrial misconduct for other drug
defendants are shown. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director. This BJS Bulletin presents the first release of
findings from the 2006 State Court Processing Statistics
project.

Thomas H. Cohen and Tracey Kyckelhahn, BJS statisticians,
prepared this report under the supervision of Duren Banks.
The data were collected and processed by the Pretrial Justice
Institute (PJI) under the supervision of Cherise Burdeen.
Current and former PJI staff, including Stephanie Garbo,
Jessica Keefe, David Levin, Tracy Loynachan, and Becky Mensch
also contributed to this project. Carma Hogue of the Economic
Statistical Methods and Procedures Division, U.S. Census
Bureau, assisted with sample design.

Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan edited the report, and Tina
Dorsey and Jayne E. Robinson produced and prepared the report
for final printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James. 
May 2010, NCJ 228944

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2193>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation . Partnerships . Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

5/19/2010/JER/ 10:32AM