U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Firearm Use by Offenders



November 2001, NCJ 189369

Revised 02/05/02

--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fuo.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------

By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

----------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

                         Percent of prison inmates
Type of firearm             State     Federal
     Total                   18.4 %     14.8 %
Handgun                      15.3       12.8
Rifle                         1.3        1.3
Shotgun                       2.4        2.0
 
Characteristic of
inmates who              Percent of prison Inmates
carried firearms         possessing a firearm
     Offense                State      Federal
Violent                      30.2 %     35.4 %
Property                      3.1        2.9
Drug                          8.1        8.7
Public-order                 19.1       27.3
 
     Gender
Male                         19.1 %     15.5 %
Female                        7.3        6.2
 
     Age
24 or younger                29.4 %     19.1 %
25-34                        16.5       15.5
35 or older                  14.8       13.6
 
     Criminal history
First-time offender
offenderntence               22.3 %      9.5 %
Recidivist                   17.2       18.4
 
                         Percent of State inmates
                         possessing a firearm
Source of gun               1997        1991
     Total                 100.0%      100.0%
Purchased from --           13.9        20.8
Retail store                 8.3        14.7
Pawnshop                     3.8         4.2
Flea market                  1.0         1.3
Gun show                     0.7         0.6
Friends or family           39.6        33.8
Street/illegal source       39.2        40.8
 
                         Percent of prison inmates
                         possessing a firearm
Use of firearm             State      Federal
     Total                 100.0 %     100.0 %
Fired                       49.1        12.8
Killed/injured victim       22.8         5.0
Other                       26.3         7.8
Brandished to --            73.2        46.2
Scare someone               48.6        29.3
Defend self                 41.1        24.9
 
*  During the offense that brought them to
prison, 15% of State inmates and 13% of
Federal inmates carried a handgun; about
2% had a military-style semiautomatic gun
or machine gun.

*  Among inmates in prison for homicide, a
sexual assault, robbery, assault or other 
violent crime, 30% of State offenders and 35% 
of Federal offenders carried a firearm when
committing the crime.  Almost a fourth of State
inmates and almost a third of Federal inmates
serving a sentence for a violent crime had 
carried a handgun during the offense.

*  29% of State inmates under age 25 at the
time of the survey were carrying a gun when
they committed their current offense compared 
to 15% of those 35 or older. 

*  In 1997 among State inmates  possessing
a gun, fewer than 2%  bought their firearm at
a flea market or gun show, about 12% from
a retail store or pawnshop, and 80% from
family, friends, a street buy, or an illegal
source.

*  On average, State inmates possessing a
firearm received sentences of 18 years,
while those without a weapon had an
average sentence of 12 years.

*  Among prisoners carrying a firearm during
their crime, 40% of State inmates and 56% 
of Federal inmates received a sentence
enhancement because of the firearm.
---------------------------------------------------------

Approximately 203,300 prisoners serving a
sentence in a State or Federal prison in
1997 were armed when they committed the
crime for which they were serving time. An
estimated 18% of State prison inmates and
15% of Federal inmates reported using,
carrying, or possessing a firearm during the
crime for which they were sentenced. In
1991,16% of State inmates and 12% of Federal 
inmates said they were armed at the time of 
their offense.

Among all inmates in 1997, 9% of those in
State prisons and 2% of those in Federal
prisons said they fired a gun while committing 
their current offense.  Of violent offenders, 
18% of State inmates and 9% of Federal inmates  
discharged a firearm. Less than 2% of inmates 
serving time for a drug, property, or public-
order offense fired a gun during the crime that 
resulted in their prison sentence. 

Among prisoners who carried a firearm
during the offense for which they were
serving time in 1997, 14% had bought or
traded for the gun from a store, pawnshop,
flea market, or gun show. The 1997 percentage 
who had acquired their firearm at a retail 
outlet represented a significant drop from 
21% in 1991. The percentage of inmates 
receiving their gun from family or friends 
rose from 34% in 1991 to 40% in 1997.

Data for this report are based primarily on
personal interviews with large nationally
representative samples of State and Federal
prison inmates.  In the 1997 and 1991 Surveys 
of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities, inmates were questioned about any 
firearms they may have used when committing 
a crime and asked to specify the type of 
weapon, its source, and its use in committing 
crimes.  In addition, inmates were queried 
about the types of both current and past 
offenses for which they were sentenced, 
including any weapons offenses.

Almost a fifth of prison inmates 
carried a gun during their crime

An estimated 18% of State prison inmates and 
15% of Federal inmates reported that they used, 
carried, or possessed a firearm when they 
committed the crime for which they were serving 
a sentence to prison.***Footnote 1: For 
definitions of firearms, see Methodology on 
pages 14 and 15.***  

When asked if they had ever been armed while 
committing a crime, about a quarter of State 
prison inmates and a fifth of Federal inmates 
reported that they had carried a gun while 
committing at least one crime.  

Almost half of both State and Federal
inmates said that they had owned or
possessed a firearm at some time in their
lives.  Equivalent measures for lifetime gun
ownership among adults in the general
population are difficult to find. Personal or
telephone interviews and polls provide
estimates for persons in the general
population owning a firearm at the time of 
the survey.  An estimated 25% to 29% of the
adult population reported currently owning a
firearm when surveyed.***Footnote 2: Phillip
J. cook and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: 
Summary Report, Washington, DC, Police 
Foundation, 1996, tables 2.3.***  According 
to public opinion polls, members of 4 in 
every 10 U.S. households have access to a gun. 

Less than 2% of inmates reported
carrying a fully automatic or
military-style semiautomatic firearm 
 
Fewer than 1 in 50 State and Federal inmates 
used, carried, or possessed a military-style 
semiautomatic gun or a fully automatic gun 
during their current offense.  These guns, as 
used in the questions and definitions for the 
personal interviews with prison inmates, include 
the following:

*  military-style semiautomatic pistol --
similar to a conventional semiautomatic
pistol except that the magazine or clip is
visible***Footnote 3: The survey interview
included in the operational definition of
a military-style semiautomatic pistol the
phrase "can hold more than 19 bullets."***

*  military-style semiautomatic rifle -- a
semiautomatic rifle with military features
such as a pistol grip, folding stock, flash
suppressor, or bayonet mount

*  military-style semiautomatic shotgun
-- a semiautomatic shotgun with military
features such as a pistol grip, folding 
stock, flash suppressor, or bayonet mount

*  machine gun -- a fully automatic gun which, 
if the trigger is held down, will fire rapidly 
and continuously. 

Some examples of these firearms are the UZI, 
TEC-9, and MAC10 for hand-guns; the AR-15 and 
AK-47 for rifles; and the "Street Sweeper" for 
shotguns.  Possession of these models meeting
criteria specified in Federal statutes can be
unlawful.

To be understood by inmate respondents who were 
asked about their gun use, the questions and 
definitions in the survey reflect terminology 
commonly used by prisoners to describe types 
of weapons.  If questioned by respondents, 
interviewers read to them the definitions 
included on pages 14 and 15 of this report. Of 
necessity, this language is similar in concept 
but may differ in wording from technical 
descriptions in Federal statutes pertaining to 
firearms.

The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994 made it unlawful, with certain 
exceptions, to manufacture, transfer, or 
possess military-style semiautomatic weapons, 
if not lawfully possessed on September 13, 
1994.***Footnote 5: See P.L. 103-22 and 
Commerce in Firearms in the United States,
Department of the Treasury, Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, February
2000, page C-5.*** 

Of inmates who carried a firearm during
their offense, 8 in 10 had a handgun

Inmates reported that a handgun was their
preferred firearm; of those carrying a firearm,
83% of State inmates and 87% of Federal
inmates said that they carried a handgun
during the offense for which they were
serving their longest sentence.  About 8% 
of State inmates who had carried a firearm
during the commission of their crime
reported having a military-style semiautomatic 
(7%) or fully automatic (2%) firearm, with 
some carrying both.

                       Percent of prison
                       inmates carrying a
                       firearm during current
                       offense
Type of firearm           State     Federal
 
Handgun                    83.2 %    86.7 %
Rifle                       7.3       8.9
Shotgun                    13.1      13.7
 
Single shot                53.9 %    49.2 %
Conventional
   semiautomatic           43.2      51.8
Military-style
   semiautomatic            6.8       9.3
Fully automatic             2.4       3.8
 
   Number of inmates    190,383    12,936
 
Note: Inmates could report carrying more than
one type of firearm. For definitions of weapon
categories, see pages 2, 14, and 15.

Firearm use during crimes 
increased from 1991 to 1997

Over the 6 years between surveys of inmates, 
1991-97, possession of a firearm during a 
crime increased from 16% to 18% of State 
inmates and from 12% to 15% of Federal inmates.  
Because of the growth in the prison population, 
the estimated number of inmates carrying a 
firearm increased dramatically -- from 114,100 
in 1991 to 190,400 in 1997 in State prisons 
and from 6,300 in 1991 to 12,900 in 1997 in 
Federal prisons.  These estimates were based 
on inmates who reported carrying a firearm
during the offense for which they received
their longest sentence. 

8% of drug offenders and 3% 
of property offenders armed while 
committing their crimes

Fewer than 1 in 10 offenders serving a
sentence for selling or carrying illegal 
drugs and 1 in 30 inmates in prison for a 
property crime -- burglary, larceny, fraud, 
or destruction of property -- had a firearm 
with them while committing their current
offense.

Inmates who had been sentenced for violent 
crimes used firearms more often than other 
prisoners.  They were more likely than property, 
drug, or public-order offenders to have used 
or possessed a gun during their crime. An 
estimated 30% of violent offenders in State 
prisons and 35% in Federal prisons had a 
firearm at the time of the offense. 

Offenders sentenced for homicide or for
robbery reported the most extensive use of
firearms. Among inmates sentenced for
homicide, about 43% in State prisons and
39% in Federal prisons said they were
carrying a firearm when they committed the
offense.  About 35% serving time for robbery 
in State prisons and 40% in Federal prison 
had a gun.  

Male inmates and young inmates carried
firearms

Male State and Federal offenders were more
likely than their female counterparts to have
carried a firearm when committing their offense.  
About 19% of men in State prison and 16% in 
Federal prison reported using or possessing a 
firearm when committing their most serious 
offense, compared to 7% of women in State 
prison and 6% in Federal prison.

An estimated 21% of black non-Hispanic
inmates in State prison, 18% of Hispanics,
and 15% of white non-Hispanics said they
had a gun with them while committing their
most serious offense.  About 18% of black
and white inmates in Federal facilities and
8% of Hispanics had carried a firearm.

Young State inmates were more likely than
older inmates to use firearms.  About 29% of
inmates under the age of 25 at the time of
the survey were carrying a gun when they
committed their current offense, compared to
15% of those 35 or older.  Among Federal
inmates, about 19% under age 25 and 14%
age 35 or older said they had a gun with
them.
 
--------------------------------------------
Weapon offenses and offenders

Weapon offenses include unlawful distribution, 
sale, manufacture, alteration, transport, 
possession, or use of a deadly or dangerous 
weapon or accessory.  In 1998 an estimated 
195,000 persons were arrested by State or local 
law enforcement or referred to a U.S. attorney 
for prosecution for a weapon offense -- counting 
only the most important offense and no secondary 
offenses.  Over 35,000 persons were convicted 
of a weapon offense.  About 49,000 per- sons 
were in a local jail or State or Federal prison 
for a weapon offense in 1998.  An additional
100,000 were serving a sentence in the
community on probation, parole, or supervised 
release.  

An estimated 12% of State prison inmates and 19% 
of Federal inmates were either currently serving 
a sentence for a weapon offense or had been 
sentenced for a weapon offense in the past.

Weapons as the most serious offense or charge
in the criminal justice system, 1998
                                               Percent
                                      Number   of total
 
State/local jurisdictions
Arrested                              190,600    1.3 %
Defendants at initial filing               --    2.8
Convicted of a felony                  31,904    3.4
In local jails                         13,630    2.3
In State prisons                       26,730    2.4
On probation/parole                   100,440    2.3
 
Federal jurisdiction
Received by U.S. attorneys as suspect   4,907    4.3 %
Prosecuted                              3,347    5.1
Convicted                               3,413    5.6
In Federal prison                       8,742    8.0
On probation/supervised release/parol   4,038    4.4
 
Note:  The weapon offense is the offenders' 
most serious offense.  Statistics on persons 
in Federal jurisdiction are for fiscal year 
1998.
--Not available.
Sources:  Data on weapon offenders come from 
the FBI's Crime in the United States, 1998, 
table 29; from BJS' Compendium of Federal 
Justice Statistics, 1998; from BJS' Survey of 
Inmates in Local Jails, 1996, and Survey of
Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities, 1997, and from the following BJS 
reports available through <www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/pubalp2.htm>: Felony Defendants in Large 
Urban Counties, 1998; Felony Sentences in the
United States, 1998; Prisoners in 1999; and 
the press release for probation and parole 
surveys 2000.
 
Current and past sentences for a weapon offense,
for State and Federal prison inmates, 1997
 
Any current                       Percent of prison inmates
or past offense                       State    Federal
 
    Total                             100.0%    100.0%
 
Current or past weapon offense         12.2%     18.6%
  Current and past weapon offenses      1.3       2.2
  Current weapon/past other offenses    4.1       8.5
  Current weapon/no past offense        1.1       2.7
  Current other/past weapon offense     5.8       5.1
 
Other current and/or past offenses     87.8 %    81.4%
---------------------------------------------------

Background characteristics account 
for relatively small differences 
in firearm use

When inmates were interviewed for the 1997
Surveys, they were asked about their family
background and experiences they had when
growing up.  Characteristics about which the
inmates reported include parental upbringing,
parental incarceration, welfare assistance to 
their family, parental use of alcohol and 
drugs, and peer participation in criminal 
behavior.

Inmates who grew up living with both parents
were less likely to be using or carrying a
firearm than those who grew up primarily
living with one parent, grandparents, other
relatives, friends, or a foster family.  An
estimated 16% of State inmates and 13% of
Federal inmates living with both parents had
a gun with them, compared to 20% of State
inmates and 17% of Federal inmates living in
some other arrangement while growing up.

A higher percentage of State inmates with a
parent who had served a sentence to
incarceration carried a gun (23%) than those
whose parents had never been in prison or
jail (17%).  For Federal inmates, 18% of
inmates who had incarcerated parents and
15% of those who did not carried a firearm.

Inmates who lived in families receiving
welfare or living in publicly-subsidized 
housing while growing up were more likely
than those who did not live under these
types of government programs to be carrying
a weapon.  About 1 in 5 inmates whose
family received welfare or who lived in
publicly financed housing carried a firearm. 
About 1 in 6 State inmates and 1 in 7 Federal
inmates whose parents were not receiving
welfare benefits or living in publicly-
financed housing had a gun.  

A quarter of State inmates who said they had
a parent who had abused drugs reported that
they were carrying a gun while committing
their current offense.  In contrast, less than 
a fifth of those whose parents did not abuse
substances had a firearm.

About 20% of State and Federal inmates
whose friends while growing up used or
traded drugs, stole, destroyed or damaged
property, broke or entered private property,
or robbed someone reported that they had a
firearm with them when they committed their
controlling offense.  An estimated 15% of
State inmates and 9% of Federal inmates
who did not have friends involved in illegal
activities  or possessed a firearm during 
their current offense.

---------------------------------------------
Inmates who had ever been shot at

As one measure of violence in inmates' lives,
inmates were asked if they had ever been
shot at.  This experience could have been at
any time in their lives, including when they
were committing the crime for which they
were in prison.  About half of State prisoners
reported that in the past they had been shot
at by someone, and more than a fifth had
actually been wounded by gunfire.  A quarter
of State and Federal inmates who had been
shot at were carrying a firearm during their
current offense, compared to a tenth of those
who had never been shot at.

                      State prison inmates     Federal prison inmates
                                    Percent             Percent
                                    carrying a          carrying a
                           Number   firearm     Number  firearm
Ever shot at with a gun    516,194   24.6%      30,064   24.0%
Wounded                    213,429   26.7       12,933   24.4
Shot at but not wounded    302,765   23.1       17,131   23.6
Never shot at              514,676   12.1       56,679   10.1
----------------------------------------

Violent recidivists were as likely as 
first time violent offenders to have 
carried a gun 

Recidivism does not appear to be related to
whether inmates were carrying guns when the 
type of current offense is taken into account.  
Violent offenders who had served a prior 
sentence and first time violent offenders were 
about equally likely to be carrying a firearm 
when committing their current offense -- about 
30% of violent offenders in State prisons 
carried a firearm. About a third of violent 
Federal offenders, whether recidivist or first 
time, carried a firearm. 

Less than 10% of both first time and repeat
State offenders serving time for property,
drug, and public-order offenses carried a
gun.  Drug offenders who were recidivists
were more likely to be carrying a firearm than
first-time drug offenders (9% versus 6% of
State inmates and 11% versus 5% of
Federal inmates). 

Inmates who had served prior sentences as
a juvenile were more likely to have had a gun
than those who did not have a juvenile
record.  For State offenders 22% who had a
juvenile record and 13% with only an adult
record had a firearm while committing their
current offense; for Federal offenders 27%
with a juvenile record and 14% with only an
adult record possessed a firearm.

Inmates' retail purchase of firearms
fell between 1991 and 1997

In 1997, 14% of State inmates who had used
or possessed a firearm during their current
offense bought or traded for it from a retail
store, pawnshop, flea market, or gun show. 
Nearly 40% of State inmates carrying a
firearm obtained the weapon from family or
friends.  About 3 in 10 received the weapon
from drug dealers, off the street, or through
the black market.  Another 1 in 10 obtained
their gun during a robbery, burglary, or other
type of theft.   

From 1991 to 1997 the percent of State inmates 
with guns who acquired them at a retail outlet 
fell from 21% to 14%.  At the same time the 
percentage reporting that they used firearms 
furnished by family or friends increased from 
34% to 40%. Between the two surveys the Brady 
Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993 was 
enacted.  The act requires background checks 
for persons purchasing firearms from federally 
licensed firearm dealers.  Changes in how inmates
obtained firearms, when the two surveys are
compared, may or may not reflect the requirements 
in the Brady Act. Inmates may have procured 
their firearm or entered prison before the Brady 
Act became effective in 1994.

------------------------------------------
Victims of violent offenders possessing
firearms 

About 30% of State inmates and 35% of Federal 
inmates sentenced for a violent offense -- 
homicide, sexual assault, robbery, or assault-- 
used or possessed a firearm when committing 
their current offense.  A quarter of violent 
State prisoners and almost a third of Federal
prisoners carried a handgun.  Fewer than 1
in 10, however, carried a long gun -- a rifle
or shotgun -- or a military-style semiautomatic 
or fully automatic weapon. 

Inmates serving time for violent crimes were 
more likely to use a firearm when their victims 
were male rather than female, 18 or older rather 
than under age 18, and strangers, known by sight,
or known casually rather than persons the inmates
knew well.

*  About 40% of violent State offenders who
victimized a male had a gun compared to 17% 
of offenders when the victim was female.

*  39% of violent State inmates with a black
victim and 33% of those with a Hispanic
victim used a firearm, significantly more
than the 25% with a white victim. 

Possession of a firearm, by type of
firearm, for State and Federal prison
inmates sentenced for a violent offense,
1997
 
                        Percent of prison inmates
                        who possessed a firearm
                        during current violent
                        offense
 
Type of firearm            State    Federal
 
Total                       100 %     100 %
 
Any firearm                30.2 %    35.4 %
  Handgun                  24.7      30.4
  Rifle                     2.0       2.4
  Shotgun                   4.1       3.6
  Other                     0.7       1.2
 
Type of firearm
Single shot                17.0 %    18.0 %
Conventional
semiautomatic              12.1      16.3
Military-style semi-
automatic or fully
automatic                   2.1       4.0
 
*  Less than 10% of those who victimized
persons 17 or younger, compared to over
33% of those who victimized persons 18 or
older, possessed a firearm.  

*  Over a third of violent offenders used
guns when their victims were strangers and
casual acquaintances, compared to a fifth
who used guns against persons they knew. 

*  27% of offenders who victimized a
current or former spouse, boyfriend, or
girlfriend were armed while committing the
crime.  About 8% used guns against other
relatives, including children, siblings, and
other family members.

Characteristics of victims of violent
crime, by whether the State prison
inmate possessed a firearm, 1997
                     
                        Percent of violent
                        State prison
                        inmates
                        who possessed
Characteristics         a firearm during
of victim               current offense
 
Gender
  Male                         39.8 %
  Female                       16.8
 
Race/Hispanic origin
  White                        25.4 %
  Black                        38.6
  Hispanic                     32.8
  Other                        29.1
 
Age
  17 or younger                 8.2 %
  18-24                        40.9
  25-34                        37.0
  35 or older                  33.8
 
Relationship to offender
  Stranger                      35.6 %
  Known by sight or casually    36.2
  Well known                    20.6
     Intimate*                  27.0
    Other relative               8.2
    Friend                      26.3
    Other                       23.9
                    
*Includes spouse, ex-spouse, boyfriend,
girlfriend, ex-boyfriend, and ex-girlfriend.
 
------------------------------------------

Recidivists less likely than first 
timers to buy their gun from a retail
establishment

Although existence of a prior record did not
change inmates' likelihood of having carried
a gun while committing their current crime, it
did influence where they acquired their gun. 
Recidivists were less likely than those who
were first time offenders to have purchased
their gun from a retail store, pawnshop, flea
market, or gun show.  About a tenth of
recidivists and a fifth of first timers 
purchased their gun from a retail establishment.  

A larger percentage of recidivists than first
time offenders obtained their weapon through 
illegal activities or from the street or a 
black market source -- 42% of recidivists
and 31% of first timers. 

Recidivists with firearms were as likely as
first time offenders to obtain their gun from 
a family member or friends in 1997 -- about
40% acquired their guns from either family or
friends.

The percentage of inmates who purchased or 
traded from a retail outlet, such as a store
or pawnshop, fell during this period for both
those with prior sentences and those without
them.  For repeat offenders, purchasing from
retail fell from 17% to 11%, and for first 
time offenders from 33% to 20%. 

For recidivists the percentage of inmates
with firearms who obtained them from family
or friends rose from 1991 to 1997 -- for
recidivists from 33% in 1991 to 39% in 1997
and for first timers from 36% in 1991 to 41%
in 1997.

------------------------------------------
Victim, police, and inmate reports of
gun use during violent crime

The FBI reports that over two-thirds of
homicide victims were killed with a firearm. 
About 4 in 10 inmates serving a sentence for
murder or manslaughter in State and Federal
correctional facilities said that they had used
a gun in committing the crime.   

About 23% of robbery victims and 28% of
aggravated assault victims told the National
Crime Victimization Survey that the offender
used a gun.

Possession of firearms during violent crime,
as reported by victims, police, and prison 
inmates, 1997
 
 
 
                    Percent of         Percent of
                    victimizations     offenses in the
                    in the             FBI's Supplemental
                    National Crime     Homicide Reports/
                    Victimization      Uniform Crime Reports
                    Survey             Reports
   Violent crime
 
Homicide                                   67.8 %
Sexual assault          2.4 %
Robbery                23.0                39.7
Aggravated assault     28.4                20.0
 
 
                    Percent of offenders possessing
                    a firearm during a violent crime
 
                    Survey of Inmate   Survey of Inmates
                    in State           in Federal
                    Correctional       Correctional
   Violent crime    Facilities         Facilities
 
Homicide                42.9 %            39.3 %
Sexual assault           2.9               0.0
Robbery                 34.5              40.5
Aggravated assault      31.2              26.0
-------------------------------------------

1 in 5  military-style semiautomatic or
fully automatic guns bought from retail
store

About a fifth of inmates with a military-style
semiautomatic or fully automatic weapon
bought it retail -- at a store, flea market, or
gun show.  About a sixth of inmates with a
conventional semiautomatic weapon and an
eighth with a single-shot gun also had made
a retail purchase. 

While family and friends provided a quarter
of military-style semiautomatic or fully
automatic firearms, they gave inmates over
a third of the conventional semiautomatic
weapons and just under half of the
single-shot guns.  

Almost half of inmates possessing 
military-style semiautomatic or fully
automatic weapons, about two-fifths of those
with conventional semiautomatic firearms,
and over a third of offenders having single-
shot guns had got their firearm in a theft or 
burglary, or from a drug dealer, fence, or 
black market.

Young offenders less likely than 
older ones to have bought a firearm 
from a retail source
 
Young offenders were less likely than older
inmates to have bought their gun from a
retail outlet).  About 7% of inmates 24 or
younger and 22% of those 35 or older
obtained their gun from a retail outlet.

About half of inmates who were 24 or younger, 
compared to less than a third of those 35 or 
older, acquired their gun through illegal 
activities, a drug dealer, or a black market.

Among those possessing a firearm during
their current offense, an estimated 17% of
women and 14% of men purchased their guns 
from a retail establishment.  About 3 in
10 women offenders and 4 in 10 male inmates 
acquired their firearms from a theft, burglary, 
drug dealer, fence, or black market.  Family 
and friends provided guns to about 46% of 
female inmates with firearms and 39% of male 
inmates. 

Federal law may have disqualified 
over 8 in 10 inmates from buying a 
firearm 

The Gun Control Act of 1968, as amended,
and other Federal statutes list conditions
which disqualify an individual from
possessing a firearm or purchasing it from a
licensed dealer.  Some of these conditions
include a prior felony conviction or
indictment, current illegal drug use or
addiction, dishonorable discharge from the
Armed Forces, or being a fugitive from
justice, a mental incompetent, or a
nonresident alien.  The Brady Act, effective
in 1994, mandated that federally licensed
firearm dealers obtain  background checks of
potential purchasers, based on the conditions 
of eligibility.

A slightly lower percentage of State
prisoners who had a gun, compared to those
who did not, reported having a characteristic
which may have disqualified them, as defined 
by Federal law.  About 84% of State inmates 
who had possessed a gun and 88% who did not 
have a gun may have met at least one of the 
conditions, as measured in the inmate survey.  

Among State inmates, those with and without
guns answered differently on only two
conditions.  About 50% of those with a
firearm and 56% without had a prior
sentence to incarceration; about 37% with 
a gun and 49% without were on probation or
parole. On other  factors, about the same
percentages reported meeting a condition
that could have made them ineligible to
purchase a firearm.  Almost 6 in 10 said they
had used illegal drugs before their controlling
offense, about 1 in 10 had stayed in a mental
health facility overnight, and 1 in 20 was a
noncitizen. 

Higher percentages of Federal inmates with
guns than without them reported meeting at
least one of the conditions of the Federal
laws.  About 83% with a firearm and 78%
without one may have been disqualified from
purchasing a gun.  Higher percentages of
inmates using guns compared to those without 
a gun had a prior incarceration (55% versus 
37%), were on probation or parole when arrested 
(32% versus. 26%), or had used illegal drugs 
shortly before committing their current offense 
(56% versus 43%).   

9% of all State prison inmates and 2% 
of all Federal inmates shot a gun while
committing their current offense

In total, about 1 in 10 State inmates and 1 in
50 Federal inmates fired their gun while
committing their current offense.  Among
inmates serving a sentence for a single
violent crime incident, 18% of State inmates
and 9% of Federal inmates said they fired
the gun they were carrying. 

About 1% of inmates serving a sentence for
a single property, drug, or public-order
incident discharged a gun.  

Fewer than 1 in 20 State inmates and 1 in 10 
Federal inmates, regardless of type of offense, 
said they possessed a firearm but did not use 
it. Another 2% reported they had another weapon, 
including a knife, scissors, ax, rock, club or 
other sharp or blunt object.

About half of inmates carrying a gun
during their offense fired it and half 
of those injured or killed someone 

If inmates carried a firearm, they tended to
use it.  Among inmates possessing a firearm
and committing only one incident, four-fifths
of State inmates and half of Federal inmates
either fired the weapon or brandished or
displayed it while committing the crime. 

An estimated 23% of State inmates and 5%
of Federal inmates with a gun either killed or
injured their victim.  Another 26% of State
inmates and 8% of Federal inmates with a
gun discharged the gun but did not injure or
kill anyone with it.   

Besides firing their weapon, inmates used
their guns for other purposes.  About half of
State inmates said they used it to scare
someone, about two-fifths to defend themselves, 
and a fifth to "get away."

About 81% of State inmates with a single-shot 
gun,  79% with a conventional semiautomatic, 
and 75% with a military-style semiautomatic 
weapon or a fully automatic weapon either fired 
or brandished it.  About 51% with a single-shot 
gun, 46% with a conventional semiautomatic 
firearm, and 43% with a military-style semiauto-
matic weapon or a fully automatic  weapon
discharged their firearm.  About a fifth either
injured or killed their victim, regardless of the
type of firearm.  

About a quarter of inmates carrying military-
style semiautomatic weapon or a fully automatic  
weapon and a fifth of those with a conventional 
semiautomatic or single-shot weapon did not 
actively use the gun in any way, discharging it 
or displaying it to scare someone, defend oneself, 
or "get away." 

Possession of a firearm during an 
offense increased sentences and 
expected time served of inmates

On average, inmates possessing a firearm
had longer sentences and expected to serve
a longer time than those who had not used or
possessed a firearm while committing their
offense.  Sentences for State inmates with
firearms had an average of about 18 years,
while those for inmates without a firearm
were about 12 years.  Those who had carried 
a firearm expected to serve about 10 years 
on their sentence, and those without a
firearm, 7 years.

Violent offenders with firearms had on
average a sentence of over 20 years  and
those without firearms, about 18 years. 
Violent offenders who had carried a gun also
expected to serve 12 years on average and
those who did not carry them, 10 years.  

Significantly higher percentages of inmates
who possessed firearms, compared to those
who did not, received a sentence enhancement, 
generally for possessing a firearm.  About 
40% of State inmates who carried a firearm 
during their current offense and 6% who were 
not carrying a firearm were given an enhancement 
to their sentence because of a firearm offense. 
About 56% of Federal inmates who carried a
firearm and 14% who did not carry one
received a weapons offense enhancement.
 
Methodology 

The U.S. Census Bureau conducted the 1997 
Survey of Inmates in State Correctional
Facilities (SISCF) for the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) and the 1997 Survey of
Inmates in Federal Correctional Facilities
(SIFCF) for BJS and the Bureau of Prisons. 
From June through October, 1997, inmates
were interviewed about their current offense
and sentences, criminal histories, family and
personal backgrounds, gun possession and
use, prior drug and alcohol use and
treatment, educational programs, and other
services provided while in prison.  Similar
surveys of State prison inmates were
conducted in 1974, 1979, 1986, and 1991. 
Federal inmates were surveyed for the first
time in 1991.

Sample design

The samples for the SISCF and SIFCF
were taken from a universe of 1,409 State
prisons and 127 Federal prisons enumerated 
in the 1995 Census of State and Federal 
Adult Correctional Facilities or opened 
between completion of the census and June 
30, 1996.  The sample design for both surveys 
was a stratified two-stage selection; first, 
selecting prisons, and second, selecting 
inmates in those prisons.

In the first stage correctional facilities 
were separated into two sampling frames: one
for prisons with male inmates and one for
prisons with female inmates.  Prisons
holding both genders were included on
both lists.

In the sampling of State facilities, the 13
largest male prisons and 17 largest female
prisons were selected with certainty.  The
remaining 1,265 male facilities and 261
female facilities were stratified into 14
strata defined by census region (Northeast
except New York, New York, Midwest,
South except Texas, Texas, West except
California, and California).  Within each
stratum facilities were ordered by facility
type (confinement and community-based),
security level (maximum, medium, minimum, and 
none), and size of population.  A systematic 
sample of prisons was then selected within 
strata with probabilities proportionate to 
the size of each prison.

For the sample of Federal prisons, one
male prison and two female prisons were
selected with certainty.  The remaining 112
male facilities were classified into 5 strata
defined by security level (administrative,
high, medium, low, and minimum).  The 20
remaining female facilities were stratified
into 2 strata by security level (minimum and
not minimum).  Within security level,
facilities were ordered by size of population
and then selected with probability
proportionate to size.

For the State survey 280 prisons were
selected, 220 male facilities and 60 female
facilities.  Of the 280 facilities 3 refused 
to allow interviewing and 2 closed before the
survey could be conducted.  Overall, 32
male facilities and 8 female facilities were
selected for the Federal survey, and all
participated.

In the second stage, inmates were selected
for interviewing.  For State facilities
interviewers selected the sample
systematically using a random start and a
total number of interviews based on the
gender of the inmates and the size of the
facility.  For Federal facilities, a sample of
inmates was selected for each facility from
the Bureau of Prisons central list, using a
random start and predetermined sampling
interval.  

All selected drug offenders were then
subsampled so that only a third were
eligible for interview.  As a result,
approximately 1 in every 75 men and 1 in
17 women were selected for the State
survey, and 1 in every 13 men and 1 in
every 3 women were selected for the
Federal survey. 
 
A total of 14,285 interviews were completed 
for the State survey and 4,041 for the Federal 
survey, for overall response rates of 92.5% 
in the State survey and 90.2% in the Federal 
survey.

The interviews, about an hour in length,
used computer-assisted personal
interviewing (CAPI).  With CAPI, computers
provide questions for the interviewer,
including follow-up questions tailored to
preceding answers.  Before the interview,
inmates were told verbally and in writing
that participation was voluntary and that all
information provided would be held in
confidence.  Participants were assured that
the survey was solely for statistical
purposes and that no individual who
participated could be identified through use
of survey results.

Estimates of prisoner counts

Based on the completed interviews, estimates 
for the entire population were developed using 
weighting factors derived from the original 
probability of selection in the sample.  
These factors were adjusted for variable rates 
of nonresponse across strata and inmates' 
characteristics and offenses.  The sample 
for the State survey was adjusted to midyear 
custody counts for June 30, 1997, from data 
obtained in the National Prisoner Statistics 
series (NPS-1A).  The sample from the Federal
facilities was weighted to the total known
sentenced custody population at midyear
1997.

Excluded from the estimate of Federal
inmates were unsentenced inmates and
those prisoners under Federal jurisdiction
but housed in State and private contract
facilities.  Those prisoners who were under
State jurisdiction, yet held in local jails or
private-facilities, were excluded from the
estimated number of State prisoners.  As a
result, the estimated prisoner counts do not
match those in other BJS data series.  The
estimated prisoner counts vary according
to the particular data items analyzed. 
Estimates are based on the number of
prisoners who provided information on
selected items. 

Accuracy of the estimates

The accuracy of the estimates presented in
this report depends on two types of error: 
sampling and nonsampling.  Sampling error
is the variation that may occur by chance
because a sample rather than a complete
enumeration of the population was
conducted.  Nonsampling error can be
attributed to many sources, such as
nonresponses, differences in the
interpretation of questions among inmates,
recall difficulties, and processing errors.  
In any survey the full extent of the
nonsampling error is never known.  The
sampling error, as measured by an estimated 
standard error, varies by the size of the 
estimate and the size of the base population.

Estimates of the standard errors have been
calculated for the 1997 surveys.  For
example, the 95-percent confidence
interval around the percentage of State
inmates who carried a firearm during
current offense is approximately 18.4%
plus or minus 1.96 times 0.42% (or 17.6%
to 19.2%). 

These standard errors may also be used to
test the significance of the difference
between two sample statistics by pooling
the standard errors of the two sample
estimates.  For example, the standard error
of the difference between violent or drug
offenders carrying firearms when
committing their current offense would be
1.0% (or the square root of the sum of the
squared standard errors for each group). 
The 95%-confidence interval around the
difference would be 1.96 times 1.0% or
1.9%.  Since the difference, 22.1% (30.2%
- 8.1%) is greater than 1.9%, the difference
would be considered statistically significant.

The same procedure can be used to test
the significance of the difference between
estimates from the two surveys.  For
example, the standard error of the
difference between Federal and State
prison inmates carrying a firearm would be
0.9%.  The 95-percent confidence interval
around the difference would be 1.96 times
.9% (or 1.7%).  Since the difference of
3.6% (18.4% minus 14.8%) is greater than
1.6%, the difference would be considered
statistically significant.

All comparisons discussed in this report
were statistically significant at the
95-percent confidence level. 
 
Definitions

The survey questionnaire used the following
definitions in language and terms familiar to
the respondents.  Interviewers read the
definitions to the inmates when needed. 

Handguns include both pistols and
revolvers.  They are firearms held and fired
with one hand and include the following:

-- Revolver is a handgun with a revolving
cylinder with several cartridge chambers. 
The chambers are successively lined up with
the barrel and then discharged. (Classified
as single shot for analysis.)

-- Derringer is a short-barreled, single shot
pocket pistol.  A pistol has a chamber
integral with the barrel. (Classified as single
shot for analysis.)

-- A conventional semiautomatic pistol uses
a shell which is ejected and the next round of
ammunition is loaded automatically from a
magazine or clip internal to the pistol grip or
handle.  The trigger must be pulled for each
shot.5  (Classified as conventional
semiautomatic for analysis.)

-- Military-style semiautomatic pistol is 
similar to a conventional semiautomatic pistol
except that the magazine or clip is visible.
***Footnote 5: The survey interview included
in the operational definition of a conventional 
semiautomatic pistol "can hold a maximum style
semiautomatic pistol "can hold more than 19
bullets."***  Primary examples are the UZI, 
TEC-9, and MAC-10. (Classified as military-style
semiautomatic for analysis.)

A rifle is a firearm intended to be shot from
the shoulder. It has a long barrel wich
shoots bullets. Types include:

-- Bolt-action, pump-action, lever-action, or
single-shot rifles require physical movement
by the operator of some part of the rifle -- a
bolt, lever, or pump -- to reload.  A single
shot rifle must be loaded after each shot.
(Classified as single shot for analysis.)

-- Semiautomatic hunting-style rifle is a rifle
in which a shell is ejected and the next round
of ammunition is loaded automatically from a
magazine or clip.  The trigger must be pulled
for each shot. (Classified as conventional
semiautomatic for analysis.)

-- Semiautomatic military-style rifle has the
characteristics of a semiautomatic hunting-style 
rifle.  It also has military features such as a 
pistol grip, folding stock, flash suppressor, 
and bayonet mount. (Classified as military-style 
semiautomatic for analysis.)

A shotgun is a firearm intended to be shot
from the shoulder with either a single- or
double-barrel for firing shot (a concentration
of small pellets) at short ranges.  Types
include:

-- Bolt-action, pump-action, lever-action, or
single shot shotgun requires physical
movement by the operator of some part of
the shotgun-- a bolt, lever, or pump -- to
reload.  A single shot shotgun must be
loaded after each shot.  (Classified as
single-shot for analysis.)

-- Semiautomatic hunting-style shotgun is a
shotgun in which a shell is ejected and the
next round of ammunition is loaded automatically 
from a magazine or clip. The trigger must be 
pulled for each shot. (Classified as conventional 
semiautomatic for analysis.)

-- Semiautomatic military-style shotgun has
the characteristics of a semiautomatic
hunting-style shotgun.  In addition, the
shotgun has military features, such as a
pistol grip, folding stock, and detachable 
magazine or clip.  It looks like a semiautomatic 
military-style rifle. (Classified as military-
style semiautomatic for analysis.)

A semiautomatic gun is a firearm in which
a shell is ejected and the next round of
ammunition is loaded automatically from a
magazine or clip.  The trigger must be pulled
for each shot.  Semiautomatic guns may be
classified as handguns, rifles, or shotguns. 

A machine gun is an automatic gun which, if 
the trigger is held down, will fire rapidly and
continuously.  It is not a semi-automatic gun
for which the trigger must be pulled for each
shot. (Classified as fully automatic for 
analysis.) 

A BB gun shoots a single pellet, using air
rather than an explosive to propel the pellet.
(Excluded from analysis, as were toy guns.) 

---------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department of
Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld is the
acting director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific topic
in depth from one or more datasets that
cover many topics.  Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote 
this report. 

Tom Bonczar and Lara Reynolds provided
statistical assistance and verification. 
Terry Austin, Chief, National Tracing
Center Division of the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms, provided comments.  
Tom Hester and Tina Dorsey edited the 
report.  Jayne Robinson administered final 
production.

November 2001, NCJ 189369
--------------------------------------


End of file
02/05/02 revised ih