U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


May 2000, NCJ 180771

Guide to the BJS Website

Priscilla Middleton
BJS Digital Information Specialist

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Sections updated

*  Key Crime and Justice Facts at a Glance, updates and 7 new
charts
*  Crime & Justice Electronic Data Abstracts, 8 updated and 19
new spreadsheets
*  Homicide Trends in the United States, updated to 1998 with 18
new charts
*  Drugs and Crime Facts, updated with new data from 25 sources

Other new materials on BJS website

*  Spreadsheets of tables in new publications.
*  Listing of CD-ROMS available from BJS
*  Questionnaires available electronically
*  Job opportunities
*  Requirements for Federal assistance

New from BJS partners

*  Justice Research Statistics Association, Incident-Based
Reporting Resource Center
*  American Statistical Association's Guide to Abstracts and
Bibliographies
*  National Clearinghouse for Criminal Justice Information
System, new look and address
----------------------------------------------------------

In addition to the traditional paper publications, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics electronically publishes a variety of
materials including statistical graphics and spreadsheets on the
BJS website (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/).  Every publication
produced by BJS since 1994, when the website was launched, is
available electronically.  This guide is issued periodically to
notify you of updates and additions to the material that is
available on the website and not otherwise published.  

To keep up with the latest at BJS visit What's new at BJS  
http://www/ojp/usdoj/bjs/whtsnw2.htm.
This page consists of --

*  Announcements of BJS sponsored conferences and other BJS
activities 
*  The latest BJS publications (released in the past 6 months) 
*  Solicitations for BJS grant programs 
*  The latest data available from the BJS website.

BJS also announces new releases in JUSTINFO, the electronic
newsletter from the National Criminal Justice Reference Service.
To automatically receive this biweekly newsletter, subscribe to
JUSTINFO at -- 
http://www.ncjrs.org/ 
justinfo/index.html

For more information about the site, take the tour of the BJS
website at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
tour/intro.htm 

Key Crime & Justice Facts at a Glance

Key Facts at a Glance presents trends in crime and justice in 36
charts including 7 new charts (see list below).  The charts in
Key Facts at a Glance are updated as new data become available. 
Most have been updated since the first edition of the Guide to
BJS website (NCJ 172208 May 1999).  A complete list of the
charts in Key Facts at a Glance, including the date of the most
recent update, is in Appendix 1. 

You can find Key Facts at a Glance at ttp://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/glance.htm.  Small versions of the charts (thumbnails) 
and brief statements of findings are presented.  Click on the 
thumbnail and you will go to a page that contains a full-sized 
version of the chart and additional information about the data 
and findings.  Click on the full-sized version of the chart and 
a table with the data used in the chart will appear.  This table 
is a text file which you can save to your hard drive and import 
into most spreadsheet, charting, and word processing programs.   

In addition, an electronic file is available that contains
full-sized color versions of selected charts suitable for
overheads or handouts.  This file is updated at the same time
the charts are updated on the website. 

Paper versions of these charts are available from the BJS
Clearinghouse.  Please reference NCJ 170087 when ordering.

Crime & Justice Electronic 
Data Abstracts

Crime & Justice Electronic Data Abstracts (CJEDA) are a series
of spreadsheets that contain data from a wide variety of
published sources, usually by jurisdiction and over time.  You
can use these spreadsheets to find the answer to a particular
question, include the data in other analyses, or create your
own graphs or maps. These spreadsheets are updated as new data
become available.

The additions and updates to the CJEDA for the past 6 months are
announced on What's New from BJS.  A complete list of
spreadsheets is available in Appendix 2.

You can download these spreadsheets to your computer and open or
import them into most spreadsheet, charting, and word processing
programs.  Most of these files are in .wk1 format.  (The MIME
type for these files is application/spreadsheet and the file
extension is wk1.)  Many browsers can be configured to
automatically launch a spreadsheet program to display these
files.  Consult the documentation of your browser for specific
instructions.



A few of the holdings are a collection of files that are archived 
into one .zip file to facilitate transfer from the Internet. 
Additional help to unzip these files is available at
http:/www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/help.htm.
If you do not have Internet access you can order them on
diskette from the BJS Clearinghouse.

To allow you to find what you want, these spreadsheets are
indexed in two ways: by topic (Crime and arrest data, Criminal
justice data, Corrections data, Demographic data) and by
jurisdiction level (National, Federal, State, County, City).

New additions

Criminal justice expenditure and 
employment trends
Twelve new spreadsheets concerning trends in justice expenditure
and employment were recently added.  These spreadsheets compare
justice expenditure to spending for other governmental services,
adjust the data for inflation, and analyze trends in justice
spending and employment.  The expenditure data provided are for
1982 to 1996 and employment and payroll data are for 1980 to
1996. 

Arrest data
Another new addition is arrests by age group, number and rates
for all offenses, index offenses, violent offenses, and property
offenses, 1970-98.

Recent updates

Crime data
*  The number of crimes reported to police and crime rates,
1960-97, U.S. totals and by State, from the FBI's Uniform Crime
Reports.

Homicide data
*  Homicide victimization and offending rates of juveniles and
young adults, by State, 1976-98 based on the FBI's Supplementary
Homicide Reports. 

*  Number of homicides and population for cities with estimated
population 100,000 or more, from 1985-97.

Crime and related data for large counties 
and cities
*  Selected crime data, as well as data on police,
prosecutorial, and jail resources, and employment, income, and
educational variables, 90 most populous counties.
*  Selected crime data, as well as data on police, and criminal
justice expenditures, 25 largest cities.

Arrest data
*  Number of arrests for violent crimes of juveniles (under age
18) and adults (age 18 or older), 1970-98.

Law enforcement data
*  Number of full-time sworn law enforcement officers, rate per
100,000 residents, and percent change since 1975 in the United
States. 

Capital punishment data
*  Prisoners executed under civil authority in the United
States, by year, Federal, State-by-State, and region, 1977-99.


Homicide trends in the United 
States

This recently updated site contains a series of charts that
describe homicide patterns and trends in the United States since
1976.  The latest updates and additions are listed on What's new
in Homicide trends in the United States
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm).

All charts, tables, and other information have been updated with
the 1998 preliminary and 1997 final Supplementary Homicide
Reports data and the 1998 Law Enforcement Officers Killed and
Assaulted data.  Most tables which support the graphics now
contain the numbers on which the percentages and rates are
based.  

The recent update added 18 charts, including two animated trend
charts on homicide offending and victimization rates by age from
1980 to 1999.  A new section on eldercide -- homicides of persons
age 65 or older -- has been added. The updated sections and
additions are listed in the box on this page.

To ease printing, a consolidated version of all of these pages
in Homicide trends in the United States is provided. 


New additions to Homicide trends in the United States
 
Trends by age
    Homicide victimization rates by age, 1980-98, an animation
    Homicide offending rates by age, 1980-98, an animation
    Percent of homicides in which the offender was known to the victim, 1976-98
Infanticide
The number of homicides of children under age 5 by age of victim, 1976-98
Eldercide
    Homicides of persons age 65 and older by gender of victim, 1976-98
    Homicide victimization and offending rates of persons age 65 and older, 1976-98
    Percent of homicides committed during a felony by age of victim, 1976-98
Intimate homicide
    Proportion of all homicides involving intimates by gender of victim, 1976-98
    Number of homicides of intimates by relationship of the victim to the of
	  the offender, 1976-98
    Intimate homicide rates by race, gender, and relationship, 1976-98
Multiple victim or offender homicides
    Percent of homicides involving multiple victims by number of victims, 1976-98
    Percent of homicides involving guns by number of victims, 1976-98
Circumstances
    Percent of homicides involving guns by circumstance, 1976-98
Weapons
    Percent of homicides involving guns by age of victim, 1976-98   aggregate
Regional trends
    Teen homicide offending rates by region, 1976-98
City trends
    Number of homicides in urban, suburban, and rural areas, 1976-98
    Percent of all homicides involving intimates by urban, suburban, and
	rural areas, 1976-98
Clearances
    Percent of homicides cleared by age of victim, 1976-98  aggregate

Drugs & Crime Facts

This section of the BJS website is an updated web version of the
publication, Drugs and Crime Facts, 1994.  Statistics on
drug-related crimes, law enforcement, courts, corrections, drug
use, and public opinion are summarized in an easy to use format.
Data from BJS series as well as other government sources
provide an online overview of drugs and crime in the United
States.

Drugs & Crime Facts (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dcf/contents.htm)
has been updated with information from 25 statistical publications
issued since the launch in May 1999.  A new section that focuses on
drug use at arrest has been added.  Links to the source materials for
each entry are provided for users seeking more detail.  As new
data become available, the site is updated and enhanced with the
latest data about drugs and crime.  The table below lists the
publications used to update the site.

New sources used in Drug & Crime Facts, by agency
 
Bureau of Justice Statistics
    DWI Offenders under Correctional Supervision
    Criminal Victimization and Perceptions of Community
    Safety in 12 Cities, 1998
    Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1996
    Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 1996
    Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 1999, jointly with the
	    U.S. Deparment of Education
    Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics,  1997:
        Data for Individual State and Local Agencies with 100 or More Officers
    Local Police Departments, 1997
    Mental Health and Treatment and Inmates and Probationers
    Prior Abuse Reported by Inmates and Probationers 1998
	Prisoners in 1998
    Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear 1998
	Probation and Parole in the United States, 1998
    Sheriffs' Departments, 1997
	Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, 1998
 
National Institute of Justice
    1998 Annual Report on Cocaine Use Among Arrestee,
	    Arrestees Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM),
    1998 Annual Report on Marijuana Use Among Arrestee,
	    Arrestees Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM),
    1996-1997 Update:  HIV/AIDS, STDs, and TB in Correctional
	    Facilities
 
Office of National Drug Control Policy
    Fact Sheet:  Drug Use Trends
    Fact sheet:  Drug Data Summary
    The National Drug Control Strategy, 1999
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National
  Institute on Drug Abuse
	The Monitoring the Future Study
U.S. Sentencing Commission
	 1998 Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing Statistics
 
Substance Abuse and Mental Services Administration (SAMHSA)
    Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) Annual Medical
	    Examiner Data 1997
    Summary of Findings from the 1998 National Household Survey on
	    Drug Abuse
    Year-end 1998 Emergency Department Data from the Drug Abuse
	    Warning Network
 


Other electronic materials and publications 
from the BJS website

Electronic releases

Tables from various BJS' series which were printed in the past
are now being offered exclusively online in spreadsheets. 
Collections of these spreadsheets are archived together in zip
files to facilitate downloading.  The following is a list of
recent electronic releases by topic.

Corrections
HIV in Prison 1998, NCJ  181758
National Corrections Reporting Program
  Time served in State prison,
    1993, NCJ 175662
    1994, NCJ 175663
    1995, NCJ 175664

    1996, NCJ 175665
    1997, NCJ 181754
  Sentence length of State prisoners, 
    1993, NCJ 175666
    1994, NCJ 175667
    1995, NCJ 175668
    1996, NCJ 175669
    1997, NCJ 181755
  Most serious offense of State
  prisoners,
    1993, NCJ 175670
    1994, NCJ 175671
    1995, NCJ 175672
    1996, NCJ 175673
    1997, NCJ 181756

Expenditure and Employment 
Justice Expenditure and Employment 
Extracts --
   1993, NCJ 163068
   1994, NCJ 175706
   1995, NCJ 175707
   1996, NCJ 180883

Users who do not have Internet access can order the spreadsheets
on diskette from the BJS Clearinghouse (please use the NCJ
number to order.) 

Spreadsheets that support 
publications

BJS also provides data from the tables of most BJS publications
in spreadsheet format. Over 1,265 spreadsheets are available on
the website.  In many instances, these files include not only
the published tables but also additional detail used to
calculate published rates or percentages and the formulas used.

You can use these spreadsheets to include the data in other
analyses, create your own graphs or maps, or in some instances,
view details that are not in the published report.

Like the Crime and Justice Electronic Data Abstracts, these
files can be downloaded and imported into most spreadsheet,
charting, and word processing programs. The table on this page
lists recent publications for which such data are available.  
A link to these spreadsheets is included on the publication's 
web abstract. The address of the abstract is included on the 
table below.

Most of these files are either text files or spreadsheets in 
.wk1 format, although half of the holdings are a collection of
files that are archived into one .zip file to facilitate
transfer from the Internet. From the abstract, click
on spreadsheets and the file will download to your computer
where you can open it and use it.  Additional help to unzip
these files is available at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/help.htm.  

Users who do not have Internet access can order the spreadsheets
on diskette from the BJS Clearinghouse (please use the NCJ
number to order.)



Datasets and publications on 
CD-ROM


A list of datasets, publications, and software available on
CD-ROM was added to the website in July 1999. 

New sections available on the BJS website (cont.)

The latest additions include:

Datasets 
*  Civil Justice Survey of State Courts, 1996
*  Federal Justice Statistics Programs,1994-96
*  National Correction Reporting Program 1983-1986. 

Publications
*  The Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics 
1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.
 
Software 
*  Crime Victimization Survey (CVS) 
Software

These CD-ROMs can be ordered from the National Criminal Justice
Reference Service. A detailed description of the content of each
CD-ROM and information about the cost and the NCJ number for
ordering are available at:   http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cd.htm

Questionnaires

Most of BJS publications are developed through data gathered
from BJS' surveys.  A description of these surveys and data
series can be found under the topical references on BJS home
page.  Links to many of the questionnaires are available on the
topical pages with the survey descriptions and on a new page at
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/quest.htm.  The following questionnaires
are available electronically.

Crime and victims  
National Crime Victimization Survey 
      *  NCVS Survey instrument
      *  NCVS Crime Incident Report
      *  Police Public Contact Survey: A Supplement to the NCVS 
Criminal Victimization Software Standard Survey questions
(includes questions about community policing) 

Corrections
Summary of Sentenced Population
   Movement (NPS-1)
Report of Inmates Under Sentence
   of Death (NPS-8)
Census of Jails
       *  CJ-3:  1999 Census of Jails
       *  CJ-3A: Jurisdiction Data   
       *  CJ-3A Addendum:  Facility Data
       *  CJ-3B:  Multi-Jurisdiction Facility
       *  CJ-3C:  Private Facility
       *  CJ-3D:  In Indian Country
1996 Survey of Inmates in Local Jails
1997 Survey of Inmates in State
   Correctional Facilities
1997 Survey of Inmates in Federal Correctional Facilities
Inventory of data elements
   questionnaire



Law enforcement
1997 Sample Survey of Law Enforce-
   ment Agencies (CJ-44)
Survey of State Police Agencies
   (SSP-1)
1998 National Study of DNA
   Laboratories

Prosecution
1996 National Survey of Prosecutors

Courts and sentencing
  1999 National Survey of Indigent
     Defense Systems
       *  Program Survey
       *  County Survey

Job opportunities

BJS employs a variety of positions to fulfill its mission,
including: statistician, editor, grant program specialist, 
and policy and program analyst. 

In addition, BJS offers a variety of opportunities for recent
graduates and students at the graduate and undergraduate level,
including the Presidential Management Intern Program and Summer
Education Employment Program. The types of positions available
include statistical clerk, statistical assistant, administrative 
clerk, and administrative assistant. To get a detailed description 
of each position  mentioned above and links to a description of 
current openings, visit (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/jobs.htm

BJS also sponsors the Visiting Research Fellowship Program in
which experienced scholars and practitioners participate in a
specifically designed research project of particular operational
relevance to the national or international justice system.  To
find out more about the Visiting Fellows Program visit
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/fellows.htm.

Requirements for Federal 
assistance

BJS Human Subjects/Confidentiality Requirements elaborates on
how all recipients of funding from BJS are required to comply
with the Federal requirements concerning human subjects research
and confidentiality of any personally identifiable information.  

All applicants should review the following materials prior to
submission of an application:  Protection of Human Subjects and
Privacy Certificate Requirements for Applicants for Funding from
the Bureau of Justice Statistics, BJS Screening Sheet for
Protection of Human Subjects, and Privacy Certificate.  These
materials are available on BJS website at    
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/hscr.htm

Instructions for Applicants for Federal Assistance provides
detailed descriptions of what is required for applications for
Federal assistance from BJS.  Links to electronic versions of
all forms (portable document format, pdf) are available on BJS
website at  http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/apply.htm 

BJS partners roll out new web capabilities

Justice Research Statistics Association 
(JRSA) Incident-Based 
Reporting Resource (IBR) Center 
(http://www.jrsa.org/ibrrc/) 
This new site supported by BJS provides comprehensive
information on accessing and using incident-based reporting data
for the analysis of crime and reporting of justice statistics.
The goal of the website is to facilitate the use of State
incident-based reporting (IBR) systems and the National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) by crime analysts,
researchers, and other justice professionals. The Center seeks
to put practical analytical information and tools into the hands
of analysts who want to work with incident-based data and to
provide a forum where analysts can exchange information and
ideas about using IBR data.

American Statistical Association's Guide to Abstracts and
Bibliographies (www.la.utexas.edu/research/crime_criminaljustice
_research/) The purpose of this site is to inform researchers and
statisticians about BJS data sets they can use in their research.  
Abstracts and bibliographies of many studies that used BJS data 
sets are available on this site. 

National Clearinghouse for Criminal Justice Information Systems
(http://www.search.org/clearinghouse/) This website, sponsored
by BJS and operated by SEARCH, the National Consortium for
Justice Information and Statistics, has a new look and URL. The
site provides the criminal justice community with on-line access
to a host of justice information resources, including impartial
information on available software solutions and a comprehensive,
interactive database of justice agency requests for proposals.

BJS is the statistical arm of the U.S. Department of Justice. 
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.  Priscilla Middleton wrote
this report, under the supervision of Marianne Zawitz. Tom
Hester edited this report and Jayne Robinson administered final
production.

March 2000,  NCJ 180771

To order these materials --

Contact the Bureau of  Justice Statistics Clearinghouse to
request information or to order publications and products.  If
you do not have Internet access, these materials can be obtained
by calling the National Criminal Justice Reference Service
(1-800-732-3277).  Some are available only in electronic forms
since they are intended to be used on computers.

Internet:  
http://www.ncjrs.org/statordr.htm

Mail:  BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
        P.O. Box 179
        Annapolis Junction, MD 
        20701
Fax: 1-410-792-4358
Phone:  1-800-732-3277

*  Paper reproductions are $5.00 + $0.10 per page

*  Diskettes with spreadsheets are $4.50 (US) and $8.50 (Canada
and other countries).


