U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
-----------------------------

Guide to the BJS Website

December 2002, NCJ 187735

---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/gbjsw3.htm

This report is one in series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2#guide
---------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------
In addition to traditional paper publications, 
BJS electronically publishes a variety of 
materials including statistical graphics and 
spreadsheets on the BJS website. Every 
publication produced by BJS since 1995 and a 
small selection from 1994, when the website 
was launched, are available electronically.  

To keep up with the latest at BJS visit
What's new at BJS
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/whtsnw2.htm.

This page consists of  --

*  Announcements of BJS-sponsored conferences, 
   presentations, and other recent items 
*  BJS publications and products (released
   in the past 6 months) 
*  Solicitations for BJS grant programs and
   contracts 
*  Latest data-spreadsheets and charts

For more information about the site, take
the tour of the BJS website at
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/tour/intro.htm.
----------------------------------------------

This guide is issued periodically to notify
you of updates and additions to the material 
that is available on the website and not 
otherwise published.

New features

Crime & Justice Data Online
www/ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dataonline/

This new interactive application provides
quick access to comprehensive and easy
to use crime and justice data.  Now, at the
touch of a button, you can extract the data
you need to build your own tables on
crime and homicide trends and law
enforcement.
  
Reentry Trends in the United States
www/ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/reentry.htm/

This new section summarizes the lastest 
data concerning inmates returning to the
community after serving time in State or 
Federal prison. 


New listserve

Subscribe to JUSTSTATS and
get e-mail notices of all new and
updated statistical materials
from:
*  Bureau of Justice Statistics
*  Federal Bureau of Investigation 
*  Office of Juvenile Justice and
  Delinquency Prevention

To subscribe, send an e-mail to 
listproc@ncrjs.org, leave the subject line blank, 
and in the message, type "subscribe 
JUSTSTATS" and your name.

Crime & Justice Data Online
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dataonline/

In November 2001 BJS launched an interactive 
application that provides quick access to 
comprehensive and easy to use crime data.  
Data are available on crime trends from the 
FBI's Uniform Crime Reports, on homicide 
trends and characteristics, and on large 
law enforcement agencies from the Law
Enforcement Management and Administrative 
Statistics.

Before Data Online these data were only
available in hardcopy, if at all. Now, you
can select the jurisdictions of interest, 
build a table, and download a spreadsheet
version for later use. You will not need 
to perform data entry again.

Crime trends from the FBI's Uniform
Crime Reports (UCR)

Users can construct data tables on the
reported criminal offenses from the
Uniform Crime Reports for the U.S. totals,
all 50 States, and local agencies with a
population coverage of 10,000 or more.  
Included are the numbers and rates for 
the following index offenses: 

 Violent crimes
*  murder and nonnegligent manslaughter
*  forcible rape
*  robbery
*  aggravated assault Property crimes
*  burglary
*  larceny/theft
*  motor vehicle theft.

State level data are available from 1960,
and local agency data are available from
1985.

Before this interactive application, 
these data were only available from 
annual editions of Crime in the United 
States. See the electronic samples of 
crime trends that are available from 
Data Online.

Homicide trends and characteristics
from the FBI's Supplementary Annual
Reports (SHR)

Users can access homicide trends and
characteristics for all 50 States since 
1976 and local reporting agencies with
population coverage of more than 250,000
since 1985.

This section displays the total number of
homicides reported annually in the UCR
and the characteristics of those homicides
from the SHR. The characteristics are
presented as percentages of the total
because not all homicides are reported in
the SHR. Six variable groups are covered:

*  total number of homicides, reported
   annually in the UCR
*  age of victim (in age groups)
*  race of victim (white, black, other)
*  gender of victim (male, female)
*  race and gender of victim (white male,
   black male, and so on)
*  weapon used(gun, knife, other weapon)

Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS)

Data available from LEMAS describe the
organization and administration of large
police and sheriffs' departments. The 
1997 and 1999 LEMAS data available are 
for all 49 State law enforcement agencies 
and local agencies with 100 or more sworn
officers and 50 or more uniformed officers
assigned to respond to calls for service
(about 650 agencies).  You can get an
agency profile or tables with additional
details on one or more agencies.

Special topics

Reentry Trends in the United States
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/reentry.htm

In October 2002 this new section was
added to the BJS website. It summarizes
the latest national data concerning
inmates returning to the community after
serving time in State or Federal prison. 
Reentry Trends in the United States is
based on information from 12 statistical
publications covering 6 different BJS data
collections.  As new data become available, 
the site will be updated.

This section provides data on --
*  State reentry trends --
*  Growth in prison and parole populations
*  Releases from prison
*  Entries to parole
*  Success rates for parolees
*  Recidivism
*  Characteristics of releases
*  Federal reentry trends --
*  Supervised release

Homicide trends in the United States
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm

This section of the BJS website contains
over 50 charts that describe homicide
patterns and trends in the United States
since 1976.  Homicide is of interest not
only because of its severity but also
because it is a fairly reliable barometer 
of all violent crime. At a national level, 
no other crime is measured as accurately 
and precisely.  

All charts, tables, and other information
have been updated with the 2000 data
from the Supplementary Homicide Reports
and the Law Enforcement Officers Killed
and Assaulted. Tables are provided that
contain the values used in the graphics 
as well as the numbers on which the 
percentages and rates are based. 
Spreadsheets of the data used are also 
provided. 

The data on this site may differ slightly
from previously published figures because
of updates to the data files after
publication and because of the imputation
methods used.

-------------------------------------
To ease printing for Homicide Trends in
the United States (NCJ 185988) and
Reentry Trends in the United States(NCJ
197334), a consolidated version in
portable document format(pdf)is provided.  
Also, a paper reproduction of the site 
can be ordered from NCJRS. Use the NCJ 
number when ordering.
-----------------------------------------

Updated sections

Key Crime & Justice Facts at a Glance
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/glance.htm

Key Facts at a Glance presents trends in
crime and justice in 35 charts that are
updated as new data become available. A
complete list of the charts in Key Facts 
at a Glance, including the date of the most
recent update, is in Appendix 1. 

Small versions of the charts (thumbnails)
and brief statements of findings are
presented. Click on the thumbnail and you
will go to a page that contains a full-sized
version of the chart and additional
information about the data and findings. 
Click on the full-sized version of the chart
and a table with the data used in the chart
will appear.  Also, spreadsheets with the
chart data can be saved to your hard drive
and imported into most spreadsheet,
charting, and word processing programs.

In addition, an electronic file is available
that contains full-sized color versions of
selected charts suitable for overheads or
handouts.  This file is updated at the same
time the charts are updated on the
website.

Topics that are covered in Key facts at a
Glance are --

*  Crime trends
*  Violent crime
*  Property crime
*  Crime victim characteristics
*  Arrests
*  Trends in Federal investigations and
   prosecutions
*  Trends in felony convictions in State
   courts
*  Correction trends including  capital
   punishment trends
*  Demographic trends in correction
   populations, by gender and race
*  Demographic trends in jail populations,
   by age, gender, and race
*  Expenditure trends

Paper versions of these charts are
available from the BJS Clearinghouse. 
Please reference NCJ 170087 when
ordering.

Drugs & Crime Facts
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dcf/contents.htm

This section of the BJS website is an
updated web version of the publication
Drugs and Crime Facts, 1994. Statistics
on drug-related crimes, law enforcement,
courts, corrections, drug use, and public
opinion are summarized in an easy to use
format. Data from BJS series as well as
other government sources provide an
online overview of drugs and crime in the
United States.

Drugs & Crime Facts has been updated
with information from 22 statistical
publications issued since its launch in 
May 1999. Links to the source materials 
for each entry are provided for users 
seeking more detail. As new data become
available, the site is updated and
enhanced.  Following is a listing of
agencies that contribute information to
update this site:

Department of Justice
*  Bureau of Justice Statistics.
*  National Institute of Justice
*  Office of Juvenile Justice and
   Delinquency Prevention
*  Federal Bureau of Investigation
*  U.S. Sentencing Commission
 
Executive Office of the President
*  Office of National Drug Control Policy

Department of Health and Human
Services
*  National Center on Addiction and Substance
   Abuse
*  Substance Abuse and Mental Services
   Administration (SAMSHA)
*  U.S. Department of Health and Human
   Services National Institute on Drug Abuse

To ease printing, a consolidated version of
all of these pages in Drugs & Crime Facts
is provided.  Also, a paper reproduction of
the site can be ordered from NCJRS.  Use
NCJ 165148 when ordering.

Other electronic materials and
publications from the BJS website

Electronic releases

Tables from various BJS series which
were printed in the past are now being
offered exclusively online.  All tables 
are available in spreadsheet format, and
several are also presented in portable
document format (pdf). Collections of
spreadsheets are archived in zip files to
facilitate downloading. The following is 
a list of recent electronic releases by 
topic:

Corrections
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm

National Corrections Reporting Program
 Time served in State prisons
    1998  NCJ  195300
    1999  NCJ  193210
 Sentence length of State prisoners
    1998  NCJ  195301
    1999  NCJ  193211
 
 Most serious offense of State prisoners
    1998  NCJ  195303
    1999  NCJ  193212
 
Probation and Parole in the United States
    1999  NCJ  183508
    2000  NCJ  188208

Correctional Populations in the United
States  NCJ  192929

Expenditure & employment
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/eande.htm

Justice Expenditure and Employment 
Extracts 
    1997  NCJ  185672
    1998  NCJ  190641
    1999  NCJ  190642

Courts & sentencing
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/stssent.htm

State Court Sentencing of Convicted 
Felons, 1998  NCJ  190637

Crime & victims
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cvict.htm

Criminal Victimization in United States:
    1996  NCJ  174445
    1997  NCJ  174446
    1998  NCJ  181585
    1999  NCJ  184938
    2000  NCJ  188290
 
Users who do not have Internet access
can order the spreadsheets on diskette
from the BJS Clearinghouse. Please use
the NCJ number to order.

Survey questionnaires
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/quest.htm

Most of BJS publications are developed
through data gathered from BJS' surveys. 
A description of these surveys and data
series can be found under the topical
references on BJS home page. Links to
many of the questionnaires are available
on the topical pages with the survey
descriptions and on the questionnaire
page. Following is a list of the
questionnaires, added since the last
update.  

Crime and victims  
 National Crime Victimization Survey 
*  NCVS Survey instrument
*  NCVS Crime Incident Report
*  Police Public Contact Survey: A
   Supplement to the NCVS 
 The NCVS Survey instrument and Crime
 Incident Report used to interview
 Spanish speaking respondents.
 
Corrections
 2000 Probation Data Survey
 2000 Parole Data Survey
 
Law enforcement
 1999 Sample Survey of Law Enforcement
 Agencies (CJ-44)
 2000 Law Enforcement Managment and 
 Administrative Statistics (CJ-38L)2000
 Census of State and Local Law
 Enforcement Agencies (CJ-38S)  2001
 State Police Traffic Stop Data  
 Collection Procedures (SSP-1)
 2001 National Study of DNA
 Laboratories
 
Prosecution
 2001 National Survey of Prosecutors
 
Courts and sentencing
  2002 National Survey of Indigent
   Defense Systems
   * Program Survey
   * County Survey

Spreadsheets
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dtdata.htm

Crime & Justice Electronic Data Abstracts
(CJEDA) are a series of spreadsheets that
contain data from a wide variety of
published sources, usually by jurisdiction
and over time. You can use these
spreadsheets to find the answer to a
particular question, include the data in
other analyses, or create your own graphs
or maps. These spreadsheets are updated as 
new data become available. A complete list 
of spreadsheet updates is available in 
Appendix 2.

To allow you to find what you want, these
spreadsheets are indexed in two ways: by
topic (Crime and arrest data, Criminal
justice data, Corrections data,
Demographic data) and by jurisdiction
level (National, Federal, State, County,
City).

You can download these spreadsheets to
your computer and open or import them
into most spreadsheet, charting, and word
processing programs. Most of these files
are in .wk1 format. (The MIME type for
these files is application/spreadsheet and
the file extension is wk1.) Many browsers
can be configured to automatically launch
a spreadsheet program to display these
files. Consult the documentation of your
browser for specific instructions. 

A few of the holdings are a collection of 
files that are archived into one .zip file 
to facilitate transfer from the Internet.  
Additional help to unzip these files is 
available at http:/www.info-zip.org/pub/info
zip. If you do not have Internet access you 
can order them on diskette from the BJS
Clearinghouse. See page 8 for the ordering 
process.

Spreadsheets that support 
publications

BJS also provides data from the tables 
of most BJS publications in spreadsheet
format. Over 4,000 spreadsheets are
available on the website. In many
instances these files include not only 
the published tables but also additional 
detail used to calculate published rates 
or percentages and the formulas used. You
can use these spreadsheets to include the
data in other analyses, create your own
graphs or maps, or in some instances, view 
details that are not in the published
report.

For details on how to access these files,
see the description on how to download
spreadsheets in the section above.

Users who do not have Internet access
can order the spreadsheets on diskette
from the BJS Clearinghouse. Please use
the NCJ number of the publication to
order.

New additions

BJS Data Quality Guidelines
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/
dataquality.htm

The Office of Management and Budget
(OMB)required Federal agencies subject
to the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C.
Chapter 35)to develop and publish their
own information quality guidelines and
provide the public with administrative
means for requesting corrections to
disseminated information. The BJS
guidelines were finalized in October 2002. 

They include a description of policies and
procedures BJS follows to ensure data
quality.
 
BJS Statistical Principles and 
Practices & BJS Strategic Plan 
FY 2003-2004 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/principles.htm

A unit of the U.S. Department of Justice,
BJS has as its principal function to compile
and analyze data and to disseminate
information for statistical purposes. This
page lists the principles and practices
followed by BJS.

Also available from this page is the Bureau
of Justice Statistics Strategic Plan FY
2003-2004. This report describes BJS's
mission, planned activities, and associated
outcome measures for FY 2003 and FY
2004.  

------------------------------------------
BJS partners roll out new web capabilities

Justice Research and Statistics
Association (JRSA) www.jrsa.org

This website features an improved navigation
system, incorporating links to contact
information, a site map, and an information
request form on every page. There are also
a search box at the top of every page and a
copyright statement and address information
at the bottom of every page. The main page
offers prominent sections listing current
events/projects and recent publications, 
as well as direct links to the Statistical 
Analysis Centers page and the Infobase of 
State Activities & Research.

The JRSA website has been enhanced
visually. The main page features more
color and graphics, making it easier to
distinguish different sections.

The web site was designed to maintain a
consistent visual look regardless of the
setup of a particular visitor's computer. 
This was accomplished through a graphics-
based navigation menu both on the left 
side and at the top of the page.   

Many of the graphic-based changes are
based on recent research related to web-
site user behavior and preferences;
despite the increased use of graphics, the
JRSA website remains accessible to the
visually impaired.

National Archive of Criminal Justice
Data (NACJD)
www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/index.html

In October 2002 NACJD implemented a
redesigned version of its website.  The
new site improves content and navigation
and provides detailed resource guides to
facilitate the use of some of the more
complex data collections. Users can now
search for data collections using justice
topic keywords, study titles, principal
investigators' names, and ICPSR study
numbers. They can use the database of
bibliographic citations that link to 
published reports and statistics from 
other data collections at NACJD. They can 
also search a list of recent BJS publications,
link to the publications, and download the
data.

Resource guides provide the following:
*  SPSS programming code that facilitates
   reproduction of statistics contained 
   in BJS reports
*  information about funding sources for
   the support of secondary analysis of
   justice data
*  data sets that can be analyzed on-line
   without downloading to a personal
   computer, using enhanced variable
   transformation capabilities and regression
   analysis.

Federal Justice Statistics Resource
Center (FJSRC)
http://fjsrc.urban.org/

This website, created by the Urban Institute,
provides online access to BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database,
which contains information about suspects
and defendants processed in the Federal
criminal justice system. The FJSP uses data
obtained from Federal agencies to compile
comprehensive information describing
defendants from each stage of Federal
criminal case processing. Since the last
update, annual data for 1997- 2001 have
been made available online.
-----------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
JUSTINFO

The Bureau of Justice Statistics and other
agencies within the Office of Justice
Programs announce new releases in
JUSTINFO, the electronic newsletter from
the National Criminal Justice Reference
Service. To automatically receive this
biweekly newsletter, subscribe to
JUSTINFO at--
www.ncjrs.org/justinfo/index.htm.
------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical arm of the U.S. Department of
Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is the
director. Priscilla Middleton wrote this
report, under the supervision of Marianne
Zawitz. Lara Reynolds and Ida Hines
provided statistical assistance. Tom
Hester edited this report and Jayne
Robinson administered final production.

December 2002, NCJ 187735
-----------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
To order these materials  --

Contact the Bureau of Justice Statistics
Clearinghouse to request information or to
order publications and products. If you do
not have Internet access, these materials
can be obtained by calling the National
Criminal Justice Reference Service
(1-800-732-3277).  Some are available
only in electronic form because they 
are intended to be used on computers.

Internet: 
www.ncjrs.org/statordr.htm
Mail:  BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
    P.O. Box 6000
    Annapolis Junction, MD 
    20701
Fax: 1-410-792-4358
Phone: 1-800-732-3277

*  Paper reproductions: - 25 pages and
below $10.00 - above 25 pages $15.00.
--------------------------------------------


End of file
12/16/02 ih
