U.S. Department of Justice                            
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

June 2011, NCJ 234085

Hate Crime, 2003-2009

Lynn Langton and Michael Planty, BJS Statisticians

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=1760

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=72
    
-----------------------------------------------------------   
       
From 2003 to 2009, an annual average of 195,000 hate crime
victimizations occurred each year against persons age 12 or
older residing in the United States, according to the
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The 148,400
overall hate crime victimizations that occurred in 2009
represent a decline from 2003 when residents experienced
239,400 hate crime victimizations. During the period, the
number and rate of violent hate crime victimizations also
declined. The rate of violent hate crime declined from
0.8 violent hate crime victimizations per 1,000 persons age
12 or older in 2003 to 0.5 per 1,000 in 2009 (figure 1).
Nearly 90% of the hate crime victimizations occurring during
the 7-year period were perceived to be racially or ethnically
motivated.

The 1990 Hate Crime Statistics Act (P.L. 101-275) defines
bias-motivated or hate crimes as "crimes that manifest
evidence of prejudice based on race, religion, sexual
orientation, or ethnicity." The law has since been amended
twice: once in 1994 to include crimes motivated by bias
against persons with disabilities, and in late 2009 to
include crimes of prejudice based on gender or gender
identity. ***FOOTNOTE 1 The NCVS has collected
information about hate crime victimizations motivated by
gender bias since 2003. This report excludes gender-based
hate crimes to allow for comparability with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
and to maintain consistency with the legal definition
of hate crime during the period of analysis***. 

-------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* From 2003 to 2009, the rate of violent hate crime
victimizations in the United States decreased from 
0.8 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to 0.5 per 1,000. 
From 2003 to 2009, hate crime victimizations accounted for
less than 1% of the total victimizations captured by the
NCVS.

* In nearly 90% of hate crime victimizations occurring
between 2003 and 2009, the victim suspected the offender was
motivated by racial or ethnic prejudice or both.

* More than 4 in 5 hate crime victimizations involved
violence; about 23% were serious violent crimes.

* In about 37% of violent hate crimes the offender knew the
victim; in violent nonhate crimes, half of all victims knew
the offender.

* Police were notified of fewer than half (45%) of all hate
crime victimizations.

* Eight hate crime homicides (murders/non-negligent
manslaughters) occurred in 2009. 

* From 2003 to 2009, no differences were found between hate
and nonhate crime in the percentage of violent victimizations
involving a weapon or causing injury to the victim.    

* The majority of violent hate crimes were interracial while
the majority of nonhate violent crimes were intraracial.

* Fewer than 1 in 10 hate crime victims stated that the
offender left hate symbols at the crime scene; nearly all
hate crime victims said that the offender used hate language.
-----------------------------------------------------------

The NCVS and UCR are the two annual sources of information
that describe hate crime in the United States.  This report
presents data on the characteristics of hate crimes and hate
crime victims using both of these sources, which present
similar pictures of the overall trends in and     
characteristics of hate crime victimizations. Unless
otherwise noted, the information in this report detailing
incident and victim characteristics is  primarily from the
NCVS. 

Throughout this report, the terms hate crime and
bias-motivated crime are used interchangeably and include
violent or property offenses motivated by prejudice against a
victim's race, religion, sexual orientation, ethnicity, or
disability. The NCVS collects data from the victims about the
offenders' motivation for the hate crime. The survey measures
bias motivated by the offender's assumption that the victim
belonged to or was associated with a group largely identified
by these characteristics. 

Number and rate of hate crime victimizations declined in
recent years

A hate crime victimization refers to a single victim or
household thatexperienced a criminal incident suspected to be
motivated by hate. For violent crimes (rape or sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) and
for personal larceny, the count of hate crime victimizations
is the number of individuals who experienced a violent hate
crime. For crimes against households (burglary, theft, and
motor vehicle theft), each household affected by a hate crime
is counted as a single victimization. 

Overall the number of hate crime victimizations was lower in
2009 than 2003-down from 239,400 victimizations to 148,400
(table 1). A similar declined occurred in violent hate crime
victimizations as well. 

---------------------------------------------------
Measuring hate crime using the National Crime Victimization
Survey and Uniform Crime Reports

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a survey of
a nationally representative sample of persons age 12 or older
in U.S. households. Each year victim self-reports capture
information about the number and characteristics of
victimizations, both reported and not reported to law
enforcement. Hate-related victimizations are based on
victims' suspicion of the offenders' motivation. However, the
NCVS definition requires that victims' suspicions be
corroborated by at least one type of evidence that hate was
the motivation, such as offenders' use of hate language, hate
symbols left at the scene, or the police investigators'
confirmation that a hate crime occurred.

Imputing offenders' motives is difficult. Victims, witnesses,
or police officers may misinterpret symbols or words. The
NCVS provides a measure of what victims describe as hate
crimes, but it cannot directly interpret the offenders'
intent.

The FBI's Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) Hate Crime Statistics
Program collects information about hate or bias-motivated
incidents, offenses, and offenders reported and classified by
law enforcement agencies each year. In 2009, the program
included 14,422 participating law enforcement agencies
representing 90.9 percent of the nation's population. These
agencies provided 1 to 12 months of data about bias-motivated
crime.

The primary differences between the UCR and NCVS programs
relate to victim reporting to the police and how police
process and classify incidents as hate or bias-motivated.

* The NCVS captures incidents and victimizations whether 
they were reported to law enforcement agencies. About 45% of
NCVS respondents who were victims of hate crime said that the
police were notified about the crime.

* NCVS hate-motivated incidents are defined by the victim and
the presence of crime scene evidence. They include incidents
that may not be founded or recorded by police investigations
as a hate-motivated incident.

* Unlike the NCVS, the UCR captures offenses against all
individuals, regardless of age, and against organizations,
institutions, schools, churches, and businesses. The UCR also
captures hate crime homicides, which are excluded from the
NCVS. 

The NCVS estimates an annual average of 169,000 violent hate
crime victimizations per year. When the UCR data are
restricted to the types of violent crimes collected through
the NCVS (rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple
assault), the UCR shows an average of 2,900 hate crime
victims known to police.  The large discrepancy can be
accounted for in part by determining that 54% of victims in
the NCVS did not report their crimes to the police, 12%
stated that a complaint was signed, and 7% received
confirmation from the police investigators that the crime was
a hate crime. Once these factors are considered, the UCR
estimate is no longer statistically different from the NCVS
estimate due to the relatively large standard error
associated with the NCVS estimate.
---------------------------------------------------

From 2003 through 2009, hate crime victimizations accounted
for less than 1% of the total victimizations captured by the
NCVS. Violent hate crime victimizations accounted for an
average of 3.1% of all violent victimizations.

From 2003 to 2009 the rate of violent hate crime
victimizations declined by 37%

From 2003 to 2009, persons age 12 or older experienced an
annual average of about 194,800 hate crime victimizations and
179,300 hate crimeincidents (table 2). Incidents are
distinguished from victimizations in that one criminal
incident may have multiple victims or victimizations. Of the
hate crime victims, nearly 169,000 (87%) were persons who
experienced violent hate crime victimization, and about
24,400 (13%) were households victimized by bias-motivated
property crimes. 

On average, an annual rate of 0.7 victimizations per 1,000
persons age 12 or older were victims of a violent hate crime.
An annual rate of 0.2 per 1,000 households experienced a
hate-related property crime. The rate of both violent and
property hate crime victimizations declined from 2003 to
2009. 

Offender's language was evidence that the crime was motivated
by hate in most hate crime victimizations

For a crime to be classified as a hate crime in the NCVS, the
victim must report at least one of three types of evidence
that the act was motivated by hate: the offender used hate
language, the offender left behind hate symbols, or police
investigators confirmed that the incident was hate crime.
Almost all hate crime victims cited the offenders' use of
hate language as evidence that the crime was motivated by
hate. From 2003 to 2009, about 98% of all hate crimes and 99%
of violent hate crimes involved hate language (table
3). Fewer than 1 in 10 victims reported that the offender
left hate symbols at the scene of the crime (9%) or that
police investigators confirmed that the crime was hate based
(7%). 

Victims suspected that more than half of hate crime
victimizations were motivated by racial bias

The NCVS asks hate crime victims the types of bias they
suspect motivated the crime. From 2003 to 2009, about 58% of
hate crime victimizations were suspected to be motivated by
racial bias (figure 2). About a third of victims suspected
they were targeted because of their ethnicity (30%), and a
quarter said it was because of their associations with
persons having particular characteristics (25%). Victims in
about 1 in 10 hate crimes suspected the motivation to be bias
against the victim's disability.

In 2009 a smaller percentage of hate crime victims suspected
they were targeted because of their associations with persons
having particular characteristics, or because of the
offender's perception of their characteristics or religious
beliefs, than in 2003 (not shown in table). The percentage of
hate crimes in which victims suspected motivation of sexual
orientation bias was slightly greater in 2009 than in 2003
(not shown in table).  

More than 4 in 5 hate crime victimizations involved violence

Overall, nearly 87% of hate crimes involved violence, and
about 23% were serious violent crimes (rape/sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault) (table 4). In contrast, about
23% of all nonhate crimes involved violence with about 8%
classified as serious violent crimes. 

From 2003 to 2009, the majority of hate crimes were simple
assaults (64%). The next most common type of hate crime was
aggravated assault (16%), followed by theft (8%), robbery
(6%), and burglary (5%). No differences were found between
hate and nonhate crime in the presence of a weapon or
injuries suffered.

From 2003 through 2009, no measurable difference was detected
in the percentage of offenders who had a weapon in hate and
nonhate crime victimizations. About 20% of violent hate crime
victims reported that the offender had a weapon (table 5). 

More than three-quarters of violent hate crime victims (77%)
did not suffer from any injuries during the event. About 20%
suffered minor injuries, such as bruises and cuts, and 3%
suffered serious injuries such as broken bones, internal
injuries, or stabbing or gunshot wounds.  

Hate crimes were less likely than nonhate crimes to occur at
or near the victim's home 

From 2003 through 2009, about a third of hate crimes (32%)
occurred at or near a victim's home while more than half
(57%) of nonhate crime victimizations took place at or around
the victim's home (table 6). A greater percentage of hate
crime victims (18%) than nonhate crime victims (9%) said that
the victimization occurred at school. 

Police were notified of  fewer than half of hate crimes 

From 2003 to 2009, overall about 45% of all hate crime
victimizations captured in the NCVS were reported to the
police (table 7). Of those, 26% were reported by the victim,
13% by someone else, and 6% in some other way (for example,
police were present at the scene when the crime
occurred). More than half (54%) of violent hate crime
victimizations that resulted in an injury were reported to
the police. 

Victims signed formal complaints against the offender in 12%
of violent hate crimes and 19% of violent hate crimes that
resulted in injury. A lower percentage of victims of violent
hate crime (8%) reported an arrest in conjunction with the
crime than victims of nonhate violent crime (14%).

Generally, victims targeted because of a disability were
least likely to report the hate crime to police

With one exception, there was little variation in the
percentage of hate crime victimizations reported to the
police, regardless of the suspected motivation behind the
hate crime (figure 3). The exception involved victims who
were targeted because of a disability. A lower percentage of
hate crime victimizations believed to be motivated by
disability bias were reported to the police (33%), than hate
crimes motivated by ethnic bias (51%), bias against the
victim's associations (47%), or bias against perceived
characteristics of the victim (46%). 

Approximately a third of hate crime victimizations not
reported to the police was handled another way

Victims of the approximately 54% of hate crime victimizations
not reported to the police offered a variety of reasons for
not reporting. About 1 in 3 victims who did not report the
hate crime to the police handled the victimization in another
way, such as privately or through a non-law enforcement
official, like an apartment manager or school official (table
8). For about 19% of hate crimes not reported to the police,
the victim stated that the crime was not important enough to
report. Approximately 15% of hate crime victims who did not
report the crime believed that the police would not want to
be bothered or to get involved, would be inefficient and
ineffective, or would cause trouble for the victim.

Victims of two or more races had the highest rate of violent
hate crime victimizations

From 2003 to 2009, the greatest percentage of hate crime
victimizations were against white, non-Hispanic individuals
(table 9). However, persons of two or more races (4.0 per
1,000 age 12 or older) had the highest rate of hate crime
violent victimizations. Persons of more than one race also
had the highest rate of violent nonhate crime  victimizations
(64.3 per 1,000), compared to persons in other racial and
ethnic categories. 

For both hate and nonhate violent crime victimizations,
persons ages 12 through 24 had a higher rate of victimization
than persons age 50 or older. Also for both categories of
crime, persons in households with an income of less than
$25,000 had a higher rate of violent victimization than
persons in households with an income of $50,000 or more.
Males (0.9 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) experienced a
higher rate of violent hate crime victimizations than females
(0.5 per 1,000).

Regardless of sex or race/Hispanic origin, more than half of
victims suspected the victimization to be motivated by racial
bias

Among all racial and ethnic groups, victims suspected racial
or ethnic bias to be the motivation in the majority of
victimizations (table 10). A greater percentage of Hispanic
hate crime victims than white non-Hispanic and black
non-Hispanic victims suspected the hate crime to be motivated
by ethnic bias. 

From 2003 to 2009, with the exception of hate crimes
motivated by disability bias, no differences were detected
between the types of bias motivating hate crime
victimizations against males versus females (table
11). The majority of men (62%) and women (52%) perceived that
racial bias  motivated the hate crime. 

Victims did not know the offender in more than half of
violent hate crime victimizations 

The NCVS asks victims of violent crime about the
characteristics of the offender. From 2003 to 2009, a lower
percentage of victims of violent hate crime (64%) reported
victimization by a single offender than victims of
nonhate violent crimes (78%) (table 12). A greater percentage
of victims of violent hate crime (15%) reported victimization
by a group of four or more offenders than victims of violent
nonhate crimes (6%).

Across hate crime and other crimes, a greater percentage of
offenders were males than females, and a greater percentage
were white than any other race. A higher percentage of
violent hate crime victimizations (16%) involved offenders
from more than one age group than nonhate crime violent
victimizations (8%). The percentage of offenders age 18 to 29
was slightly lower in violent hate crime (24%) than in
nonhate crime violent victimizations (30%). Similar
percentages of hate and nonhate crime violent victimizations
involved offenders that were age 17 or younger and age 30 or
older.  

Victims in about 54% of violent hate crime victimizations
reported that the offender was a stranger, compared to 42% of
nonhate crime victims. A greater percentage of hate crime
victims (12%) than nonhate crime victims (6%) believed that
the offender was a gang member. Nearly 30% of victims
involved in hate and nonhate crime violent victimizations
thought that the offender was drunk or on drugs when the
crime was committed.

The majority of violent hate crimes were interracial while
the majority of nonhate violent crimes were intraracial

From 2003 to 2009, 4 in 10 violent hate crimes against white
victims involved a white offender, and 2 in 10 violent hate
crimes against black victims involved a black offender (table
13). In comparison, more than 7 in 10 violent crimes against
white victims involving no apparent bias were perpetrated by
white offenders, and more than 8 in 10 violent nonhate
crimes against black victims were perpetrated by black
offenders. Nearly 70% of Hispanic victims of violent hate
crime were victimized by white offenders. The NCVS does not
allow for the identification of an offender's ethnicity. 

Based on police records hate crime incidents have recently
declined after remaining relatively stable

In 2009, according to the FBI's UCR hate crime data
collection, 2,034 law enforcement agencies reported 6,604
hate crime incidents involving 8,336 victims. The remaining
85.9% of agencies that participated in the Hate Crime
Statistics Program reported that no hate crimes occurred in
their jurisdictions (not shown in a table). 

Similar to the NCVS, the UCR showed a decline in the number
of hate crime victimizations known to the police in 2009,
compared to 2003. The number of hate crime victimizations
known to the police declined by about 9%, from 9,100 hate
crime victimizations in 2003 to 8,300 in 2009 (figure
4). 

In more than half of hate crime victimizations known to
police in the UCR, offenders targeted victims because of
racial bias against the victim

Similar to NCVS, more than 50% of hate crime victims known to
the police in the UCR were targeted because of an offender's
racial bias (table 14). A similar percentage of hate crime
victims were targeted because of religious bias and sexual
orientation in the UCR data when compared to the NCVS. UCR
estimates on hate crimes motivated by the victim's disability
differed from findings based on the NCVS. The UCR identified
about 1% of hate crime victimizations as motivated by bias
against a victim's disability, while the NCVS identified
disability bias to be the motivation for 8% of hate crimes
that were reported to the police. 

From 2003 to 2009, an average of seven hate crime homicides
occurred each year

According to the UCR Hate Crime Reporting Program, 8 people
were victims of hate crime homicides (murder/non-negligent
manslaughter) in 2009. Since a high of 14 homicides in 2003,
the number of hate crime homicides has ranged between 3 and 9
homicides each year between 2004 and 2009. This was an
average of 7 homicides per year.

Property crimes accounted for 40% of hate crimes recorded in
the UCR and 12% in the NCVS 

From 2003 to 2009, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and
simple assault accounted for 31% of hate crimes reported to
the UCR, compared to about 88% of hate crimes in the NCVS
that were reported to the police. Intimidation, a crime
classification not recognized in the NCVS, accounted
for 28% of the UCR hate crime. About 40% of hate crime
victimizations collected by the UCR were property crimes,
such as burglary, theft, and vandalism, with vandalism
accounting for about 86% of the UCR's hate crimes against
property.***FOOTNOTE 2 Vandalism is not one of the major
offense categories in the NCVS and information about hate
crime vandalism was not collected by the NCVS after 2008. The
estimates of vandalism from the NCVS did not meet reporting
standards and are not shown***.

Methodology

National Crime Victimization Survey

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal crimes, whether or not reported to
the police, against persons age 12 or older in a
nationally representative sample of household in the United
States. Survey results are based on data gathered from
residents living throughout the United States, including
persons living in group quarters, such as dormitories,
rooming houses, and religious group dwellings. The survey
excludes personnel living in military barracks and persons
living in institutional settings, such as correctional or
hospital facilities. For more detail, see the Survey
Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the United
States, 2007 at http://www.bjs.gov. Victim self-reports
capture information about the number and characteristics of
victimizations reported and not reported to law enforcement
each year. Hate crime victimizations are based on victims'
perception of the offenders' motivations. Victims provide
evidence of the hate motivation by words, symbols, and
actions used by the offenders.

Technical Notes

Standard error computations

Anytime national estimates are derived from a sample rather
than the entire population, as is the case with the NCVS,
caution is warranted when drawing conclusions about the size
of one population estimate in comparison to another or about
whether a time series of population estimates is changing.
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates
based on responses from a sample of the population each have
some degree of sampling error. The sampling error, or margin
of error, of an estimate depends on several factors,
including the amount of variation in the responses, the size
and representativeness of the sample, and the size of the
subgroup for which the estimate is computed. 

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one
estimate to the next. In general, a smaller standard error
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than
an estimate with a higher standard error. Estimates with
relatively large standard errors are associated with less
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with
caution. 

The coefficient of variation (CV) is a measure of an
estimate's reliability. The CV is the ratio of the standard
error to the estimate. In this report, the CV was calculated
for all estimates. In cases where the CV was greater than
50% or the estimate was based on 10 or fewer sample cases,
the estimate was noted with a "!" symbol. (Interpret data
with caution; estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or
coefficient of variation is greater than 50%.) 

A statistical test is used to determine whether differences
in means or percentages are statistically significant once
sampling error is taken into account. Comparisons made in the
text were tested for statistical significance at the p < .05
level to ensure that the differences were larger than might
be expected due to sampling variation. Significance testing
calculations were conducted at BJS using statistical programs
developed specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Census
Bureau. These programs take into consideration many aspects
of the complex NCVS sample design when calculating estimates.
Standard errors for average annual estimates were calculated
based on the ratio of the sums of victimizations and
respondents across years. 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related
to one another and to other variables not included in the
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences
based on the results presented.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 impacted the total
violent crime estimates for that year to an extent that they
were considered to be not comparable to estimates from other
years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS
conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau have found a
high degree of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, and
2009 are consistent with and comparable to those for 2005 and
previous years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006
(December 2007), Criminal Victimization, 2007 (December
2008), Criminal Victimization, 2008 (September 2009), and
Criminal Victimization, 2009 (October 2010) are
available on the BJS website at http://www.bjs.gov.

Uniform Crime Reports

The UCR Hate Crime Statistics Program captures information
about the types of bias that motivate hate crimes, the nature
of the offenses, and some information about the victims and
offenders by attaching the collection of hate crime
statistics to the established UCR data collection procedures.
The hate crime data presented here comprise a subset of
information that law enforcement agencies submit to the UCR
Program.***FOOTNOTE 3 This section references the UCR Hate
Crime website,
http://ww2.fbi.gov/ucr/hc2009/abouthcs.html***.
 
Incidents and offenses--Crimes reported to the FBI involve
those motivated by biases based on race, religion, sexual
orientation, ethnicity/national origin, and disability. The
2010 UCR data collection will allow the reporting of crimes
motivated by gender and gender identity bias, as well as
crimes committed by and directed against juveniles.

Victims--he victim of a hate crime may be an individual, 
business, institution, or society as a whole.

Offenders--Law enforcement specifies the number of offenders
and, when possible, the race of the offender or offenders as
a group.

Agencies that participated in the Hate Crime Statistics
Program in 2009 represented nearly 279 million inhabitants,
or 90.9% percent of the nation's population. Their
jurisdictions covered 49 states and the District of Columbia.

Hate crime legislation

On April 23, 1990, Congress passed the Hate Crime Statistics
Act, which requires the Attorney General to collect data
"about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based on
race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity." The
Attorney General delegated the responsibilities of developing
the procedures for implementing, collecting, and managing
hate crime data to the Director of the FBI, who in turn,
assigned the tasks to the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)
Program. Under the direction of the Attorney General and with
the cooperation and assistance of many local and state law
enforcement agencies, the UCR Program created a hate crime
data collection to comply with the congressional mandate.

Subsequent changes to hate crime data collection
In September 1994, lawmakers amended the Hate Crime
Statistics Act to include bias against persons with
disabilities by passing the Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act of 1994. The FBI started gathering data
for the additional bias type on January 1, 1997.

The Church Arson Prevention Act, which was signed into law in
July 1996, removed the sunset clause from the original
statute and mandated that the collection of hate crime data
become a permanent part of the UCR Program.

In 2009, Congress further amended the Hate Crime Statistics
Act by passing the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate
Crime Prevention Act. The amendment includes the collection
of data for crimes motivated by bias against a particular
gender and gender identity, as well as for crimes committed
by, and crimes directed against, juveniles. The FBI is
currently making plans to implement changes to collect these
data.

As Amended, 28 U.S.C.  534
"[Sec. 1.] (a) This Act may be cited as the 'Hate Crime
Statistics Act."

(b) (1) Under the authority of section 534 of title 28, United
States Code, the Attorney General shall acquire data, for
each calendar year, about crimes that manifest evidence of
prejudice based on race, religion, disability, sexual
orientation, or ethnicity, including where appropriate the
crimes of murder, non-negligent manslaughter; forcible rape;
aggravated assault, simple assault, intimidation; arson; and
destruction, damage or vandalism of property. 

(2) The Attorney General shall establish guidelines for the
collection of such data including the necessary evidence and
criteria that must be present for a finding of manifest
prejudice and procedures for carrying out the purposes of
this section.

(3) Nothing in this section creates a cause of action or a
right to bring an action, including an action based on
discrimination due to sexual orientation. As used in this
section, the term 'sexual orientation' means consensual
homosexuality or heterosexuality. This subsection does not
limit any existing cause of action or right to bring an
action, including any action under the Administrative
Procedure Act or the All Writs Act [5 USCS & 551 et seq. or
28 USCS & 1651].

(4) Data acquired under this section shall be used only for
research or statistical purposes and may not contain any
information that may reveal the identity of an individual
victim of a crime.

(5) The Attorney General shall publish an annual summary of
the data acquired under this section.

(c) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section
through fiscal year 2002.

Sec. 2. (a) Congress finds that-

(1) the American family life is the foundation of American
Society,

(2) Federal policy should encourage the well-being, financial
security, and health of the American family,

(3) schools should not de-emphasize the critical value of
American family life.

(b) Nothing in this Act shall be construed, nor shall any
funds appropriated to carry out the purpose of the Act be
used, to promote or encourage homosexuality." 

In 2009, the U.S. Congress further amended the Hate Crime
Statistics Act by passing the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd,
Jr. Hate Crime Prevention Act, Section 4708 of House
Resolution 2647. The amendment states:

 SEC. 4708. STATISTICS

(a) In General- Subsection (b)(1) of the first section of the
Hate Crime Statistics Act (28 U.S.C. 534 note) is amended by
inserting 'gender and gender identity,' after 'race'.

(b) Data- Subsection (b)(5) of the first section of the Hate
Crime Statistics Act (28 U.S.C. 534 note) is amended by
inserting,' including data about crimes committed by, and
crimes directed against, juveniles' after 'data acquired
under this section.' "


--------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov

-------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This Special report was written by Lynn Langton and Michael
Planty. Jennifer Truman verified the report.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report,and Jayne Robinson prepared the report
for final printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James. 

June 2011, NCJ 234085 

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the
website: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1760.

-----------------------------------------------------------

6/10/2011/JER/12:28pm