U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

National Criminal Victimization Survey and Uniform Crime Reporting

Hate Crime Reported by Victims and Police


November 2005, NCJ 209911


---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/hcrvp.htm
---------------------------------------------------------

By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician
              
-----------------------------------------
Highlights
              
A majority of hate crime victims identified 
race as the offenders' motivation
              
* Most hate crimes described by victims
accompanied violent crimes -- a rape or other
sexual assault, robbery, or assault (84%). 
The remaining 16% were associated with 
property crimes -- burglary or theft.  

* Victims reported a major violent crime 
-- a rape, robbery, or an assault in which 
a victim was injured or threatened with a 
weapon -- in a third of hate incidents.  

* In about half of hate crimes, the victim 
was threatened verbally or assaulted without 
either a weapon or an injury being involved.

* An estimated 3% of all violent crimes 
revealed to the NCVS by victims were 
perceived to be hate crimes.
    
* Annually from July 2000 through December
2003 about 22,000 households experienced
vandalism they thought was motivated by 
hate or bias.

* Approximately 44% of hate victimizations 
were reported to police. 

* When the victims themselves reported to 
police, they did so primarily to prevent 
the offender from committing further 
offenses(35%)and to obtain help from the 
police (33%). 

* In 41% of hate victimizations reported 
to police, law enforcement was at the 
scene within 10 minutes.

* Per capita rates of hate crime victimization
varied little by race or ethnicity: about 
0.9 per 1,000 whites, 0.7 per 1,000 blacks, 
and 0.9 per 1,000 Hispanics were reported to 
the National Crime Victimization Survey.

* Most likely to be offenders were men(79%) 
and strangers (51%). Two-thirds of violent 
hate victimizations involved a lone offender.
--------------------------------------

An annual average of 210,000 hate crime
victimizations occurred from July 2000 
through December 2003. During that period 
an average of 191,000 hate crime incidents 
involving one or more victims occurred 
annually. Victims also indicated that 
92,000 of these hate crime victimizations 
were reported to police. These estimates were 
derived from victim reports to the National 
Crime Victimization Survey(NCVS)of the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics(BJS).

As defined here, an ordinary crime becomes 
a hate crime when offenders choose a victim
because of some characteristic -- for example,
race, ethnicity, or religion -- and provide 
evidence that hate prompted them to commit 
the crime. Bias crime is another term for 
hate crime. Hate crimes that respondents 
report in the NCVS are based on victims' 
perceptions of why they became crime 
victims.

National data on hate crimes come from two
primary sources:

*  NCVS -- approximately 77,600 nationally
representative persons interviewed biannually
about their experiences with crime
*  the FBI Uniform Crime Reporting Program
(UCR) -- law enforcement agency reports to 
the FBI on crimes reported to police.

This BJS report uses data from the NCVS 
to provide information on hate crimes 
both reported and not reported to police 
and compares some of these findings to 
those reported by the FBI.

Hate crimes committed because of 
prejudice

The 1990 Hate Crime Statistics Act charged 
the U.S. Attorney General to "acquire 
data... about crimes that manifest evidence 
of prejudice based on race, religion, sexual 
orientation, or ethnicity, including, where 
appropriate, the crimes of murder, non-negligent 
manslaughter; forcible rape; aggravated assault, 
simple assault, intimidation; arson; and 
destruction, damage or vandalism of property." 
A 1994 amendment added the disabled to the list 
of groups to be tracked. 

The Attorney General delegated data collection 
of hate crimes principally to the FBI. They 
appended information on bias motivation to the 
UCR. This program includes both the Summary 
Reporting System and the National Incident-
Based Reporting System (NIBRS). 

In 1997 BJS and the U.S. Census Bureau, the
data collection agent for the NCVS, developed
questionnaire items to identify victims of 
hate crimes. The revised questions were fielded
beginning in July 2000. This report analyzes 
data from July 2000 through December 2003. 

Meeting the criteria established in the Hate 
Crime Statistics Act, the NCVS defines hate 
crimes as those incidents in which victims 
believe the offender selected them for a 
victimization because of one or more of 
their personal characteristics:
* race
* ethnicity
* religion
* sexual orientation
* disability.  

The definition also encompasses crime incidents
in which the offender perceives the victim as
belonging to or associated with a group largely
identified by one of these characteristics.

The NCVS definition requires that corroborating
evidence of hate motivation must be present at 
the incident:

* the offender used derogatory language
* the offender left hate symbols, or
* the police confirmed that a hate crime 
  had taken place.  

Imputing offenders' motives is difficult. In 
the NCVS definition, hate or bias motivation 
is inferred from the words and symbols used 
by the offender. This may or may not be an 
accurate way to evaluate whether the crime 
was a hate crime. Victims or even police 
officers may misinterpret the symbols or words. 
The NCVS provides a measure of what victims 
describe as hate-based crimes, but it cannot 
directly interpret the offenders' intent. 

The result is that estimates of the volume 
and rate of hate crime from the NCVS may not 
be consistent with other estimates, which may
measure incidence differently. The NCVS does
ensure a stable methodology for collecting the
information over time and across jurisdictions. 
The questionnaire emphasizes corroborating
information from the victim about the words 
or symbols that can be reasonably understood 
to represent offender bias.

Crimes reported to the NCVS -- sexual assaults,
robbery, assault, burglary, larceny, or 
vandalism –- with evidence of hatred toward any 
of these specific groups have been classified 
as crimes motivated by hate. The data for hate 
crimes from the NCVS include information about 
victims, offenders, and characteristics of 
crimes -- both crimes reported to police and 
crimes not reported to police.

Victims have reported an average 
of 191,000 hate crime incidents 
annually since 2000

Between July 2000 and December 31, 2003, 
an annual average of 191,000 hate crime 
incidents were estimated from victim reports 
to the NCVS. A hate crime incident may have 
more than one victim. Victimizations count 
one person or household affected by a criminal 
incident.  For violent crimes, the number of 
victimizations equals the number of persons 
involved. A crime against a household is 
assumed to involve a single victim-- the 
affected household. Annually 210,000
victimizations motivated by hatred or bias 
occurred between July 2000 and December 31, 
2003.  

Approximately 3% of all violent crimes 
measured by the NCVS were hate crimes. 
About 1 in every 500 property crimes were 
estimated to have been motivated by hate. 

Victims perceive race as the 
primary reason for hate crimes

Hate crimes are criminal offenses -- homicide,
sexual assault, robbery, simple and aggravated
assault, burglary, or theft -- in which victims
perceive at least one of the offender's
motivations to be prejudice. Victim race was 
the primary perceived offender motivation 
reported by victims for hate crimes. In half 
of hate crimes recorded by the NCVS, race was 
seen by hate crime victims as the underlying 
motivation. In 1 in 4 hate crimes, the victim's 
ethnic origin was viewed by the victim as the 
motivation for the crime.   
 
Victims also revealed to the NCVS that they
perceived the motive for about 3 in 10 hate 
crimes was the victim's association with 
persons who have certain characteristics, 
for example, a multiracial couple.

In about 1 in 6 incidents reported to the 
NCVS, sexual orientation was described by 
the victim to have been the basis for the 
crime. 

The victim's religion was mentioned in 
about 1 in 8 hate crimes, and the victim's 
disability, in about 1 in 9.

Over 4 in 5 NCVS hate crimes 
violent offenses

According to victim reports, hate crimes 
were more likely to be violent -- a sexual 
assault, robbery or simple or aggravated 
assault -- than crimes not associated with 
the characteristics of a hate crime. 
Approximately 84% of NCVS hate crimes and 
23% of non-hate crimes were violent
offenses.

-----------------------------------------
Almost all bias crime victims cited  
offenders' remarks as evidence for 
classifying the offense as a hate 
crime
    
Victims of hate crimes knew the crime 
they experienced was hate related because 
offenders made fun of them, made negative 
comments, used slang, hurtful words, or 
abusive language. About 99% of victims 
encountered hate-related language, 
irrespective of the offenders' motives.  
------------------------------------------- 

Hate crimes were also more likely to be 
among the most serious. In 38% of NCVS hate 
crimes, victims were raped, robbed, injured, 
or threatened with a weapon. Of those crime 
victimizations not based on hate of the 
victim, about 12% reached this level of 
seriousness.   

Hate crimes included a higher percentage of 
less serious violent crimes as well. In about 
46% of hate crimes and 12% of non-hate based 
NCVS crimes, victims were intimidated or 
assaulted without either an injury or having 
to face an offender with a weapon. 

Victims reported that about 13% of hate crime
victimizations and 63% of crimes in which hate
was not a motivation involved a motor vehicle 
theft or the anonymous theft of property or 
household goods.  

44% of hate crimes reported 
to police

A strength of the NCVS is the information 
provided by victims on their interactions 
with police after the crime. About 44% of 
hate crimes were reported to police. About 
a quarter of hate crimes were reported by 
the victim and a tenth by someone else -- 
another victim, a household member, or an
official such as a guard or school 
authority. 
 
Hate crime accompanying a violent crime and
violent offenses without a hate component 
were reported to police at the same rate
(44% of violent hate crimes and 49% of other 
violent crimes). The difference between hate 
related (22%)and non-hate related(28%)violent 
crimes reported by the victim was not 
statistically significant. 

In approximately 7 in 10 hate crimes reported 
to police, police were either at the scene or 
came after they were called. In the remaining
victimizations, the victim went to police, the 
police didn't come to the scene, or the police 
were informed some other way. All information 
came from the period between the crimes' 
occurrence and the NCVS interview.   

-------------------------------------------
Police confirmed 8% of hate 
victimizations 

Overall, 8% of hate crime victims reported 
to the NCVS that law enforcement determined 
the victimization to be bias related. 
According to victims, police validated 
approximately 1 in 5 hate crime 
victimizations that were reported to them as 
hate crimes.
--------------------------------------------

Victims reported that the police took action 
in 85% of hate crimes. In half of hate crimes 
reported to law enforcement, the police took 
a report of the crime. In 32% of hate crimes, 
the police questioned witnesses or suspects.

In a third of hate crimes, the victim or 
another household member signed a complaint. 
In about 19% of hate crimes, the police 
arrested someone for the offense.

Victims' self-reports indicated that police
responded to a violent hate motivated crime 
as they did to a non-hate based violent 
crime. In half of the reported victimizations, 
police took a report, in about a third, they 
questioned witnesses or suspects; in about 
a quarter, they made an arrest.

In both hate and non-biased violent crimes 
about a third of victims or other members 
of their household signed a complaint. 

Victims who reported hate crimes 
to police wanted to punish the 
offender and prevent further crimes

Victims of hate crime reported their experience
to police for a number of reasons. Among those
who called the police, about 35% said they
notified police to get the offender, that is, 
to prevent the offender from committing further
offenses, to punish the offend-er, or to catch 
the offender.  

About 33% of those reporting hate crime said 
they reported the incident to get help; they 
were trying to stop or prevent the incident 
from happening; or they needed help because of 
an injury or other problem. About 23% wanted to 
let the police know about the crime to either 
improve police surveillance or perform their 
civic duty. 

Victims of a violent hate crime who reported 
the crime to police expressed reasons similar 
to those of victims of other violent crimes -- 
they wanted the offender to be apprehended and 
they sought help.
    
4 in 10 who did not report hate 
crime to police preferred to handle 
it another way

Four in 10 victims who did not ensure that the 
hate crime was reported to police said they 
didn't report it because it was handled another 
way. For example, the crime was reported to 
another official or kept private. A quarter 
said the incident was not important enough to 
report because it was a minor crime, "kid stuff," 
or it was not clear the offender intended harm.

Victims who did not report violent crimes to 
police expressed similar reasons for their 
behavior, regardless of whether the offense 
had hate crime characteristics. Fully 4 in 
10 reported that they dealt with the violent 
crime another way. 

-----------------------------------------
1 in 10 victims of crime helped by 
an agency other than the police

Some victims received help from nonpolice
agencies. About 1 in 10 victims of all hate
crimes, victims of violent hate crime, and 
victims of violent crimes not involving 
hate or bias said that they received help 
from another government office or a private 
agency.
----------------------------------------

Rates of hate crime similar across 
genders, races, and ethnic groups

Generally, per capita rates of hate crime
victimization do not appear to vary based 
upon victim's gender, race, ethnicity, or 
educational attainment. However, young 
people; those never married, separated, 
or divorced; those with low incomes; and 
those living in urban areas did report 
experiencing hate crimes at higher rates.

Men and women were about equally likely to 
have experienced a hate or bias crime. 
Approximately 1.0 per 1,000 men and 0.8 per 
1,000 women indicated that they had been a 
victim of a hate crime.  

There were no significant differences in 
rates of hate crime vulnerability for racial 
or ethnic groups. Whites were victimized at 
a rate of 0.9 per 1,000, blacks at 0.7 per 
1,000, members of other races at 1.4 per 
1,000, Hispanics at 0.9 per 1,000, and non-
Hispanics at 0.9 per 1,000.

Young people reported hate crime victimization 
at rates higher than those of older persons. 
Those 17 or younger experienced about 1.9 
hate crimes per 1,000 persons, while those 50 
or older experienced 0.4 per 1,000 annually. 
  
Persons who lived in cities were more likely 
to be hate crime victims, compared to those 
living in suburbs or rural areas. About 1.3 
per 1,000 living in urban areas were victims 
annually, compared to 0.8 per 1,000 in 
suburban areas and 0.7 in rural places.

-------------------------------------------
About 1 in every 265 vandalized 
households considered the vandalism 
a hate crime

On an annual basis, an average of 5.9 
million households were vandalized from 
July 2000 through December 2003. 
Approximately 22,500 households, 0.4% 
of all those vandalized, showed evidence 
of hate motivation.

Approximately 54 per 1,000 households had
experienced vandalism.*  For 0.2 per 1,000 
households (2 per 10,000), the vandalism 
had the earmarks of a hate crime.
--------------------------------------------
                            
Motivations attributed by hate crime 
victims to offenders did not vary 
significantly for male and female victims 
and young and old. About 1 in 6 of both 
men and women who were victims of hate
crimes reported that they were 
victimized because of their sexual 
orientation. 

Among victims of hate crimes, half of both 
whites and blacks and three-quarters of 
those identified as Asian or American 
Indian said they were victimized because 
of their race. Three-quarters of Hispanic 
victims of hate crime said they were
victimized because of their ethnicity. The 
small numbers of sampled black hate crime 
victims limits analysis of the reasons they 
believe they were victimized.
                            
A third of hate crime victims 20 or younger 
and a quarter of those 21 or older said 
they were selected as victims because of 
the people with whom they associated.

Hate crime offenders generally 
acted alone and were strangers 
to their victim  

The NCVS has information on offenders who
committed crimes because the victim was
present, knew the offender, or learned 
something about the offender after the 
incident.

According to victim reports, crimes are 
generally committed by one offender. A sole 
offender committed about 68% of violent hate 
crimes. Hate crimes which accompanied a 
violent crime were more likely than violent 
crimes without hate characteristics to be 
carried out by two or more offenders(32.5% 
versus 18.5%).

Offenders are predominantly male. Approximately
79% of victims of a violent hate crime reported 
that at least one of the offenders was a man, 
as were 83% of offenders in violent crimes 
described as not being motivated by hate or 
bias.

A significantly higher percentage of victims 
of violent hate crimes than those reporting 
a non-hate related violent crime said the 
offenders were black -- about 38% of hate 
crime victims and 24% of victims reporting 
a non-hate related violent victimization.

While victims of violent hate crimes reported 
white and black offenders in close percentages 
(44% white and 38% black), a higher percentage 
of those who were victims of violent crimes not
related to hate reported having white rather 
than black offenders (62% white and 24% black).

About 26% of the offenders described by victims 
of violent hate crime and 33% of victims of 
non-hate related violent crime were 20 or 
younger, a nonsignificant difference.  

Fifty-two percent of victims of violent hate 
crime and 45% of victims of other violent 
crimes were victimized by strangers or 
persons they recognized only by sight. These 
numbers were not statistically different.

About a quarter of offenders committing hate 
or nonbias crimes used a weapon, for example, 
a firearm, knife or other sharp object, or a 
blunt instrument.

About the same percentage of victims of violent
hate crimes and victims of non-hate related 
violent crimes thought they were victimized 
by gang members (7% and 6%). 

Motivations attributed to male and female 
hate crime offenders were not significantly 
different.

When hate victims reported that the persons
committing the crime were black, 9 in 10 
victims said they thought the offender's 
motive for the crime was their race; in 2 in 
10, they thought it was ethnicity. For victims 
reporting white offenders, about 3 in 10 
victims attributed the crime to race, 3 in 10 
to the characteristics of associates of the
victim, 3 in 10 to their ethnicity, and 3 in 
10 to their sexual orientation.  
                            
A quarter of the hate crime offenders 
identified as at least 21 were said by their 
victims to have committed the offense because 
of the victim's ethnicity or the 
characteristics of persons with whom they 
associated.

Hate crime victims and offenders 
differ in age

The following compares the gender, race, and 
age of crime victims with those of their 
offenders. Some table cells have few cases, 
making conclusions tentative.  

About 9 in 10 male hate crime victims reported
that the person who victimized them was also
male. Female victims were almost equally likely 
to have been victimized by males and females, 
with 59% identifying a male offender and 50% 
a female offender (including the 9% who said 
both males and females committed the hate 
crime).

About 4 in 10 white hate crime victims 
indicated that the offenders were white, 
and the same proportion reported the 
offenders to have been black. The small 
number of black hate crime victims 
precludes analysis of the race of persons 
who victimized them.
                            
Young victims -- those 20 or younger -- 
reported young offenders, and older 
victims -- those 21 or older -- older 
offenders. Approximately 61% of young 
victims said the offenders were young, 
and 88% of older victims had older 
offenders. 

Hate crimes occur in public places

Both violent hate crimes and violent non-
bias crimes took place between noon and 
midnight –- 72% of violent hate crimes 
and 70% of violent non-hate related crimes.  

About 62% of violent hate crimes took place 
in a public area, primarily a commercial
establishment, parking area, the street, 
or a school. By comparison, 51% of violent 
offenses not hate related occurred in a 
public space.

Violent hate crimes were less likely than 
other violent crimes to take place at the 
victim's home –- 21% of hate crimes and 
31% of violent crimes not reflecting bias.  

Hate crime statistics from the FBI's 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program 
(UCR) and the NCVS

The FBI has compiled statistics on hate crime
based on reports of law enforcement agencies
since 1992. The FBI appends reports on hate
crimes to their existing data collection 
from law enforcement agencies through the 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR).  

The UCR collects nationwide counts for 
specific crimes reported to police from 
approximately 17,300 law enforcement 
agencies, representing 93.4% of the U.S. 
population in 2003. About 4,200 agencies 
report detailed information to an enhanced 
UCR program, the National Incident-Based 
Reporting System (NIBRS). Law enforcement 
agencies use one of these means to provide 
data on hate crimes:

* For law enforcement agencies that 
report summary numbers of crimes, the 
FBI developed a brief form to collect 
incident-specific information about 
hate crime incidents, victims, and 
offenders, including motivation and 
other characteristics. 

* For law enforcement agencies that 
provide incident-based records to the 
FBI, hate crime data are captured in 
the NIBRS framework. 

The FBI combines the hate crime reports 
from both the summary program and NIBRS 
into a single file, the UCR Hate Crime 
file.

The NCVS does not include reports of crime 
from institutions, organizations, churches, 
schools, and businesses, although persons 
involved in these entities are included. It 
does, however, include crimes not reported 
to police. To make the data comparable, only 
UCR and NIBRS crimes in which an individual 
was the victim are analyzed for this report.

Both the NCVS and the UCR collect data on 
rape and other sexual assault, robbery, 
simple and aggravated assault, burglary, 
auto theft, and larceny. The UCR also 
collects incident-specific information on 
homicide. Both the NCVS and the NIBRS hate 
crimes provide information on victims -- 
their gender, race, and age -- and on 
offenders - their numbers, demographic 
characteristics, and weapons.  

A comparison of these data provides some 
striking similarities but also some major 
differences.

NCVS and UCR demonstrate similar 
motivations for hate crimes

Motivations reported for hate crimes were 
similar for the NCVS victimizations reported 
to police and UCR. In both, race is identified 
as the primary motivation for a hate crime 
(56% for NCVS and 51% for UCR). Ethnicity is 
similarly ranked for the NCVS (29%) and for 
UCR(17%). Both NCVS and UCR numbers indicate 
about 1 in 6 hate crimes were motivated by 
bias against a sexual orientation and 1 in 
9 by bias against a religion.
  
Motivations perceived by NCVS victims of crimes
not reported to police are similar to ones for 
NCVS crimes reported to police. Race is still 
thought to be the primary reason for hate 
crimes (56% for crimes reported to police and 
55% for those not reported). Ethnicity provides 
the basis for about 29% of crimes reported to 
police and 27% for those not reported. About 
21% of NCVS crimes reported to police and 16% 
not reported were thought to be motivated by 
sexual orientation.

Basic categories of offenses 
motivated by hate similar for 
both NCVS and UCR 

About 8 in 10 hate crimes are violent crimes 
and the remaining 2 in 10 are property crimes 
as described by the NCVS and the UCR. 

However, among violent hate crimes, the NCVS
reports substantially higher percentages of
aggravated assault -- crimes involving 
injuries from attacks or the use of a weapon 
(25% of NCVS crimes reported to police versus 
14% of UCR reports). The NCVS hate crimes 
include a smaller percentage of crimes 
classified as intimidation or verbal threats 
than the UCR (21% of NCVS crimes reported to 
police and 40% of UCR reports).  

Among property crimes perceived to be hate
related and said by NCVS victims to be 
reported to police, the NCVS and UCR both 
reported relatively small percentages of hate 
crime in burglary (8% and 2%)and larceny or 
household theft(7% and 1%). 

NCVS hate crimes not reported to law enforcement 
differed in seriousness from the ones reported 
to police. A smaller percentage of the unreported 
are aggravated assaults (14% versus 25%). A 
somewhat higher percentage of unreported crimes 
(34%) than reported crimes (21%) were crimes of 
intimidation.

Some basic characteristics of hate 
crime  victims differ in NCVS and 
NIBRS
 
NIBRS data provide a richer array of information
on victim and offender characteristics than 
does the UCR's reporting on hate crime from 
its summary program. However, NIBRS information
can be attributed only to crimes in the NIBRS
jurisdictions, for it is not statistically 
representative of crimes reported to police 
nationwide. Hence, any relationships between 
the NCVS and NIBRS data could be coincidental. 
NCVS figures are representative of hate crimes 
nationwide.  

While the majority of hate crime victims
described by both the NCVS crimes reported 
to police and the NIBRS are male, higher
percentages of NCVS hate crime victims are
women compared to NIBRS hate crime victims
(49% of NCVS crimes reported to police and
35% of NIBRS).

Compared to NIBRS, the NCVS had a higher
percentage of white hate crime victims. Among
hate crime victims, approximately 84% of those
in NCVS and 67% of those in NIBRS were white. 
Conversely, a smaller percentage of NCVS hate
crime victims were black; 11% in the NCVS
compared to 29% in NIBRS. NCVS victims were
also older than those reported in NIBRS. 
About 64% were 30 or older among the NCVS 
victims and 45% among NIBRS victims.

Some basic characteristics of hate
crime offenders also differ between 
NCVS and NIBRS

Hate crime offenders described by the NCVS
crimes reported to police differ from those 
in the NIBRS in number of offenders, and their 
race, age, relationship to victim, and weapon 
use. Both the NCVS and NIBRS describe that half 
of the hate crime victimizations are committed 
by one offender, although a smaller percentage 
of offenders described by the NCVS were 
committed by only one person (61% and 68%).  

Most offenders are male (81% of victimizations 
for the NCVS and 84% for NIBRS).  

Although the NCVS shows about the same
percentage of victimizations had white and 
black offenders (43% of those reported to 
police are white and 43% are black), NIBRS 
shows more white than black offenders (68% 
white and 21% black). Approximately 65% of 
NCVS victimizations had offenders who were 
identified as 21 or older compared to 52% 
in NIBRS.

Offenders reported by the NCVS were more 
likely to be strangers than offenders in 
NIBRS (55% of victimizations versus 36%). 

NCVS offenders were more likely than NIBRS
offenders to have a firearm, sharp implement, 
or blunt object. Of those NCVS victimizations
reported to police, 30% were said to have 
a weapon compared to 19% from NIBRS.

Methodology

NCVS response rates

For the NCVS response rates of all persons
selected to be interviewed varied during the
period of analysis from 87% to 90%. During 
the 2000 to 2003 period, approximately
500,000 interviews were conducted for the 
survey. Approximately 1% of those interviewed 
did not supply information on possible hate 
crime victimization, and 4.2% did not know 
if a crime was motivated by hate.

UCR response rate

In 2002, 12,073 law enforcement agencies
provided 1 to 12 months of hate crime data 
to the UCR Program. Of those agencies 15.5% 
(1,868 agencies) reported a total of 7,462 
incidents. The remaining 84.5% indicated 
that no instances of hate crimes occurred 
within their jurisdiction.**Source: FBI 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program, Hate 
Crime Statistics 2002.**

The UCR hate crime file lists 9,222 hate 
victims in 2002; 7,646 are individual 
victims, and the remainder business, 
government, religious organizations, and 
the public. The NIBRS data file includes 
information on 1,725 individual victims 
of hate crimes.

For both the NCVS and UCR hate crime files, 
a hierarchy determines the type of crime,
based on characteristics of the incident that 
described the offense seriousness. For example, 
if a crime involved both a rape and a robbery, 
it would be classified as a rape for analysis. 
The types of crime are listed in order of 
seriousness in tables 3 and 12.

Data from the NIBRS, taken from the public 
use file on January 1, 2005, had 3 victims 
from an uncertified State and 17 incidents 
with a 2001 date.

Standard error computations

Comparisons of percentages and rates for 
the NCVS made in this report were tested 
to determine if observed differences were 
statistically significant.

Differences described as higher, lower, or 
different passed a hypothesis test at the 
.05 level of statistical significance (95% 
confidence level). The tested difference 
was greater than twice the standard error 
of that difference.  

Significance testing calculations were 
conducted at BJS using statistical programs 
developed specifically for the NCVS by the 
US Census Bureau. These programs take into 
consideration many aspects of the complex 
NCVS sample design when calculating 
generalized variance estimates.

Vandalism

The numbers on vandalism reported here differ
from the BJS households-victimized-by-crime
measure in several ways. This report uses data
collected from July 2000 through December 2003
rather than victimizations attributed to a 
specific calendar year. The numbers are also 
an annual average for the 3½ years, rather 
than numbers for a specific year. 

A household was counted as having experienced
vandalism if they were vandalized in any 6-month
period, while the households-victimized-by-crime
measure counts households vandalized within a
year. Vandalism was not included in the analysis 
of NCVS hate crimes unless it was a part of 
another NCVS crime. See the box on page 6 for 
estimates of vandalism. 

Some limitations of data

The Hate Crime Statistics Act does not include
gender as a hate condition and it has not been
included in either NCVS or UCR publications.
Some information relevant to analyzing hate 
crime is not included in either the NCVS or 
the UCR, such as, ethnicity other than 
Hispanic, sexual orientation, and religious 
background or affiliation. 

----------------------------------------             
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is 
director.

Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote this report. 
Michael Rand, Patsy Klaus, and Ramona 
Rantala provided statistical assistance 
and verified the report. Tom Hester and 
Carolyn Williams produced and edited it.

Denise Lewis, NCVS Research Unit, Demographic
Surveys Division, the U.S. Census Bureau, 
performed initial analysis of the hate crime 
variables and developed coded variables. 

November 2005 NCJ 209911
--------------------------------------


End of file
11/09/05 prepared by Ida Hines