U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Hispanic Victims of Violent Crime, 1993-2000


April 2002, NCJ 191208


---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/hvvc00.htm
---------------------------------------------------------

Callie Marie Rennison, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

---------------------------------------------------------          
Highlights
          
The rate of violent crime against
Hispanics fell 56% from 1993 to
2000.  The rate for whites declined
50%, and for blacks, 51%.   
          
*  Persons of Hispanic origin in 2000
experienced 11% of all violent crime
against persons age 12 or older in
the United States.  

*  During 2000 Hispanic persons were 
victims of about 690,470 rapes, sexual 
assaults, robberies, and aggravated and 
simple assaults. 

*  Violence against Hispanics most
often took the form of simple assault
(59%), followed by robbery (20%),
aggravated assault (19%) and rape/sexual 
assault (2%) in 2000.

*  1993-2000, the rate of violent crime 
against Hispanics fell, regardless of 
gender, age, income, or where they lived. 
Among Hispanics the largest percent
decreases in rates occurred for
women, persons age 35-49, divorced or 
separated persons, those in households 
with annual incomes between $15,000 and 
$24,999, and those in rural areas.

*  9% of Hispanic victims stated that
the offender was an intimate, while
34% described the offender as a
friend or acquaintance.

* Hispanics were as likely as whites,
blacks, or persons of other races to
report to the police that they had been
a victim of a violent crime.
------------------------------------------------------       
          
Estimates from the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS)
indicate that Hispanic persons age
12 or older experienced about
690,470 violent crimes (rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated or
simple assault) in 2000. 

Among Hispanics over the period
1993-2000, those most vulnerable to
violent crimes were males (54
victimizations per 1,000 annually),
juveniles age 12-17 (90 per 1,000),
those with household incomes under
$7,500 (64 per 1,000), and those
who had never married (74 per
1,000). 

Violence against Hispanics, as with
other victims, most often took the
form of simple assault (59%). About
equal percentages of Hispanics
were robbed (20%) or were victims
of aggravated assault (19%).  Two
percent of Hispanic victims of
violence sustained a rape or sexual
assault in 2000.

From 1993 to 2000 the rate of violent 
victimization against Hispanics fell 
from 63 victimizations per 1,000 to 28.  
Violent crime rates declined for Hispanics 
across most demographic categories examined --
falling most among females, those age 35 
to 49, divorced or separated persons, those 
in households with incomes between $15,000 
and $24,999, and those in rural areas. 

Data and definitions

Estimates of violent crime are drawn
from National Criminal Victimization
Survey (NCVS) data collected by
the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS).  

Respondents to the NCVS who identified 
themselves as Mexican-American, Chicano,
Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or 
South American (Spanish-speaking countries) 
or other Spanish origin are defined as
Hispanics in this report.  The category 
"Hispanic" includes persons of any race.  
Comparison groups include non-Hispanic
persons who were white, black, American 
Indian, or Asian.  Thus, in this report the 
terms "white," "black," "American Indian," 
and "Asian" refer only to non-Hispanic 
persons.  

Violent acts examined include threatened, 
attempted and completed rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault.  Only limited homicide data are
available.

--------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization
Survey 

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source 
of information on the frequency, 
characteristics, and consequences of criminal 
victimization.  One of the largest continuous 
household surveys conducted by the Federal
Government, the NCVS collects information 
about crimes both reported and not reported 
to police. The survey provides the largest
national forum for victims to describe
their experiences of victimization, the 
impact of crime, and the characteristics 
of violent offenders.

For the most current overall estimates of 
criminal victimization in the United States, 
see Criminal Victimization 2000: Changes
1999-2000, with Trends 1993-2000 (NCJ 187007).

Findings from the  NCVS are also on the BJS 
website <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>
--------------------------------------

Violence against Hispanics, 2000

During 2000 persons of Hispanic origin 
experienced 11% of all violent crime 
against persons age 12 or older in the 
United States, and they were about 10% 
of the general population.  In total during 2000, 
Hispanic persons were victims of about 
690,470 rapes, sexual assaults, robberies,
and aggravated and simple assaults.  
As a rate, there were 28 violent 
victimizations per 1,000 persons of 
Hispanic ethnicity.   

As with other victims, most violence
against Hispanic persons was simple 
assault (59%), an offense committed 
without a weapon and resulting in, at 
most, minor injury. Twenty percent of 
Hispanic victims were robbed, and 19% 
were victims of an aggravated assault, 
an offense committed with a weapon or
resulting in serious injury or both. 
Rapes and sexual assaults accounted for 
2% of all violence against persons of 
Hispanic origin.

During 2000 Hispanics were victims
of rape and sexual assault at rates
somewhat lower than those for blacks.  
The Hispanic rates of rape and sexual 
assault were similar to those of Asians, 
whites, and American Indians.  

Hispanics and blacks were robbed at similar 
rates, and those rates were the highest of 
the groups examined. In 2000 the robbery 
rate was 6 victimizations per 1,000
Hispanics.

Hispanics were victims of aggravated assault 
at a rate similar to those for  whites and 
blacks. American Indians experienced
aggravated assault at the highest rate, and 
Asians experienced aggravated assault at the 
lowest rate during 2000. 

---------------------------------------
Hispanic homicide victims

The Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) of 
the FBI collects information about homicide 
from local and State law enforcement
agencies.  Many jurisdictions do not
obtain information on the Hispanic
origin of the victim, so that national
UCR data on Hispanic homicide victims 
are not available. 

The National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS), maintained by the National
Center for Health Statistics of the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, collects information on
homicides of Hispanics from death
certificates filed in State vital
statistics offices. 

Between 1993 and 1999 (the year of
most recent data) the NVSS recorded an 
annual average of 409 Hispanics being 
killed -- a rate of 9.1 homicides per 
100,000 Hispanics.  The national homicide
rate was 6.2  per 100,000. 
-----------------------------------------

Whites, blacks, and Hispanics were
victims of simple assault at similar
rates during 2000.  Simple assaults
were experienced by American Indians 
at the highest rate, and by Asians at 
the lowest during 2000.

Victim characteristics, 1993-2000

Though all persons are vulnerable to
violent crime, data demonstrate that
some groups are victimized at different 
rates.  For example, for the various 
demographic characteristics, Hispanics 
were generally victims of crime at rates 
higher than those of Asians but lower 
than those of American Indians.** footnote  
Because of the consistent patterns of relative
rates of victimization compared to Hispanics,
American Indians and Asians are not discussed
in this section of the report, although their
rates are presented in the tables.  For more
information, see Violent Victimization and
Race, 1993-98, NCJ 176354, and American Indians 
and Crime, NCJ 173386.**   Rates also varied 
among Hispanics in different demographic 
categories.

Gender

As within the racial groups, 
Hispanic males experienced violent
crime at a rate higher than that for
Hispanic females.  Among males,
Hispanics were victims of violent
crime at a rate greater than that for
whites, but similar to that for blacks. 
Among females, Hispanics were violently 
victimized at a rate similar to that for 
whites but at a rate lower than that for 
blacks.

Age

For Hispanics, 1993-2000, the young were 
more likely than older persons to be 
victims of violent crime:  90 per 1,000 
Hispanics age 12 to 17, 70 per 1,000 Hispanics
age 18 to 24, 7 per 1,000 Hispanics age 65 
or older were victims of violent crime each 
year.

During the period, among persons age 18 to 
49, Hispanics were victims of violence at 
rates lower than those for whites and blacks.  
Among persons age 12-17 and 50 or older,
Hispanics were victimized at rates similar 
to those for blacks. 

Marital status

From 1993 through 2000 never married, married, 
widowed, and divorced/separated Hispanics
experienced violence at different rates. For 
Hispanics, as for members of the racial groups
examined, persons who had never married or 
those who were divorced or separated were 
the most vulnerable to violent crime.   

Among persons who had never married and 
those who were divorced or separated, 
Hispanics were victimized at a rate lower 
than that for whites and at a rate similar
to that for blacks. Among married persons, 
Hispanics were victimized at a rate similar 
to that for blacks and at a rate higher 
than that for whites.  No differences in 
rates of violence among widowed persons
emerged.

Annual household income  

For Hispanics, persons in households with an 
annual income of less than $7,500 were more 
likely to be victimized than persons in
households at all higher levels of income 
except one.  Only a marginal difference 
between rates of violent victimization 
separated persons in households with an
annual income of less than $7,500 from 
those with an average annual income $7,500 
to $14,999. 

While at some levels of income the rates 
of violent victimization of Hispanics were 
different from those of whites and blacks, 
a consistent pattern of difference was not present. 

Location of residence

Hispanics in urban, suburban, and rural 
areas were violently victimized at 
statistically similar rates between 1993 
and 2000.  

Hispanics were victimized in urban
areas at a rate lower than those for
blacks and whites.  In suburban
settings, Hispanics were victims of
violent crimes at a rate higher than
that for whites but lower than that for
blacks.  In rural areas Hispanics
sustained violent victimizations at a
rate higher than those for whites and
blacks.

Characteristics of the crime
event, 1993-2000

Victim-offender relationship 

The percentages of Hispanic victims
of violence who were victimized by
an intimate partner (9%) or some
other relative (4%) were similar to
those of the non-Hispanic groups
examined, 1993-2000.   

A somewhat smaller percentage of violent
victimization of Hispanics than of
whites was committed by friends or
acquaintances.  Apparent differences in 
the percentages of violent crimes by 
friends or acquaintances -- between 
Hispanics and blacks, American Indians, 
or Asians --  were not statistically
significant.  

Fifty-two percent of Hispanic victims
of violence identified the offender as 
a stranger.  A higher percentage of Asian 
victims (64%) and a lower percentage 
of white victims (46%) did the same.

Presence of weapons

Between 1993 and 2000, 34% of Hispanic 
victims of violence reported that the 
offender had a weapon during their victimi-
zation.  The percentage of Hispanics who 
faced an armed offender was greater than
the percentage of whites (23%), but similar 
to the percentages among the other racial groups.

A firearm was present in 14% of the violent 
victimizations of Hispanics.  This percentage 
exceeded 7% of white victims but did not 
differ statistically from the percentages 
of black, American Indian, and Asian victims 
facing an offender armed with a firearm.

Injuries and treatment

Between 1993 and 2000, 73% of Hispanic 
victims of violence were not injured.  
Similar percentages of victims who were 
white, black, or Asian were not injured 
(75%, 71%, and 77%, respectively).  A
somewhat lower percentage of American Indian 
victims (64%) escaped injury.
 
Among the Hispanics injured during
a violent crime, 15% did not seek
medical treatment for their injuries. 
This response was similar to that of
whites (15%), blacks (13%),
American Indians (16%), and Asians
(12%).  

Alcohol and/or drug use of offender

Twenty-eight percent of Hispanic
victims of violent crime perceived
the offender to be under the
influence of drugs and/or alcohol,
1993-2000.  A slightly higher 
percentage of whites (32%) and a higher
percentage of American Indians
(44%) reported such drug or alcohol
use.  Similar percentages of Hispanic,
black, and Asian victims stated that 
the offender acted under the
influence of drugs or alcohol.  A
large percentage of victims in each
racial/ ethnic category state that
they did not know if the offender was
under the influence of drugs or
alcohol at the time of the incident.

Reporting to police

The percentages of violent victimizations 
that were reported to the police between 
1993 and 2000 were similar for Hispanics and
members of non-Hispanic racial groups.  
Forty-four percent of all violence against  
Hispanic individuals was reported to the
police; this compares to 39% for Asian victims, 
42% for whites, 45% for American Indians, and 
48% for blacks.

Among Hispanics, violence against those who 
were male, under age 20, or never married 
was reported at percentages lower than violence
against other Hispanic subgroups. Violence sustained 
by Hispanics at different income levels was 
reported to the police at similar percentages.

Reasons for not reporting to police

Hispanic men and women emphasized different 
reasons for not reporting to police the violence 
they had experienced.  A higher percentage of 
males than females gave "minor crime" and "lack 
of proof" as reasons for not reporting to
the police.  A somewhat higher percentage of 
males cited "not important to the police."  A 
higher percentage of female than male victims 
of violence did not report to the police because 
the victim "feared reprisal" or was "protecting
the offender."

Differing racial or ethnic backgrounds were not 
associated with the most commonly cited reasons 
for not reporting violence to the police.  Victims 
of all racial or ethnic groups were most likely to
say that the violence was not reported because it 
was a "private or personal matter," or because it 
was a "minor crime." 

Trends in nonfatal violence,
1993-2000

The overall rate of violence against
Hispanics decreased 56% between 1993 and 
2000 -- from 63 to 28 victimizations per 
1,000 Hispanics age 12 or older.  The 
estimated number of violent crimes against
Hispanics decreased from the 1993 level of 
about 1.1 million to 690,470 in 2000. 

For almost every demographic characteristic 
considered, the rate of violence against Hispanics
declined between 1993 and 2000.  Some of the 
largest percentage decreases in rates occurred 
for females (a 63% decline), those age 35-49 
(66% decrease), divorced or separated persons 
(64% decline), those in households with annual
incomes between $15,000 and $24,999 (71% decrease),
and those in rural areas (71% decline).

Methodology

This report presents data from the National 
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) of the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics.  The NCVS gathers data
about crimes using an ongoing, nationally 
representative sample of households in the United 
States. NCVS data include information about crime 
victims (age, gender, race, ethnicity, income, 
and educational level), criminal offenders
(gender, race, approximate age, and victim-offender 
relations), and the nature of the crime (time and 
place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of 
injury, and economic consequences).  These data 
include incidents both reported and not reported 
to police. 

Between 1993 and 2000 about 731,460 individuals 
of all races and ethnic groups age 12 or older 
were interviewed.  For the NCVS data presented, 
response rates varied between 89% and 92% of 
eligible individuals.

Respondents to the NCVS who identified themselves 
as Mexican-American, Chicano, Mexican, Puerto 
Rican, Cuban, Central or South American (Spanish-
speaking countries) or other Spanish origin are 
defined as Hispanics in this report. The category 
"Hispanic" includes persons of any race. Comparison
groups include non-Hispanic persons who were white, 
black, American Indian, or Asian.  Thus, in this 
report the terms "white," "black," "American 
Indian," and "Asian" refer only to non-Hispanic 
persons.  

Violent acts examined include threatened, 
attempted and completed rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault.

Hypothesis testing and the NCVS

Standard error computations

Comparisons of estimates discussed in this 
report were tested to determine if the 
differences were statistically significant.  
Differences described as higher, lower, or
different passed a hypothesis test at
the .05-level of statistical significance 
(95%-level of confidence).  The tested 
difference was greater than about twice the
standard error of that difference. For 
comparisons of estimates which were 
statistically significant at the 0.10 level 
(90%-confidence level), differences are 
described as somewhat, marginal, or slight.  

Caution is required when making comparisons 
of estimates not explicitly discussed in this 
report. What may appear to be a large
difference in estimates may not test as 
statistically significant at the 95%-or even 
the 90%-confidence level. Significance 
testing calculations were conducted at BJS 
using statistical programs developed
specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Census 
Bureau.  These programs consider the complex 
NCVS sample design when calculating generalized
variance estimates.

Estimates based on 10 or fewer sample cases have 
high relative standard errors.  Because
calculated standard errors for such estimates 
may not be accurate, care should be taken when 
comparing estimates based on 10 or fewer cases 
to other estimates.  It is not advisable to make 
comparisons between estimates when both are
based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

Testing trends in violent victimization

Unless stated otherwise when a statement is made 
describing differences in estimates between years, 
it was tested for significance using a computer 
program designed specifically for the NCVS.  
These tests determine whether an estimate
in one year differs from that of another, 
regardless of intervening estimate variation.  

---------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Lawrence A. Greenfeld is acting
director.

BJS Special Reports address a
specific topic in depth from one 
or more datasets that cover many
topics.

Callie Marie Rennison, BJS
Statistician, wrote this report 
under the supervision of Michael R. 
Rand. Cathy T. Maston provided the
statistical review.  Tom Hester
produced and edited the report. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report
for printing.

April 2002, NCJ 191208
-----------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
To keep current on criminal justice
statistics, at no cost...

Subscribe to e-mail notification of
the latest statistical releases from
BJS, the FBI, and the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention through JUSTSTATS. 
To learn how to subscribe, see

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/juststats.htm
--------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------
This report and others from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics are
available through the Internet --

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs

The data from the National Criminal
Victimization Survey are available
from the National Archive of Criminal
Justice Data, maintained by the
Institute for Social Research at the
University of Michigan,
1-800-999-0960.  The archive may
also be accessed through the BJS
Internet site.
-------------------------------------


End of file
01/22/02 ih