U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Improving Access to and Integrity of Criminal History
Records


July 2005, NCJ 200581


--------------------------------------------------------------   
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iaichr.htm

--------------------------------------------------------------

Peter M. Brien
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director

Peter M. Brien, Statistical Policy Advisor,
BJS wrote this report. Todd D. Minton, BJS 
Statistician, verified the findings.
Tina Dorsey produced the report, and Tom
Hester edited it.

Contents

Achievements of the National Criminal History 
Improvement Program                       

Missing dispositions in criminal history records           

Opportunities for improving background checks              

Appendix I. Identifying prohibited purchasers:
The mentally ill                          

Appendix II. Identifying prohibited purchasers:
Domestic violence misdemeanants and subjects
of restraining orders                     

Appendix III. BJS surveys in the aftermath
of September 11, 2001  

Office of Justice Programs
Partnerships for Safer Communities               

Achievements of the National Criminal 
History Program

NCHIP overview

The National Criminal History Improvement Program
(NCHIP) represents a close collaboration among the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), State criminal 
justice agencies, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI). Since 1995, this collaboration has improved the 
nation's public safety by enhancing and upgrading the 
States' criminal history records which are used for 
background checks for firearms purchases, pre-employment 
checks for certain sensitive professions, criminal 
sentencing decisions, and many other purposes. The NCHIP
program has facilitated the development of a national
network of State criminal records which is available to
State and federal law enforcement officials. 

The program has provided direct financial and technical
assistance to States to develop and upgrade their
criminal record information systems -- including records
of protection orders, sex offender registries, and
automated fingerprint identification. NCHIP has been
instrumental in making these records accessible on an
interstate basis through FBI administered systems  -
*  the National Instant Criminal Background Check 
System (NICS)
*  the Interstate Identification Index (III)
*  the National Protection Order File
*  the National Sex Offender Registry
*  the Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (IAFIS).

Since 1995 BJS has awarded nearly $400 million to
States and Territories. During the period of funding 
the number of criminal history records has increased 
29% nationwide, and the number of automated records
available for immediate use by law enforcement
increased 35%.  

As of December 31, 2001, there were nearly 64.3 million
subjects in State criminal record files, and 89% of 
these records were automated. 

This highlights section presents an overview of 11
performance measures for NCHIP: 

*  Millions of background checks are supported by the
NICS
*  The percentage of State criminal history records
which are automated has improved
*  The number of records that are shareable through the
FBI's III has increased
*  The number of States participating in III has increased
*  More law enforcement agencies are reporting arrest
information electronically
*  The number of States participating in the FBI's IAFIS
has increased
*  More courts are transmitting automated dispositions
*  Criminal history information processing has become
more efficient
*  The National Protection Order File has significantly
expanded
*  The National Sex Offender Registry has reached
record levels
*  NCHIP has established a framework to assist in
Homeland Security.

These measures summarize how NCHIP has assisted States 
in improving criminal history record completeness and 
automation.

The National Instant Criminal Background 
Check System (NICS) supports millions of 
background checks 

NCHIP funds have supported State efforts to conduct
rapid and efficient checks under the NICS. In 2001, 
the NICS supported nearly 8 million checks at the 
presale stage of firearms purchases.  

Assisted by NCHIP funding, the State NICS infrastructure 
made the transition from an interim system to the current 
permanent system. Under the interim Brady system, the 
chief law enforcement officer conducted checks. 

Currently States operate background check systems of
their own (Point-of-Contact States or POC States), 
rely exclusively on the NICS, or do both. 

From the inception of the Brady Act on March 1,1994,
to December 31, 2001, nearly 38 million applications 
for firearm transfers were subject to background Checks.

---------------------------------------------
Data sources for measuring access to and 
integrity of criminal history records

Almost a decade before the inception of NCHIP in fiscal
year 1995, BJS formed a partnership with the States
and the FBI to improve the accuracy and accessibility of
criminal history records. After passage of the Brady Act,
expanded use of those records enlarged both BJS' role
as administrator of funds to improve record systems and
BJS' role as statistical monitor to meas-ure efficiency
and completeness.

The following provided data for this report:

*  Since 1989 BJS has funded the biennial Survey of
Criminal History Information Systems, conducted by
SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics.

*  In 2001 and 2002 BJS initiated research with the
Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS) and
SEARCH. These collaborations  addressed issues
related to the completeness and accuracy of criminal
history records, mental health records, restraining
orders, and misdemeanor domestic violence records.

*  Upon passage of the Brady Act and creation of
NCHIP, BJS initiated the Firearm Inquiry Statistics
program as part of NCHIP. The program operates
through a cooperative agreement with REJIS.
---------------------------------------------
Number of firearm purchase applicants: 7,806,000					
A. Checks conducted by NICS: 4, 248,900
 1. Number denied for purchase by NICS: 60,700 (1.4%)			
(a) Number of denials appealed: 10,400 (17%)			
 (Number of denials reversed: 3,200)			
 (b) Number of denials not appealed: 50,300 (83%)
2. Number approved for purchase by NICS: 4,188,200 (98.6%)			
 (a) Retrievals due to erroneous sale: 3,400			
									
B. Checks conducted by POC's: 3,556,900
1. Number denied for purchase by POC's: 75,200 (2.1%)
(a) Number of denials appealed: 13,500 (18%)				
(Number of denials reversed: 6,300)
(b) Number of denials not appealed: 61,800 (82%)			
2. Number approved  for purchase by POC's: 3,481,700 (97.9%)
(a) Retrievals due to erroneous sale: 3,400				
									
Sources: BJS; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; and the NICS Program of the FBI

------------------------------------------------
Of the nearly 8 million checks conducted in 2001, 98%
of applicants were approved whether the check was
conducted by the State or the FBI.***Footnote 1: This 
2% rejection rate is consistent with the rejection 
rates from 2001, 2000, 1999, and 1998 and during the 
interim Brady period from 1994 to 1998.***  
   
There are two principal ways to evaluate the
performance of the background check system:
*  Examine the percentage of applicants for a firearm
purchase who were incorrectly prohibited (Error I) 
*  Examine the percentage of persons who were allowed
to purchase a firearm who should have been prohibited
from doing so (Error II). 

Error I can be measured by calculating the ratio of
successful appellants of a rejection to the total number
of applicants to purchase a firearm. In 2002 there were
9,500 successful appeals of rejections from among the 
7,806,000 applicants that year. This translates into an 
error rate of 0.1%.

Error II can be measured by calculating the ratio of
firearm retrievals by law enforcement to the total number
of applicants to purchase a firearm. In 2002 there were
7,400 retrievals due to an incorrect sale to a prohibited
purchaser against a total of 7,806,000 applicants. This
also translates into an error rate of approximately 0.1%.

Among the 136,000 applicants rejected as prohibited
purchasers during 2002, 8 in 10 did not appeal the
rejection. Among those who filed an appeal, almost 
6 in 10 rejection decisions were sustained.

Levels of State criminal record 
automation have increased 

There have been notable improvements in the automation
of State criminal history records since 1995. As the 
number of criminal records has increased in recent 
years, the NCHIP program has helped the States to 
ensure that levels of automation remain high. In 2001,
30 States had at least 90% of their criminal history
records automated, compared to 22 States in 1995.  

The number of States with relatively low levels of
automation (defined as having less than 70% of records
automated) declined from 13 States in 1995 to 6 States
in 2001. 

2001 represents the first year in which more than half 
of the States (27) indicated that 100% of their criminal
history records were automated. In 1999, 21 States
reported having 100% automation, as did 18 States in
1995.

Number of records shareable through 
the FBI's Interstate Identification 
Index (III) has increased 

The number of Interstate Identification Index (III) 
records maintained by the States as compared to the 
records maintained by the FBI is an important measure 
of the decentralized nature of the background check 
system. To ensure that criminal history records are 
compatible across all States, record improvements 
funded by BJS under NCHIP are required to conform 
to FBI standards for III participation. BJS has 
designated State participation in the III as one 
of the highest priorities of the NCHIP program.

From yearend 1993 to April 2003, the number of State
records available for sharing under the FBI's III 
nearly doubled from 25.5 million to 48.5 million. 
Since 1993 the number of records available for III 
has been increasing at a much faster rate than the 
overall number of criminal records.

In 1993 half of all criminal history records were III
accessible, and 70% were in 2001. It is projected 
that in 2005, more than three-fourths of all criminal 
history records will be accessible through the III.

At yearend 2001, 22 States had at least 75% of their
records accessible through III, and 15 States had 50%
to 74% of their records III accessible. 

Number of States participating 
in III has increased  

As part of NCHIP's commitment to achieving full State
participation in the FBI's III system, BJS has used the
NCHIP program to encourage all States to make their
records available to the FBI and other States. In 1989,
20 States were members of the III system. The number
of participating States grew to 26 in 1993. As of May
2003, 45 States were participating in III. 

The application for NCHIP funds requires nonparticipating 
States to include a discussion of their III status and a 
plan for future III participation. 

More law enforcement agencies are 
reporting arrest information 
automatically 

State law enforcement agencies have frequently relied on 
the NCHIP program to help them transition from ink-based 
fingerprinting systems to electronic systems. From 1999 
to 2003 NCHIP has provided States with approximately 
$31 million for Livescan systems and their participation 
in the FBI's automated fingerprint system. These systems 
allow fingerprints to be scanned and instantly 
transmitted electronically to criminal justice agencies 
throughout the State or Nation. 

Among the 37 States reporting complete data, the number 
of arresting agencies that electronically transmit
arrest information and fingerprints increased by more
than 2,000 from 1997 to 2001. Nationwide, 2,594
agencies electronically submitted arrest information 
in 2001, a substantial increase from 493 agencies 
in 1997.

An increasing number of States participate 
in the FBI's Integrated Automated Fingerprint
Identification System (IAFIS)

NCHIP funds are available to all States for the
conversion to IAFIS. As of March 2003, 43 States, the
District of Columbia, and 3 Territories participated 
in IAFIS. In fiscal year 2002 NCHIP distributed over 
$3.8 million to 19 States and the District of Columbia 
to purchase equipment for the automatic capture and
transfer of fingerprint images.

More courts are transmitting 
automated dispositions

Whether the States can maintain complete and accurate
criminal history records depends heavily on the 
ability of the courts to report final dispositions 
automatically to the criminal history repository or 
court administrator's office. For several years NCHIP 
has been committed to supporting the record and case 
management systems of State and local courts.  

From 1997 to 2001 NCHIP funds assisted nearly 725
courts to develop the ability to report final 
dispositions automatically.  As of yearend 2001, over 
2,000 courts were reporting disposition information 
electronically, based on 25 States reporting complete 
data.

As part of NCHIP's support for capture of judicial
decisions for criminal history records, participating
courts across the United States have developed the
ability to -- 
(1) electronically link fingerprints and other biometric
information to dispositions and share this information
with corrections and law enforcement agencies
(2) provide electronic protection order/restraining 
order files that can be accessed by law enforcement 
officers in the field
(3) establish and maintain sex offender registries
(4) convert juvenile records to the adult case
management system
(5) establish databases of offender-based information. 

Processing criminal history 
information becoming more efficient 

Since 1995 NCHIP has assisted States in developing
and implementing integrated criminal history record
systems. Through NCHIP support, new information
technologies have enabled State criminal justice
agencies to share critical information more efficiently. 
The average time required for agencies to transmit
arrest information, final court dispositions, and prison
admissions to criminal history repositories has declined
significantly since 1995. In addition, these repositories
are processing and posting this information more quickly
than in 1995.

From 1995 to 2001 the average time between an arrest
and the addition of fingerprints and information about
that arrest to a criminal history record was cut nearly 
in half from 45 days to 24 days. The average time 
required to receive, process, and add final court 
disposition information to a criminal history record 
declined more than 30%, from 68 days to 46 days. In 1995 
information about an individual's admission to prison 
took an average of 94 days to be received and then posted 
to a record. By 2001 this information was processed 3 
times faster, in 31 days.

Despite progress from 1995 to 2001, not all States have
adopted integrated or automated systems for transferring 
criminal history information. In 2001 States were still 
more likely to transmit information through the U.S. 
Postal Service than by electronic or online transmissions.  

The National Protection Order File 
has significantly expanded

A 1994 amendment of the Federal Gun Control Act made 
illegal the sale of firearms to persons subject to a
qualifying protection order. A qualifying protection 
order meets conditions that refer to domestic violence. 
NCHIP has placed special emphasis on ensuring that 
domestic violence-related offenses and protection 
orders are included in criminal records. Funds have been
specifically awarded for development of State protection
order files that are compatible with the FBI's national 
file, NCIC National Protection Order File, to permit 
interstate enforcement of protection orders. 

The National Protection Order File, the fastest growing
national set of criminal history records maintained by 
the FBI, has tripled in size since 2000. On February 3,
2003, the National Protection Order File held over
750,000 protection orders from 43 States.

The National Sex Offender Registry 
has reached record levels

Since 1998, the NCHIP program has  assisted States in
establishing sex offender registries which interface 
with the FBI's National Sex Offender Registry. This
assistance has enabled State sex offender registry
information to be obtained and tracked from one
jurisdiction to another.

The National Sex Offender Registry has seen dramatic
growth in recent years, from nearly 50,000 records in
2000 to over 280,000 records in 2003. On February 3,
2003, the National Sex Offender Registry  contained
records from every State, the District of Columbia, 
and 3 Territories.

NCHIP helped to create tools for 
accomplishing the work of  
Homeland Security

A signal contribution of NCHIP has been to assist the
States and the FBI in construction of a nationwide
network of criminal history and fingerprint archives. 
The contents can be examined for both criminal justice
purposes (for example, presale firearms checks) and
noncriminal justice purposes, such as employment
security clearances. 

In 1992 State repositories held 36.4 million automated
criminal history records, and 4 States relied completely
on paper records. Since 1995 NCHIP has assisted the
States' transition toward automation, so that in 2001
State repositories held 57.4 million automated criminal
history records.  As of March 1, 2003, there were 48.5
million criminal records that were shareable through III. 

Future challenges for NCHIP 

With a history of success, the role of NCHIP has evolved 
to support the States in pursuing emerging technologies 
and new criminal justice priorities as identified by 
Federal and Sate policymakers. 

According to the administrators of NCHIP, there exist 
areas of opportunity where Federal resources will 
continue to be needed. Discussed in greater detail in 
the following pages, these future challenges for NCHIP 
include:

Updating relevant mental health records -- BJS has
conducted surveys to examine the status of mental 
health records among the States. Analysis of responses 
can help to determine how NCHIP can further enable 
States to make the information in mental health 
records available for background checks.  

Improving access to records for domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions -- Since 1996, when Congress
added conviction for a domestic violence misdemeanor 
to the list of Federal firearm prohibitors, NCHIP has 
worked with the States to improve access to these 
records; however, significant challenges remain. 
Recent BJS surveys examined the persistent impediments 
to accessing these criminal records. 

Ensuring that court disposition reporting systems are
automated -- All court disposition information should 
be transmitted electronically using established 
technologies. The automation of court dispositions will 
provide complete and accurate information electronically 
to Federal and State criminal justice officials.

Encouraging prosecutors to complete criminal history
records by reporting their declinations to prosecute --
When prosecutors decline to prosecute arrestees, 
frequently the declinations are not added to the 
criminal records. Checks of these records require 
significant effort to discover whether the arrested 
individual was prosecuted. 

Converting older paper records into an electronic 
format -- Many State criminal history record 
holdings contain older records on paper. Full 
automation awaits the entering of these records 
into the system.

Linking criminal history transactions with NIBRS
incident reports -- This linkage allows criminal 
history records to reflect a wealth of detailed 
information concerning the nature and characteristics 
of criminal incidents.  Incident-based information 
allows for better informed decisions regarding 
criminal punishment, crime control strategies, and
policy analysis. 

Developing a uniform national criminal history format 
for RAP sheets -- Because of variation in criminal 
history record formats among the States, the interstate 
exchange and interpretation of criminal history 
information are unnecessarily complicated. The 
development and adoption of a uniform format for RAP 
sheets will make criminal history information more 
easily understood across jurisdictions.   

Continuing to address privacy and confidentiality
issues as they relate to non-criminal justice
background checks -- The Prosecutorial Remedies
and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children
Today Act of 2003 or PROTECT Act contains provisions
that will make it easier for private organizations 
that work with children, the elderly, or the disabled 
to conduct background checks on volunteers. The 
PROTECT Act established a pilot program that permits 
volunteer organizations to submit 100,000 requests for 
background checks to Federal authorities. States will 
want to ensure that privacy and confidentiality
protections are respected as non-criminal justice
background checks become more prevalent.

------------------------------------
NCHIP goals

NCHIP remains committed to its responsibility to
provide Federal assistance to State criminal 
justice record systems. That bedrock commitment 
remains as the program addresses these challenges: 

*  Identify how NCHIP can be more effective in
promoting the use of State mental health records 
during background checks

*  Create initiatives to remove impediments to the
availability of conviction records for domestic 
violence misdemeanors

*  Continue NCHIP efforts to introduce technology into
all courtrooms so that disposition records will be
transmitted electronically to criminal history record
repositories

*  Develop procedures to encourage prosecutors to
promptly report declinations to the repositories

*  Continue NCHIP's encouragement of States to
remove backlogs of paper records

*  Support the development and adoption of a 
uniform RAP sheet

*  Work with States to ensure that privacy and
confidentiality protections are respected as 
background checks for noncriminal justice 
purposes become more prevalent.
----------------------------------------------

Missing dispositions in criminal history records

In a 2001 survey, half the States reported that from
10% to over 50% of the arrests recorded in State
databases had no final disposition indicating how 
the arrest was resolved. These arrests that lack
dispositions, known as "open" or "naked" arrests,
create substantial problems for time-sensitive
background checks because conducting the
necessary research to complete the record is often
time consuming, labor intensive, and costly.

BJS examined the scope of missing dispositions as
reported by the States in a 2001 survey. Factors 
that contribute to missing dispositions include the
following:

* poor communication among the courts, law
enforcement, and corrections agencies in providing
final disposition information to the State repository 
* reliance on the mail and manual research rather
than on electronic communication
* repository delays in posting disposition information
to a criminal record
* persistent backlogs of criminal justice records in
criminal history repositories
* failure of States to audit their data-bases to ensure
record completeness
* varying definitions of "missing dispositions" among
States 
* inconsistent procedures among States for handling
missing dispositions.

Missing dispositions or "open arrests" an
extensive problem

In a 2001 survey, State repository directors were
asked what percentage of arrests in their databases
had final dispositions recorded. Six States reported
that 90% or more of their arrests had corresponding
final dispositions. Twenty-three States reported that
between 50% and 89% of arrests had dispositions. In
nine States less than half of the arrests had final
dispositions recorded in the databases. Twelve
States and the District of Columbia could not
estimate the percentage of arrests with dispositions.

The repository directors also reported the percentage
of arrests occurring within the last 5 years ("recent
arrests") that contained final dispositions. Eight
States reported that 90% or more of their recent
arrests had final dispositions attached. Twenty States
reported that between 50% and 89% of recent arrests
had dispositions. In 12 States less than half of the
recent arrests in their database had final dispositions
recorded. Ten States and the District of Columbia
could not estimate the percentage of recent arrests
with dispositions.

Another measure of the missing disposition problem is 
the number of final court dispositions in State files
that can not be linked to arrest or charging
information. In 2001, 14 States estimated the number
of unlinked court dispositions. These States reported
a total of 704,300 final court dispositions on file 
that could not be linked to arrest or charging 
information, an average of over 50,000 unlinked 
dispositions per State. 

While 14 States estimated the number of unlinked final 
court dispositions, 16 States estimated the percentage 
of final court dispositions in their files that could 
not be linked to an arrest. Minnesota and Indiana 
reported that half of their final court dispositions 
could not be linked to arrest or charging information. 
Wisconsin, Kansas, and Pennsylvania reported that 
between 30% and 40% of their final court dispositions 
were unlinked. In Michigan and Nebraska a quarter of 
their final court dispositions had no link to arrest 
or charging information. The remaining nine States 
(Georgia, Maryland, Montana, Nevada, New York, South 
Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, and Virginia) reported 
that 10% or fewer of their final court dispositions 
contained no arrest or charging information.

Poor interagency communication 
contributes to missing dispositions 
                        
Interagency communication can be 
evaluated in three ways: 

(1) by the number of days required for the court, law
enforcement agency, or corrections agency to report
disposition information to the repository
(2) by the extent to which criminal justice agencies
rely on manual systems rather than electronic
systems to transmit disposition information and
research missing dispositions
(3) by whether all criminal justice agencies are 
fully aware of their reporting requirements. 

Disposition data took over a week on 
average to reach repositories

A leading reason why final dispositions are not
adequately linked to their associated arrests is 
delay by the courts, law enforcement, and corrections
agencies in reporting disposition information to
repositories. Another important reason, processing
delays by the repository, is described more fully in 
a following section.

Court disposition information required 
3 weeks on average

On average in 2001, it took 21 days for final court
dispositions to reach the State criminal history
repository.***Footnote 2: The average number of
days for final court disposition information to reach
the repository was based on 1995-2001 data from a
cohort of 28 States.*** The time required for
repositories to receive disposition information ranged
from 1 day or less in six States to 80 days in North
Dakota. Repositories in most of the reporting
jurisdictions (21) received final court disposition
information within 15 days.

The average time required for final court disposition
information to reach the repository steadily decreased
from 36 days in 1997 and 33 days in 1999.  In 2001
final court dispositions reached the repository 14 
days faster on average than they did in 1995; how-
ever, as six States have demonstrated, the average 
time for submission could be 1 day rather than 21 
days.  

Arrest information required 11 days 
on average

In 2001, as in 1999, arrest data and fingerprints 
took 11 days on average to be received by State
repositories. The time required to receive arrest
information ranged from 1 day or less in five States
and the District of Columbia to 169 days in
Mississippi. In 22 States and the District of
Columbia, repositories received arrest information
within 7 days.  

In 1995 and 1997 transmission of arrest information
to the repository took an average of 13 days and 14
days, respectively.***Footnote 3: The average number 
of days for arrest information to reach repositories 
was based on 1995-2001 data from a cohort of 40 
States and the District of Columbia.*** Corrections 
information required 9 days on average

In 2001 an average of 9 days elapsed between a prison 
admission and the receipt of that information by the 
State repository. The time required for repositories 
to receive prison admissions ranged from 1 day or 
less in nine States to 60 days in North Carolina.  
Repositories in just over half of the reporting 
jurisdictions (17) received prison admission
information in 7 days or less.

In 2001 the average prison admission reached the
repository 5 times faster than in 1995, when 45 days
were required. In 1997 and 1999 prison admissions
reached the repository in 16 days on average.
***Footnote 4: The average number of days for prison 
admission information to reach repositories was 
based on 1995-2001 data from a cohort of 25 States.*** 

Prosecutor declinations often did not reach
repositories

In 2001, 12 States were able to estimate the number
of prosecutor declinations -- decisions to drop or
modify charges -- sent to the repository in the prior
year. Thirty-two States indicated that State law or
policy required that prosecutorial declinations be
transmitted to criminal history repositories.  

Local prosecutors often fail to report declinations 
to State record repositories. In 2001 five States
indicated that all prosecutorial declinations were
transmitted to the repository. In 1999  three States,
and in 1997 six States, reported that all prosecutors'
declinations were transmitted to the repository.

BJS, with the American Prosecutors Research
Institute, is scheduling a survey to delineate more
clearly the processes by which disposition information
reaches or fails to reach a repository. The study will
examine the following: whether statute, regulation,
office practice, or some other authority governs the
transmission of declination information by prosecutors; 
what penalties (if any) exist for noncompliance; the 
average time from declination to the notification of 
the repository; and the impediments that exist in 
reporting declinations promptly to the repository.

Postal services used instead of 
electronic communication

Trial courts provide most of the information about
final dispositions. Criminal history repositories in 
the 47 States and the District of Columbia receive 
final disposition information from trial courts or 
the State court administrator's office. Fifteen of 
those repositories receive all the information through 
the Postal Service; 14 repositories receive part of 
that information by mail.

Thirty-five States request final disposition 
information from prosecutors. In 16 States the 
repositories receive all information from prosecutors 
by post; in 12 States, part of that information.

Twenty-six States request law enforcement agencies
to report information on final dispositions to the
repository. In 13 States law enforcement agencies
rely entirely on the Postal Service; in 11 States,
partially.

Repositories receive final disposition information from
appellate courts or court administrators in 28 States.
More than half of these States (15) rely on the Postal
Service for delivery of all this information; five 
rely on the Postal Service for some of the information.

Manual systems used to research 
missing dispositions

A 2001 BJS survey revealed that while researching
criminal records with missing dispositions, agencies
in 46 States rely on manual procedures. Most of
these States (34 of the 46) use only manual systems
to locate missing final dispositions. Only Colorado,
Michigan, Pennsylvania, and South Dakota fully
utilize automated means to obtain missing final
dispositions.

Agencies unaware of their 
reporting requirements

In certain States the criminal history repository does
not capture final disposition information because the
agencies responsible for providing this information
are not aware of all reporting requirements. Other
States report that courts and law enforcement
agencies are maintaining incomplete or inaccurate
statistics on final case dispositions.
    
Arrest and corrections information does 
not always reach repositories 

The transmission of arrest and corrections information 
to the repository is not required by law or policy in 
all States.  

In 39 States and the District of Columbia, there are
policies to provide the repository with data on the
admission or release of felons from State prison. In
26 States and the District of Columbia, there are
policies to give the repository information on the
admission or release of a felon from a local jail.

Thirty-one States and the District of Columbia have
policies to provide probation information to the
repository, and 30 States and the District of 
Columbia have policies to provide parole information.

If an arrestee is not charged with a crime after the
fingerprints are submitted to the repository, 19 
States indicated that State law does not require that 
the repository be notified of the failure to charge 
the arrestee.

Criminal history repositories face 
challenges in processing records 

Recent BJS surveys have suggested that criminal
history repositories are encountering several
problems including significant backlogs, older 
records that have no dispositions, and infrequent 
audits to ensure accuracy of records.  

The backlogs faced by criminal history repositories
can be measured in two ways: 
(1) by the length of time between the repository's 
receipt of information and when that information is 
entered into a record
(2)by the number of forms that await entry into the
record. 

By both measures, State repositories face significant
challenges that must be met to improve the NICS
background check process. 

Overall average processing times by 
repositories decreased, 1995-2001
    
Separate from the issues whether the repositories
receive final court dispositions, arrest information, 
or correctional information, and whether the received
information is recent, is how well a repository
processes information it does receive. Many State
repositories are unable to quickly process critical
information and include it in the record, despite
progress in recent years).

Final court dispositions   Repositories took an average 
of 25 days to process final court disposition 
information and post it to a criminal record in 2001.  
The time required to post court disposition information 
ranged from 1 day or less in 12 States to 330 days in 
Washington. The majority of responding jurisdictions 
(23) entered these data in 10 days or less.

Average processing time has decreased since 1995 and 
1997 when repositories took 33 and 34 days, respectively, 
to post final court dispositions. In 1999 an average of 
24 days was required.***Footnote 5: The average number 
of days required for repositories to process and post 
final court dispositions to a record was based on 1995-
2001 data from a cohort of 32 States and the District 
of Columbia.***

Prison admission information -- In 2001 an average
of 22 days elapsed between the repository's receipt
of prison admission information and the posting of
that information to the record. The time required to
post prison admission information ranged from 1 day
or less in nine States to 90 days in Illinois.  The
majority of responding jurisdictions (21) enter these
data in 10 days or less. 

The average number of days required to post prison
admission information has declined significantly in
recent years. In 2001 repositories processed and
posted prison admission information in nearly half 
the time required in 1999, when the process took an
average of 43 days. The average processing time for
prison admissions in 2001 was considerably shorter
than in 1995 and 1997 when processing took 49 days
and 29 days, respectively.***Footnote 6: The average 
number of days required for repositories to process 
and post prison admission information to a record 
was based on 1995-2001 data from a cohort of 28 
States.***

Arrest information -- Repositories took an average 
of 13 days to post arrest information to a criminal 
record in 2001. Eleven State repositories posted 
arrest information in 1 day or less. Oklahoma took 
180 days -- the longest time period of any State. 
Most States (27) posted arrest data in 7 days or 
less.  

In 2001 repositories posted arrest information to a
criminal record in less than half the time required 
in 1995, when the process took an average of 32
days.***Footnote 7: The average number of days
required for repositories to process and post arrest
information to a record was based on 1995-2001 data
from a cohort of 41 States and the District of
Columbia.***  In 1997 and 1999 State repositories
took an average of 31 days and 28 days,
respectively, to process arrest information and 
post it to a record.

Repository backlogs exceed 
2.5 million records

In 2001 most States reported that they were
encountering backlogs in entering certain criminal
history information into State criminal databases.
Twenty-six States reported a backlog in entering
arrest and fingerprint information; 27 States had 
a backlog of court disposition forms; and 12 States 
had a backlog of custody supervision reports.

Repositories in States that could estimate the size 
of their backlogs in 2001 reported that 2.5 million
records of arrest, disposition, and custody information
were unprocessed or only partially processed. The
backlog comprised over 2 million court disposition
forms, 350,000 fingerprint cards, and 130,000
custody supervision reports. 

In 2001 State repository backlogs were smaller in 
all three categories of information than they were 
in 1995. Compared to 1997, however, the total backlog
increased 50% in 2001. Most of the increase after
1997 was attributable to unprocessed court
disposition forms, increasing from 940,000 in 1997 
to approximately 2 million in 2001. The number of
unprocessed custody supervision reports nearly
tripled from 1997 to 2001 from 46,500 to 134,000.
From 1997 to 2001, the backlog of unprocessed
fingerprint cards was cut in half from 710,000 to
354,000.

The composition of State criminal record backlogs
remained unchanged in recent years. Since 1995
court disposition forms have comprised the majority
of State criminal record backlogs, followed by arrest
fingerprint cards and custody supervision reports.

Because not all States can estimate the size of their
repository backlogs, the true number of unprocessed
or partially processed criminal justice records is 
likely to be higher than the estimates reported here.

Older records on paper or microfilm account for large
portion of "open arrests"

Many State criminal history records contain arrests
from several years ago for which no final disposition 
was reported. At the request of BJS, the FBI drew a 
sample of NICS checks that could not be completed 
instantly due to the presence of "open arrests." More 
than 75% of the arrests from this sample were from 
1984 or earlier.  

Audits of criminal history records 
remain infrequent

In 2001, 23 State criminal history repository directors
reported that their databases had not been audited
for completeness in the prior 5 years. An audit would
have told them how accurate and complete were the
criminal histories in their holdings. Over half of 
those States (13) reported that they had not planned 
or scheduled a data quality audit to occur within the 
next 3 years. Overall, 24 States did not plan to 
perform a data quality audit within 3 years of the 
survey.

Of the 27 States with completed audits after 1995,
changes were made to improve data quality as a
result of 22 of these audits.

National standards can help assure 
complete criminal history records 

The problem of missing dispositions in State criminal
history records is perpetuated in part because there
is no national consensus on how a missing disposition 
is defined, measured, or researched by State agencies.  

Improvements in criminal history records have fallen
short of earlier BJS efforts to establish voluntary
reporting standards.***Footnote 8:  Recommended
Voluntary Standards for Improving the Quality of
Criminal History Record Information (56 FR 5849).*** 
The presence of a national standard on the time
required for final court disposition information to
reach the repository would encourage better
performance by States that currently process this
information more slowly. 

National standards are lacking on the following 
five issues concerning criminal history record
completeness.

States define "missing dispositions" differently
States' definitions of an "open" arrest or "missing
disposition" vary. It is difficult to accurately 
identify missing dispositions and obtain a national 
estimate of the extent of the problem because the 
term has different meanings in different States. 

Most States (34) and the District of Columbia
consider any arrest event or charge without a
disposition to be a "missing disposition," while 
16 States require a certain amount of time to pass
before an arrest event or charge is officially
considered a missing disposition. 

Ten States reported that they define a missing
disposition as an arrest that is not being actively
prosecuted. These 10 States rely on a variety of
methods to determine that an arrest is not being
actively prosecuted, including notification by the
prosecutor or court, searching court records, and
regular audits of records.

States are divided as to whether they measure a
missing final disposition by using an arrest event 
or an arrest charge. An event has one or more charges.
Twenty-one States measure a final disposition by an
arrest event; 17 States identify it by an arrest 
charge; and 10 States and the District of Columbia 
measure a missing final disposition by both an arrest 
event and an arrest charge. 

There are also two exceptions to the basic information 
used to determine whether a disposition is missing. 
Vermont uses arraignments rather than arrests, and 
Pennsylvania does not specify any particular event 
to measure a missing disposition.

States require long delays before 
designating a disposition as "missing"
                   
Sixteen State repositories require that time elapse
before a disposition is officially considered to be
missing.  

If the subject of a background check has been
convicted of a disqualifying offense and the
conviction is not included in the record, in certain
States months will pass before the record is
designated as having a missing disposition. During
those months the subject will not be prohibited from
purchasing a firearm because the NICS check will not
reveal the disqualifying conviction.
  
Of the 16 States that require a certain amount of 
time to pass before an arrest event or charge will be
officially considered to have a missing disposition.
Two States require that more than 1 year must pass
before a record without a disposition is officially
declared to have a missing disposition (Connecticut
and Washington). In seven States an entire year
must elapse before a disposition is considered
missing (Alaska, Indiana, Kansas, Michigan, Missouri, 
South Carolina, and Virginia). In three States a 
disposition is not counted as missing until more than 
6 months have passed (Arizona, Maine, and New York). 
The remaining four States use another time interval.  

State procedures for handling missing 
dispositions differ

When State repositories receive new disposition
information that cannot be linked to an arrest 
charge or event, States follow varying policies. 
 
From July 1, 2000, to July 1, 2001, 45 States and the
District of Columbia reported receiving final court
dispositions that could not be linked to arrest
information in the criminal history record. When final
court dispositions could not be linked to an arrest, 27
States did not enter the unlinked information. Eight
States created a "dummy" arrest segment with the
information from the court disposition record, and
three States entered the court information without any
linkage to a prior arrest segment. The remaining 12
States and the District of Columbia followed other
procedures.

In that same 1-year period, 34 State repositories
received information from corrections agencies that
could not be linked to arrest information in the
criminal history record. When States received
correctional information for which there was no
underlying court information, 25 States imputed a
conviction for the record. Nineteen States and the
District of Columbia reported that they did not 
enter a conviction on the record based on information 
from corrections agencies. 

When information from corrections agencies cannot
be linked to an arrest, the information is not entered
into the system in 14 States and the District of
Columbia. Six States create a "dummy" arrest segment 
with the correctional information, and 15 States enter 
the correctional information without any linkage to a 
prior arrest segment. 

From July 1, 2000, to July 1, 2001, 32 State
repositories received information from final
prosecutor dispositions that could not be linked to
arrest information in the criminal history record. 
When prosecutor information could not be linked to
an arrest, 24 States and the District of Columbia did
not enter the unlinked information. Six States 
created a "dummy" arrest segment with the unlinked
prosecutor information, and two States entered the
prosecutor information without any linkage to a prior
arrest segment.  

Common identifiers absent in criminal 
history records

The States use a wide variety of identifiers to link
disposition information with the arrest or charging
information, and no single identifier is used by all 
50 States. 

Forty States and the District of Columbia link
dispositions by using a unique arrest event identifier;
28 States and the District of Columbia use a unique
tracking number for an individual suspect; 22 States
and the District of Columbia link dispositions by using
the arrestee's name; and 16 States and the District of
Columbia link dispositions by using a name and a
reporting agency case number. Certain States use
other identifiers, such as arrest date, date of birth, 
or Social Security number of the arrestee, court docket
number, or charge number.

None of the States require positive identification that
would occur with a biometric identifier like fingerprints.

Many States unable to link final  
dispositions to specific charges

Disposition information in a criminal record is often
not linked to specific charges or counts. In 33 States
and the District of Columbia, the method used by the
repository to link disposition information to the
arrest/charge information allows the link to be made
to specific charges or counts, an arrest cycle. State
criminal history record systems can be compared
only with difficulty if some systems are appreciably
more sophisticated and complete than others.
Dispositions should be linked to specific charges in 
all States.

Accurate linkage of dispositions to criminal records
results from proper use by courts of relevant arrest
transaction numbers and the courts' direct submission 
of a livescan with the associated disposition of the 
arrest. Courts have indicated a growing interest in 
utilizing NCHIP funds to purchase livescan equipment.

BJS sponsors National Evaluation 
of NCHIP 

In response to the Attorney General's June 2001
directive, BJS commissioned a 3-year evaluation of
the National Criminal History Improvement Program
(NCHIP). The two purposes of the evaluation were -- 

(1) to measure the performance of State criminal
history records systems 
(2) to identify improvement activities that would 
be most effective in improving record completeness.
 
The evaluation ensured that the NCHIP grant program 
more efficiently addressed strengths and weaknesses 
of State criminal history record systems. Future 
NCHIP grants will be targeted to the specific record 
system deficiencies identified for each State.

The Records Quality Index(RQI)to measure
NCHIP performance 

In 2001 BJS began development of a new criminal
records performance measurement system. The
system will better guide NCHIP provision of funds
and technical assistance to the States.  

The records quality index (RQI) collects and
summarizes performance measures that objectively
assess the relative capabilities of each State's
criminal history record system. The RQI assigns a
system an overall rating based on a wide variety of
performance measures directly related to NCHIP
objectives.

A State's RQI can be compared to the RQI of other
States to determine the relative strength of the
State's criminal history record system. The RQI will
also allow for more specific analysis, permitting BJS
to track the progress of a State by the score received
on each of its performance measures. 
 
The overall RQI a State receives can be compared to
a national average to express whether the overall
efficiency of the State's criminal history record 
system meets, exceeds, or is below the impartial 
summary of all States.  

After complete data are received, the RQI will become 
an invaluable tool for identifying the strengths and 
weaknesses of each State's criminal history record 
system. Using RQI information, NCHIP will target 
funds to activities that will most significantly
improve a State's RQI, thereby improving national
background check systems more directly and quickly.

As of March 2004, 34 States have completed all RQI
data submissions. Another 10 States have made
partial submissions and have demonstrated
substantial progress toward supplying all RQI data.

Elements of the RQI offer distinct 
vantage points

The evaluation for the RQI will break down a State's
criminal history record system into a wide variety 
of performance measures that describe the system's
components, overall structure, and efficiency. 

One measure of the efficiency of a State criminal
history record system is the average time that
elapses before an arrest report is posted to the
criminal history repository. Other ways a system's
utility can also be assessed are by the percentage of
arrest records that are linked to dispositions and by
whether State's criminal justice agencies and the
State's judicial system use common identifiers. 

A State will receive a high score on one component
of the RQI if all of its criminal history records 
are automated and will receive a high score on 
another component if law enforcement agencies are
connected to the courts electronically.

The RQI consists of three sets of performance
measures: input measures, process measures, 
and outcome measures.  

Input measures describe the components of a record
system, including the following: State laws requiring
the fingerprinting of prisoners and transmission of 
the fingerprints to the State repository; use of 
unique tracking numbers in the records for individual
subjects; and requirements that prosecutors submit
declinations to the repository.  

Process measures reflect system performance, including 
the following: procedures followed by the repository 
when a link can not be made between a disposition and 
an arrest; strategies employed to ensure accuracy of 
arrest data, fingerprints, and final court dispositions 
received at the repository; the average time between 
the occurrence of a final felony court disposition and 
the entry of data into the criminal history database; 
and the automation and auditing of certain procedures.  

Outcome measures reflect the impact of the State's
system and whether the records are accessible and
complete. Outcome measures include the following:
the percentage of dispositions that cannot be linked
to an arrest; the number of III records available;
backlogs in entering information into the database;
and repository notification of prosecutor 
declinations.

Criminal histories integrated with 
NIBRS reveal key crime factors


NIBRS Status of the States, August 2003

NIBRS certified 
Idaho
Utah
Colorado
Texas
Kansas
Nebraska
South Dakota
North Dakota
Iowa
Arkansas
Louisiana
Tennessee
Kentucky
Wisconsin
Michigan
Ohio
West Virginia
Virginia
South Carolina
Connecticut
Massachusetts
Rhode Island
Vermont
New Hampshire

Testing NIBRS
Maine
Delaware
New York
New Jersey
Pennsylvania
Indiana
North Carolina
Oklahoma
New Mexico
Montana
Washington
Oregon

Developing NIBRS
California
Arizona
Minnesota
Illinois
Missouri
Alabama
Hawaii
Maryland

No formal plans regarding NIBRS
Nevada
Wyoming
Mississippi
Florida
Georgia
Alaska

Source: FBI, Criminal Justice Information Services, Division, Program Support Section, Greg Swanson, NIBRS Implementation Coordinator


The National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) 
appreciably advances efforts to learn important 
details about crimes in the United States. Beyond 
the summary counts of eight offenses presently 
collected for the FBI Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), 
NIBRS represents a more sophisticated data
collection system. NIBRS enables State and local
jurisdictions to capture detailed offense, offender,
victim, property, and arrest information concerning
each crime incident. NIBRS goals are -- 
*  to enhance the quantity, quality, and timeliness 
of crime data collected by law enforcement
*  to improve the methodology used in compiling,
analyzing, auditing, and publishing collected crime
statistics.

The broader scope of offense and offender
characteristics also permits the development of
policy-relevant findings. These findings can describe
the nature and characteristics of crimes such as gun
assaults, domestic violence, hate crimes, and crimes
against children. Through NIBRS, law enforcement
officials, analysts, and the public can better
understand trends in more types of crime and in the
amount of harm to victims.

Jurisdictions that have incident-level reporting
systems are more capable of using crime data for
strategic planning, tactical crime analysis, and
manpower deployment. This ability should result in
more effective use of limited resources and better
crime control strategies.

Incident-level data, such as NIBRS, provide detailed
information on the contingencies of a crime, including
victim characteristics and consequences for victims.
Such data, when linked to criminal records,  would
permit a background check to determine whether elements 
of the offense meet specific prohibitions for firearm 
transfer or other factors of concern.

Incident reports would contain the victim's 
characteristics, the victim/ offender relationship, and
the offender's use of a firearm -- establishing whether
the victim was a child or whether the offense involved
domestic violence.
 
The FBI and BJS have been active in assisting the
States in meeting the NIBRS standards and becoming 
certified for NIBRS data submission. In 2001 BJS 
distributed $13 million to 26 States through the 
NIBRS Implementation Program to develop and operate 
NIBRS-compatible systems. 

As of August 2003, 24 States had their State UCR
programs approved by the NIBRS Certification Board,
according to the FBI's NIBRS Implementation
Coordinator (map). Twelve States were testing their
systems to determine if they will soon meet
certification standards. Nine States were developing
a NIBRS system, and six (Alaska, Georgia, Florida,
Mississippi, Nevada, and Wyoming) had no formal
plans to provide NIBRS data to the FBI.   

Opportunities for improving background checks

Percentage of criminal history records accessible through the Interstate Identification
Index (III), by State, December 2001

States with at least 75% of records III-accessible
Arizona
California
Colorado
Florida
Georgia
Idaho
Iowa
Maryland
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Montana
Nebraska
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
North Carolina
South Carolina
South Dakota
Virginia
West Virginia
Wyoming

States with 50-74% of records III-accessible
Alaska
Arkansas
Delaware
Illinois
Indiana
Missouri
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Tennessee
Utah
Washington
Wisconsin
	

States with less than 50% of records III-accessible

Alabama
Connecticut
District of Columbia
Hawaii
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
North Dakota
Rhode Island
Texas
Vermont

Since 1995 NCHIP has operated under a broad
mandate to improve public safety by enhancing the
quality, completeness, and accessibility of the
Nation's criminal history record information 
systems. NCHIP has funded State and local initiatives
designed to improve criminal records and to allow
these records to be used for criminal justice and
authorized noncriminal justice purposes.
Achievements of NCHIP were highlighted on pages
1 to 6.

A BJS review of the NCHIP program has concluded
that the program's  resources must be more
aggressively targeted toward bringing the States
into compliance with the Brady Act's provisions.
NCHIP must also become fully responsive to
evolving needs for more extensive and thorough
background checks to protect homeland security.

To reflect these NCHIP management objectives, five
recommended action items are to be incorporated
into NCHIP: 

* obtaining the full participation of the States in 
the FBI's Interstate Identification Index (III) 
* improving State contributions to the FBI's national
databases of prohibited purchasers 
*  formally establishing a National Technical
Assistance Center supported by BJS
* promoting the adoption of a uniform RAP sheet to
standardize records among the States
* periodic BJS surveys of State criminal record
holdings. 

Action item 1: Obtain full State 
participation in the FBI's Interstate 
Identification Index (III)

Serving as the backbone of the NICS system, the
Interstate Identification Index (III) is a decentralized
index-pointer system maintained by the FBI for
exchanging criminal history records.  The III connects
the FBI's computerized files with State-level 
computerized files. The III contains personal
identifiers for more than 48 million offenders. Federal,
State, and local criminal justice agencies may access
it to determine whether an individual has a criminal
record anywhere in the country.

The III's "pointer" specifies the Federal or State
source that maintains any relevant record(s). Once a
hit is made against the Index, the subject's data are
automatically retrieved from each repository and
forwarded to the requesting agency. The FBI estimates 
that the III database contains 94% of the records 
checked by the NICS; therefore, it is critical that 
all States enter full partnership and contribute
their identifiers for inclusion in III.

States generally enter participation in the III 
system in two phases, defined by the nature of the 
records that they agree to provide. For the second 
phase, that of full participation, a State agrees 
to make its III-indexed records available to Federal 
and State agencies for both criminal justice and 
noncriminal justice purposes.

In the second phase the FBI ceases to maintain
duplicate criminal records for persons arrested and
prosecuted in fully participating States. All users 
of criminal history records -- for criminal justice
purposes as well as authorized noncriminal justice
purposes -- will obtain records directly from States'
central computerized files or from the FBI for Federal
records.

Fully participating States must meet minimum
standards that relate to several factors, including 
the completeness and maintenance of the records, the
presence of fingerprints for each record, and
procedures to respond to record requests. At yearend
2001 a quarter or more of the criminal history records
in a majority of States could not meet those
standards.

At the end of 2002, 22 States had at least 75% of
their records accessible through III (map). Thirteen
States and the District of Columbia had less than half
of their records accessible through III. The States and
the Federal Government will benefit in several ways
when all States become full III participants.  

First, the duplicate maintenance of criminal history
records by the States and the FBI will be eliminated,
resulting in significant cost savings. No longer will
States have to submit to the FBI fingerprints and
charge/disposition data for all felony and serious
misdemeanor arrests. Instead, States will submit only
fingerprints and textual identification data for each
person's first arrest to update the III and the National
Fingerprint File (NFF). No longer will the FBI keep
records on State offenders and process fingerprint
cards for all State arrests. Instead, the FBI will
maintain the III, the NFF, and full criminal records 
of Federal offenders.

Second, records made available on an interstate basis 
will be more complete for both criminal justice and 
noncriminal justice purposes, including the screening 
of applicants for certain sensitive positions. State 
repository records are more current than FBI files.  
In addition, many States maintain misdemeanor
records that have not been submitted to the FBI.
These records will become available through the III
system for NICS and other authorized uses.

Third, certain noncriminal justice users will enjoy
faster response times because they will be receiving
electronic responses rather than mailed record
responses from the FBI. These noncriminal justice
users may also benefit from increased efficiency at
the State level resulting from increased automation
and system improvements preceding III participation.

Action item 2: Encourage States to contribute
records to the national databases of persons
prohibited from purchasing firearms: the NICS
Index and National Crime Information Center files

A background check for a firearm transfer involves
the use of records available through the III and 
two other databases maintained by the FBI:

(1) the NICS Prohibited Persons Index (NICS Index),
containing records of persons prohibited by the Gun
Control Act to purchase a firearm -- those
dishonorably discharged from the armed services,
persons who have renounced U.S. citizenship,
mental defectives, controlled substance abusers, 
and illegal/unlawful aliens

(2) the National Crime Information Center (NCIC)
Files, containing records on sex offenders, wanted
persons, convicted persons on supervised release,
and subjects of protective/ restraining orders.
  
FBI statistics show that States have contributed
infrequently to the NICS Index and NCIC databases.
Protection of U.S. residents depends on these
databases of prohibited purchasers being complete
and current.

The NICS Index

The NICS Index is divided into six databases of
persons disqualified under Federal law from 
receiving firearms: 
(1) the Denied Persons File 
(2) the Mental Defectives/Commitments File 
(3) the Controlled Substance Abusers File 
(4) the Illegal/Unlawful Aliens File
(5) the Citizenship Renunciates File 
(6) the Dishonorable Discharges File.  

State law enforcement officials contribute to only
the first four of the six databases. In the following
summary a State is listed as having contributed to a
database as of February 1, 2003, without regard to
the number of records involved. Several
contributing States provided fewer than 10 active
records.

----------------------------------------------
NICS Index databases show minimal State
contributions

The NICS Index increased from 3,222 State records
in February 1999 to 88,696 in February 2003. Nearly
90% of this increase can be attributed to two States.
In February 2002 Vermont added 22,205 records to
the Denied Persons File. In November 2002 Michigan
added 52,698 records to the Mental Defectives File.

As of February 2003 few States had contributed
records to the FBI's NICS Index.  The Denied
Persons File had the largest number of contributing
States (12), followed by the Mental Defectives File
(7), the Controlled Substance Abusers File (3), and
the Illegal/Unlawful Aliens File (2).

Since November 1999 State contributions to the
NICS Index files have increased for all databases. 

NICS database status as of 
February 1, 2003:

Denied Persons File contains information on persons 
who have been denied the purchase of a firearm under 
Federal law but for whom disqualifying information 
is not contained in any other file accessed by the 
NICS. Federal and State law enforcement officials 
are eligible to enter records. The Denied Persons 
File contained 34,904 records contributed by 12 
States. There were 7,514 Federal records in this
file.

Mental Defectives/Commitments File contains
information from State law enforcement officials, 
the Department of Defense, and the Department of
Veterans Affairs. The file includes persons who have
been adjudicated as mentally defective or have been
committed to a mental hospital.

The Mental Defectives/Commitments File contained
53,551 records contributed by 7 States. Federal
agencies have contributed 90,111 files.
    
Controlled Substance Abusers File contains
information on persons who are unlawful users of 
or addicted to any controlled substance. State law
enforcement officials, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the
Department of Defense are eligible to enter records
into this file.

The Controlled Substance Abusers File contained 90
records contributed by 3 States and 76 Federal
records.

Illegal/Unlawful Aliens File contains information
provided by the INS and State law enforcement
officials on illegal or unlawful aliens. The
Illegal/Unlawful Aliens File contained 151 records
from 2 States. Federal agencies have contributed
2,683,910 records.
---------------------------------------------

State law enforcement contributes to four
databases of National Crime Information 
Center(NCIC) File

The NCIC system is a nationwide, computerized
database of criminal justice information. The NCIC
File is divided into eight databases: 
(1) the Protection Order File 
(2) the Convicted Persons on Supervised Release
File 
(3) the Convicted Sex Offender Registry File
(4) the Wanted Persons File
(5) the Deported Felon File
(6) the SENTRY file
(7) the U.S. Secret Service Protective File
(8) the Foreign Fugitive File.

State law enforcement officials contribute to only 
the first four databases. 

From January 2000 to February 2003, the number of
State and Federal records submitted to the NCIC
database nearly tripled from 849,610 to 2,289,320.
The increase in the number of NCIC offender records
available for background checks can be largely
attributed to the increases in the contributions to 
the National Sex Offender Registry (450% increase) 
and the National Protection Order File (220% increase).
Since January 2002 the number of records in each
NCIC file profiled in this report has increased. 

NCIC record status as of 
February 2003

Protection Order File contains court orders that are
issued to prevent acts of domestic violence against 
a person or to prevent a person from stalking,
intimidating, or harassing another person. 

The Protection Order File contains 754,033 records
from 43 States.  Federal agencies have contributed
56 protection orders to this file.

Convicted Persons on Supervised Release File contains 
records on subjects who are put under specific 
restrictions during their probation, parole, or
supervised release sentence following imprisonment.

The Convicted Persons on Supervised Release File
contained 260,556 records from 15 States. There
were three Federal records in this file.

Convicted Sexual Offender Registry File contains
records on individuals who have been convicted of 
a criminal offense against a minor, who have been
convicted of a sexually violent offense, or who are
sexually violent predators.

The Convicted Sexual Offender Registry File contained 
280,329 records from all States and the District of 
Columbia.

This file contained 10 records from Federal agencies.
              
Wanted Person File contains records on persons for
whom a federal warrant, a felony warrant, or a
serious misdemeanor warrant is outstanding.
    
The Wanted Person File contained 857,835 records
from all States and the District of Columbia. Federal
agencies have contributed 42,076 records on wanted
persons.

Action item 3: Establish a National Technical
Assistance Center

A National Technical Assistance Center (NTAC) will
ensure that all State agencies that develop and use
criminal history records are technologically advanced
with compatible information technology systems. The
importance of system designs which ensure compatibility 
with other systems to facilitate criminal and 
noncriminal background checks has never been more 
acute. 

The NTAC will assist States to have the capabilities
and integration necessary to meet homeland security
concerns -- especially in regard to communications
and access to and security of information. NTAC will
help States to determine whether proposed systems
comply with FBI/NICS participation requirements and
meet other needs for background checks.

BJS surveys conducted in response to the Attorney
General's directive demonstrate a clear need for the
NTAC. The surveys found that agencies in 46 States
rely on manual rather than automated procedures
while researching missing dispositions.  Of the 46
States, 34 use only manual systems to locate missing
final dispositions. Twelve States rely on both 
manual and automated procedures, and 4 States rely
completely on automated means to obtain missing
final dispositions.

A difficulty that besets State system development is
the continuous need to replace both hardware and
software as new technology becomes available.
Statewide plans less than a year old are  frequently
determined to be obsolete when the systems become
operational.

The NTAC will provide guidance to ensure that
information technology systems are appropriate,
integrated, and efficient in the short and long 
term.
    
Action item 4: Implement uniform RAP sheets 

Because Federal and State authorities, as well as
private entities, increasingly utilize criminal history
records for homeland security background checks,
criminal justice purposes, and noncriminal justice
purposes, it is more important than ever to make
those records as uniform and readable as possible.

The interstate exchange and interpretation of criminal
history information are needlessly complicated because 
the States and the FBI use different formats and codes. 
State criminal history records often contain symbols, 
or notations, commonly referred to as "flags." Many 
flags are based on requirements under State law. 
When shown on interstate RAP sheets, undefined flags 
can confuse readers. 

BJS has long encouraged States to convert their
criminal history records to the FBI standard interstate
RAP sheet format.***Footnote 9: See, Increasing the
Utility of the Criminal History Record:  Report of the
National Task Force, NCJ 156922, December 1995.*** More 
recently, a national task force, the Joint Task Force 
on RAP Sheet Standardization, determined that adoption 
of a uniform RAP sheet by all States and the FBI would 
benefit users of criminal history records. Information 
in those records would be more easily understood, more 
complete, and more accurate. Adoption of a uniform RAP 
sheet would also provide decision makers with the 
ability to combine or electronically collate criminal 
records from multiple sources into a single chronology 
of events. The set of data elements for the uniform RAP
sheet is intended to include all pertinent information
without overburdening systems with the collection of
extraneous information.

NCHIP funds should be used to assist the States in
adopting uniform RAP sheets that contain the
following five elements: 
(1) a clearly defined link between an arrest and the
subsequent activities and dispositions 
(2) sufficient information to allow users to identify
each agency that contributed particular information 
(3) a notice of the existence of sealed information
that some users may be authorized to obtain
(4) computer interfaces to enhance the quality and
efficacy of the criminal history record
(5) a standard transmission format to ensure that
information from a State can be easily formatted into
the model presentation format, even if the
contributing State has not adopted the model format.

Action item 5: Survey State criminal 
history record holdings periodically

The efficiency of the NICS depends entirely on the
levels of completeness, accuracy, and accessibility 
of State criminal history records. Through the NCHIP
program BJS observes the performance of State
criminal history record systems. The monitoring
identifies the critical areas of improvement that will
have the largest impact on improving the Nation's
record systems. BJS monitors State record systems in 
two ways:

(1) Record Quality Index

The RQI will be used to critically evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of a State's criminal
history record system.  The RQI will measure
improvements over time based on a several key
performance measures. NCHIP will use the RQI
results to work with the States and ensure that funds
are directed to the areas of greatest need in each
State.  The RQI will ensure accurate performance
measurement as well as responsive and timely grant
administration.

(2) Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems

Since 1989 BJS has conducted a biennial data collection 
that examines State criminal history record systems.  
This survey provides important details by State on the 
level of automation of State record systems, the level 
of disposition reporting and felony flagging, the 
timeliness of criminal record processing, measures of 
criminal history record completeness, and State 
procedures to ensure the accuracy and security of 
criminal records.  

Latest survey findings are available in Survey of 
State Criminal History Information Systems, 2001
<http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sschis01.htm.>  Previous
surveys were completed in 1989, 1992, 1993, 1995,
1997, and 1999.

Appendix I Identifying prohibited purchasers: 
The mentally ill

The Gun Control Act as amended prohibits the sale
of a firearm to several categories of potential
purchasers, including persons who have been
adjudicated as a mental defective or have been
committed to a mental institution.

Regulations of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives (ATF) define this mental
health category as --  

* individuals who have been adjudicated as a mental
defective, meaning --
"(a) A determination by a court, board,
commission, or other lawful authority that a person,
as a result of marked subnormal intelligence, or
mental illness, incompetency, condition, or disease: 
(1) Is a danger to himself or to others; or 
(2) Lacks the mental capacity to contract or manage
his own affairs.
(b) The term shall include -- 
(1) A finding of insanity by a court in a criminal 
case; and (2) Those persons found incompetent to stand
trial or found not guilty by reason of lack of mental
responsibility pursuant to articles 50a and 72b of the
Uniform Code of Military Justice."***Footnote 11: See
27 CFR 178.10.***

* persons who have been committed to a mental
institution, meaning -- 
"formal commitment of a person to a mental
institution by a court, board, commission, or other
lawful authority. The term includes a commitment to
a mental institution involuntarily. The term includes
commitment for mental defectiveness or mental
illness. It also includes commitments for other
reasons, such as for drug use. The term does not
include a person in a mental institution for
observation or a voluntary admission to a mental
institution."***Footnote 11: See 27 CFR 178.10.***

This appendix examines -- 
* the number of States that as part of a background
check are unable to regularly access court orders or
involuntary commitments for mental illness
* the principal factors that prohibit mental health
information from being regularly accessed during
background checks* BJS initiatives to improve
access to State mental health records* the results of
a 2002 BJS survey that covered the practices of the
14 States that consult mental health records during
background checks.

Mental health information rarely included in NICS
background checks

Impediments to the timely identification of categories
of prohibited purchasers are significant and have been 
well documented in recent reports by BJS and the 
General Accounting Office(GAO).***Footnote 11: Continuing 
Criminal History Records Improvement Evaluation: Final 
1994-98 Report, BJS report, NCJ 179768, February 2000. 
(All BJS reports are available 
at <http://www.ojp.usdoj. gov/bjs/abstract/>.)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearms 
Sales, Midyear 2002, BJS report, NCJ 198830, 
April 2003. 
 
Use and Management of Criminal History Record
Information: A Comprehensive Report, 2001
Update, BJS report,  NCJ 187670, December 2001.
 
Opportunities to Close Loopholes in the National
Instant Background Check System, General
Accounting Office, GAO-02-720, July 12, 2002. 
 
Improving the National Instant Criminal Background
Check System, General Accounting Office,
GAO-T-GGD-00-163, June 21, 2000.
  
Gun Control: Options for Improving the National
Instant Criminal Background Check System, General
Accounting Office, GAO/GGD-00-56, April 12,
2000.***

In March 2002 BJS surveyed all State criminal history
repository directors to determine whether mental
health records were included in the State's
background checks for firearm sales.  Twenty-five
States and the District of Columbia do not serve as
points of contact for background checks, referring all
background checks to the NICS system. None had
contributed mental health records or any related
mental health information to the FBI for use during
presale firearm checks. Of the remaining 25 States
that serve as points of contact, 11 do not check
mental health records while conducting presale
firearms checks, and 14 do (Map).

Few States make their mental health records available 
to the FBI's Mental Defectives File. As of February 1, 
2003, the NICS Index contained records of the mentally 
ill or incompetent from seven States. Michigan provided 
over 50,000 records, but no other State contributed more 
than 30 records to the file.

To protect the privacy of the mentally ill, a number 
of States have opted to provide records on individuals
prohibited from possessing a firearm for mental health 
reasons to the FBI's Denied Persons File instead of the 
Mental Defectives File. 

Several factors prohibit complete mental 
health information from being accessed 
during background checks


Point of contact States that check mental health records	
California						
Oregon						
Washington					
Utah						
Nebraska						
Wisconsin						
Illinois						
Michigan						
Pennsylvania					
Virginia						
Connecticut					
New Jersey					
Georgia						
						
Point of contact States that do not check 
mental health records	
Nevada						
Arizona						
Colorado						
Iowa						
Indiana						
New York						
Vermont						
Maryland						
North Carolina					
Tennessee						
Florida						
						
Not point of contact States. They do not provide mental
 health information to the FBI's NICS Index.
Idaho						
Montana						
Wyoming						
North Dakota					
South Dakota					
Kansas						
New Mexico					
Oklahoma						
Texas						
Minnesota						
Missouri						
Arkansas						
Louisiana						
Misssissippi					
Alabama						
Kentucky						
South Carolina					
West Virginia					
Massachusetts					
New Hampshire					
Maine						
Delaware						
Rhode Island	

State mental health records incomplete and
infrequently automated 

A 2002 BJS survey of the States revealed that the
condition of the mental health record systems often
renders those records unusable for background
checks. Findings include the following: 

* Nearly 40% of the States (18) reported the lack 
of an interface between the State's mental health
database and the criminal history repository.

* For 12% of the States (6), mental health records
were incomplete.

* Nearly a third of the States (15) reported that 
their mental health records were not fully automated.

* In 16 States officials reported that mental health
records lacked biometric identifiers like fingerprints 
to positively identify an individual. 

Condition of State mental health records also
precludes their transmission to the NICS Index. 
The reasons given for not sharing the mental health
information with the FBI included: 
* Incomplete records (8 States) 
* Automation issues (30 States) 
* No biometric identifiers (15 States).

State privacy laws protect mental health 
information 

When State officials were surveyed as to the factors
that explain why complete mental health information
could not be accessed during background checks,
they cited privacy laws more frequently than any other
factor. 

Nearly 40% of the States reported that State privacy
laws prevented access to complete mental health
information during background checks.***Footnote 12:  
Citations to privacy laws were provided by officials
from Alaska (Alaska Stat. sec 40.25.120), Colorado 
(Colo. Rev. Stat. sec 25-1-1202), New Hampshire (N.H. 
Rev. Stat. sec 151:13), North Carolina (N.C. Gen. Stat. 
sec 122C-52), Wisconsin (Wis. Stat. sec 51.30), and 
Wyoming (Wyo. Stat. sec 25-10-122).***

Officials from 30 States reported that their privacy
laws also prevented the State from providing
complete mental health information to the FBI for
inclusion in the NICS Index.

Agencies lack time and resources to 
access mental health records

In 2002 just over a quarter of the States reported that
they did not have sufficient time or resources to access 
mental health information during background checks. Just 
under a quarter cited insufficient resources as one 
factor preventing them from sharing mental health 
records with the FBI.

BJS develops 6 initiatives to widen 
access to mental health records 
  
BJS has developed six new initiatives to assist the
States in upgrading their ability to consult mental
health information during background checks as
required by the Gun Control Act.  

* BJS will formulate an initiative to write a Model 
Data Sharing Agreement. This collaborative effort 
among the States and BJS will develop State-specific
proposals for making State mental health records
accessible for firearm background checks.  

* Under the Best Practices Initiative, BJS will work
with selected States to develop a best practices
guide. This guide will highlight critical issues that
must be addressed before mental health records can
be included in database searches for disqualifying
information. The guide will describe State practices 
in use and will follow up promising practices that
emerge after the publication of the guide.  

* The Mental Health Courts Initiative will be a
collaboration with the Bureau of Justice Assistance
(BJA) to improve the criminal justice system's
supervision of mentally ill offenders. BJS will work
with BJA and their grant recipients to improve
disposition reporting for mentally ill offenders.

* BJS will work with the States to improve reporting 
to the FBI so that Federal databases will reflect more
complete information on individuals prohibited from
purchasing firearms for mental health reasons.

* BJS will expand two data collections to provide
information on the ability of the States to examine
records of those adjudicated as a mental defective
and of those committed to a mental institution. 

* BJS will more effectively target efforts to provide
NCHIP funds for the improvement of access to mental 
health records.

1. Model Data Sharing Agreement will be 
developed 

In response to a recent BJS survey, officials from 11
point-of-contact States reported that they do not
consult mental health records as part of background
checks for firearm purchases. In nearly two-thirds of
these States, officials indicated that records are not
consulted because State law or regulation prohibits
access. 

One of BJS' statutory mandates is to "provide for the
development and enhancement of State and local
criminal justice information systems."***Footnote 13:
42 USC sec 3732 (18).*** As part of that mandate,
BJS will consult with the appropriate legal, mental
health, and criminal justice officials to develop a
Model Data Sharing Agreement. Such an agreement
would make State mental health records accessible
for firearms background checks under the Federal
Gun Control Act.  

One promising tactical option for the Model Data
Sharing Agreement is to specify a reporting
arrangement with appropriate State authorities. The
State could submit only the names of those with
prohibiting mental health backgrounds to the FBI's
Denied Persons File rather than to the FBI's database
of mental defectives. This is one of many options that
simultaneously protects the privacy of records of
persons with mental health histories and enables the
States to ensure that firearms purchases comply with
Federal law.

2. Best Practices series initiated

Because State agencies vary in their ability to access
mental health records for presale background checks, 
BJS will undertake a Best Practices Initiative to 
highlight promising activities in an ongoing series
of reports.

The Best Practices series will present profiles of
States that can quickly consult mental health records
in response to a NICS inquiry. Findings will highlight
several critical issues, among them --
(1) the legal, policy, or regulatory basis for consulting 
mental health records 
(2) types of mental health records consulted
(3) whether a centralized State database exists and
which agency maintains it 
(4) which agencies (public, private, or both) are 
responsible for contributing mental health information 
(5) procedures that are followed when a background check 
is carried out 
(6)unexpected problems that arose after implementation
of the system 
(7) suggested reforms to improve the system 
(8) contact information for a State official with
responsibility for the system
(9) how issues relating to patient confidentiality were 
addressed.
 
BJS will continue to actively report on the progress
made by all States in accessing mental health
information for firearm presale background checks.

3. Mental Health Courts Initiative undertaken

In 2000 Congress enacted the "America's Law
Enforcement and Mental Health Project" to establish
demonstration mental health courts.  These courts
exist for improving supervision of and delivery of
services to mentally ill offenders.***Footnote 14:
America's Law Enforcement and Mental Health
Project, Pub. L. No. 106-515, 114  Stat. 2399
(2000).***

BJA is administering the Mental Health Courts
Program in collaboration with the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration in the
Department of Health and Human Services. This
program supports "mental health court demonstration
projects that mobilize communities to implement
innovative, collaborative efforts to bring systemwide
improvements in the way they address adult
offenders with mental disabilities or
illnesses."***Footnote 15: BJA, Mental Health Courts
Project Program Competitive Grant Announcement,
2002 at 4.  See also, BJA, Emerging Judicial
Strategies for the Mentally Ill in the Criminal
Caseload: Mental Health Courts in Fort Lauderdale,
Seattle, San Bernardino, and Anchorage.  (NCJ
182504) April 2000, reprinted February 2001.)***

In FY 2003 BJA provided over $2 million to establish
mental health courts that provide continuous juridical
oversight and intensive case management. 

BJS will work with BJA to ensure that recipients of
Mental Health Court Program grants focus on
disposition reporting. State and Federal authorities
should have accurate and complete records on
persons who fall within the purview of the Gun
Control Act if they are processed through the mental
health courts. 

4. Improved State reporting to the FBI 
encouraged

In 2002, 2 of the 14 point-of-contact States that check
mental health records prior to the sale of a firearm
forward denial information to the FBI for the Denied
Persons database in the NICS Index. State officials
from the 12 States not submitting denial information
to the FBI provided reasons that fall into three
categories: 

State law or regulations prohibit the transmission
of this information to the FBI (6 States): State
officials from California, Connecticut, Nevada,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin reported
prohibition of transmitting mental health data. Oregon
officials cited State confidentiality agreements with
mental health agencies. Although Illinois law does not
prohibit disclosure, officials reported that they do 
not provide these denials to the FBI because State 
law does not require them to do so.

Requisite technology is not in place to reliably
submit denial information based on mental health
records to the FBI (3 States): Respondents from
Washington, Wisconsin, and Hawaii noted that they
currently do not have the technology to reliably 
submit denials based on mental health records to 
the FBI. 

States need administrative reforms and improved
interagency coordination (3 States): Nebraska and
Washington officials indicated that the current
fragmented nature of conducting firearms purchases
and issuing firearms permits prevents State officials
from providing denial information from mental health
records to the FBI. Utah officials stated that
defendants who are involuntarily committed generally
have their commitments overturned after responding
to treatment, and these changes in status are not
reliably reported to other State agencies or the FBI. 

To address these problems, BJS will request that
State repositories and their data suppliers code court
orders which commit offenders to mental institutions
as dispositions of arrests on the offenders' RAP
sheets. Those dispositions are to be maintained on
the III- accessible record as well. BJS will also
continue to encourage States to transmit information
on firearm purchase rejections or commitments to
mental institutions to the NICS Denied Persons File
for inclusion in the national NICS checks. This will
remain a high priority for the FY 2004 NCHIP.

5. BJS improves data collection 
concerning the mentally ill

Two BJS surveys obtain information on States' ability
to examine records of persons adjudicated as mental
defectives or committed to mental institutions. In
response to Attorney General Ashcroft's June 2001
directive to BJS, BJS followed up on the Survey of
State Procedures Relating to Firearms Sales and the
Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems. These improvements will permit BJS to
better inform policymakers about State efforts to
examine mental health records during background
checks.

The Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm 
Sales is an annual national survey produced by the 
BJS Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) project, a 
component of NCHIP. The FIST project was established 
in 1995 to collect data that describe the scope and 
impact of firearm background checks required under 
Federal or State law. Survey reports have been 
published annually since 1996. Information is collected 
from hundreds of Federal, State, and local agencies, 
including law enforcement organizations, statistical 
analysis centers, and legislative research bureaus.

The current survey asks point-of-contact States to
indicate whether they access a statewide mental
health database when conducting a background
check for a firearms transfer. The follow-up survey
will examine  the complicated issue of how a State
handles information about persons adjudicated as
mental defectives or committed to a mental
institution. 

The follow-up survey will -- 

*  Gather more detailed information about procedures
used to check mental health records, the level of
automation of these records, the nature of the
impediments to checking mental health records, and
initiatives planned or underway to consult these
records.

*  Add questions about the nature of the database of
those States checking mental health records from a
centralized database.

The Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems is a biennial survey of all directors of State
criminal history repositories. The initial survey in 
this series was administered in 1989. The survey is the
primary source of information on the size, level of
automation, and shareability of criminal history record
holdings in each State. It provides details of the
procedures by which State repositories receive and
process criminal history information including arrests,
correctional data, and disposition data.

Survey enhancements will include the 
following:
 
*  For those States that serve as points of contact for
background checks, information will be obtained on
the centralized State databases that are utilized to
consult records of those adjudicated as a mental
defective and those committed to a mental institution.

Analysis of results will address the size, level of
completeness, and accuracy of these databases. If
databases are described as incomplete, follow-up
questions will ascertain the reasons for the
incompleteness and the remedial measures being
undertaken, if any.  

*  To assess the accuracy of these databases, the
survey will examine how often the databases are
audited to remove items such as overturned judicial
findings of mental illness. For States that do not 
serve as points of contact for background checks, the
follow-up will examine which State agencies maintain
mental health information and the impediments to
transmittal of this information to the NICS Index. 

6. Technical assistance for improving access to
mental health records provided to States

A longstanding priority of NCHIP has been
establishing the infrastructure to support full
implementation of the NICS. BJS has strongly
encouraged States to improve access to mental
health records, stressing its importance through 
its annual NCHIP announcements and communications
with the States.***Footnote 16: National Criminal
History Improvement Program Fiscal Year 2002
Program Annoucement, NCJ 192811, February 2002.***
 
BJS will make NCHIP funds available for three
related purposes:

(1) To support of the Best Practices Initiative for 
the replication of projects featured in the Best 
Practices report and the bulletins describing 
promising activities.  

(2) To support the Initiative to Improve State
Reporting to the FBI to remove the technological
impediments to report denials based on mental
health disqualifiers.  

(3) To directly assist the States in designing and
implementing an array of new programs, policies, and
technologies to upgrade capabilities to search mental
health records. 

BJS will also encourage States that have few
automated mental health records to use NCHIP funds
for the automation of mental health records. States
will be encouraged to establish processes that enable
courts to automatically update a defendant's criminal
record if the offender is adjudicated mentally
incompetent or not guilty by reason of insanity.

BJS surveyed States that search 
mental health records in 
background checks

In 2002 BJS conducted an in-depth survey of all 14
States that include mental health records in database
searches before transfers of firearms. This survey
examined a number of issues relating to these States'
procedures for checking mental health records,
including the following: 
* how the authority to check
mental health records was initially obtained
* which agencies maintain the information
* which entities provide it
* whether the mental health records are maintained
in a central State database
* whether an agreement exists between the State
repository and the mental health care providers
* information concerning the types of mental health
information checked
* costs of establishing and maintaining the system
* improvements that are needed to make the system
more effective
* other related issues.

14 point-of-contact States check 
mental health records 

Of the 25 States that serve as points of contact
(POC's) for firearm purchases, the BJS survey found
that 14 include  State mental health records in the
search prior to the transfer of a firearm.***Footnote
17: For this survey, the designation "POC State"
covers States conducting presale checks for all
firearms or for only certain firearms that are sold 
in the State.*** The POC States that include mental
health records in their presale firearms checks are
California, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, Virginia, Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii,
Nebraska, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and
Wisconsin. 

The 11 POC States that do not check mental health
records are New York, Arizona, Colorado, Florida,
Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Nevada, New Hampshire,
North Carolina, and Tennessee. 

The remaining 25 States and the District of Columbia
do not serve as POC's. None of these jurisdictions
contributes mental health records or any related
mental health information to the FBI for use during
presale firearm checks.  

On average, the 14 States that examine mental
health records prior to sales of a firearm have over
7 years of experience in conducting these checks.
The States with the most experience are Hawaii (18
years), California (11 years), Illinois (10 years),
Virginia (9 years), and Washington and Wisconsin
(8 years each).
              
The BJS survey asked the State repository directors
to characterize their State's mental health records 
on the basis of --
(1) accuracy
(2) timeliness 
(3) accessibility for a firearms check (4)
completeness.  

Most State repositories rated their records as "very
good" or "excellent" in each of the four criteria. 
The California, Georgia, Illinois, and New Jersey
repository directors rated their mental health records
as generally "excellent." Repository directors for
Connecticut and Utah rated their mental health
records as generally "very good."  

Three of the State repository directors rated their
mental health records as "poor" on one of the criteria.
Directors in Oregon and Nebraska characterized the
timeliness of their mental health records as poor.
Virginia reported the accessibility for a firearms 
check to be poor.

The survey asked State officials to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the State's program to
allow mental health information to be checked prior 
to the sale of a firearm. Respondents from Michigan
and Nebraska commented that the process is
burdensome on personnel and costly in terms of
human resources and technology.  

In contrast, survey respondents from California,
Georgia, and New Jersey indicated that their systems
work well and perform a valuable public service.

In California from 1991 through February 2002, more
than 3,100 individuals were denied the purchase of a
firearm due to a pre-existing mental health diagnosis
that the individual was a danger to himself or 
others.
    
Repository directors recommended 
reforms for checks of mental health 
records

The survey asked the 14 State repository directors
what could be done to make their checks of mental
health records more efficient. Recommendations
included -- 
* greater automation of records so that checks may
be conducted online
* permit courts, public and private mental health
facilities, and other mandatory reporters to submit
data about prohibited persons in Internet-based real
time reporting to the State database 
* permit interstate access to the mental health
information by State officials 
* broaden the scope of mental health databases to
include private mental health facilities
* standardize the process for obtaining and
maintaining records, removing  inconsistent
requirements among States
* add positive identifications of mental health
patients, such as a fingerprint or other biometric
identifier.   

States check different types of 
mental health information 

Each of the 14 POC States that consult mental health 
records conducts a check of adjudicated commitments, 
in which individuals were committed after a hearing 
by a judge or a specially appointed officer or board. 

Apart from the category of adjudicated commitments,
the mental health information that is checked during
investigations of firearm purchasers varies among the
States.  

California included in its check of mental health
records information on individuals who have
communicated serious threats of violence to a
licensed therapist.

States vary approaches for checking 
mental health records  

Ten of the 14 States maintained a central database
of mental health records. Agencies supporting or
managing these databases are the State police
(Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Virginia), State mental
health department or department of health
(Connecticut, Hawaii, New Jersey, and Washington),
criminal justice agencies (California and Georgia),
and the Department of Human Services (Illinois).

Some State databases collect information on mental
health records only from publicly-funded facilities
while other States include private facilities as
contributors. In Hawaii only the publicly-funded
mental health facilities contribute information to 
the State database. Other States collect from public 
and private mental health facilities (New Jersey and
Washington) as well as public mental health care
psychiatrists, psychologists, and counselors
(California, Oregon, and Illinois). Connecticut,
Georgia, Michigan, and Virginia receive mental health
information only through the courts. Under
Pennsylvania law mandatory reporters include judges
of the Courts of Common Pleas, mental health
administrators, and mental health review officers.

Several States noted that 100% of the individuals
within the State database would be prohibited from
purchasing a firearm in the State. However, most
States were unable to estimate what percentage of
the State's mental health patients are included in 
the central database.
              
State databases of mental health information are
updated frequently. Only one State (Oregon) updates
its database in real time. Eight States update their
mental health databases daily (California,
Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Michigan,
Pennsylvania, and Virginia). New Jersey updates its
mental health database on a weekly basis. 

Of the four States without a centralized database,
Utah and Wisconsin generally maintain their mental
health information in the courts, while Nebraska 
uses the courts as well as State commissions and
individual mental health facilities. Oregon relies 
on several databases maintained by various State
agencies including the State mental health
department.

Informal relationships link State 
criminal record repositories and 
mental health agencies 

A formal agreement, such as a memorandum of
understanding signed by a State's criminal history
record repository and mental health providers, can
govern submission of mental health information for
determining eligibility to purchase a firearm. In only
Georgia, New Jersey, and Oregon does such an
agreement exist, the result of negotiations between
the affected agencies. The remaining 11 States
reported no formal agreement. 
    
Seven States indicated that State administrative
regulations or internal policies governed the transfer
of mental health information. Four of the 14 States
(Illinois, Michigan, Nebraska, and Wisconsin)
responded that no such administrative regulations
existed.

Most States can restore right to 
possess firearms to individuals 
disqualified for mental health
reasons

In 8 of the 14 States, a prohibition against a firearm
purchase based on a mental health disqualification
may be lifted once a court or other adjudicatory body
restores a "non-mental defective" status to the
individual. These States are California, Connecticut,
Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia,
and Wisconsin.  

In California certain individuals are prohibited from
purchasing firearms for life pursuant to Federal law.
For other individuals the prohibition may be lifted
under certain circumstances, such as release from a
mental health treatment facility or successful
completion of the court's restoration process. The
majority of prohibitions in California's central
database last 5 years. 

In Georgia and Illinois the prohibition against
purchasing firearms lasts for 5 years after discharge
from a treatment facility. In Virginia the prohibition
may be lifted upon an individual's release from a
mental health facility. Nebraska and Oregon are the
only States to report that the prohibition against
purchasing firearms is permanent.  

Legislation served as the primary 
source of authority for examining 
mental health information

In almost all of the States (12 of the 14), the 
authority to use mental health records as disqualifying
information came from the State legislature. Only
Nebraska and New Jersey cited other sources of
authority.  

In half the States the criminal record repository was
involved in drafting the legislation. The legislation
generally came about from a gradual recognition of
the need to examine mental health records. Only
Connecticut reported that State legislation was
enacted as a result of a single high-profile incident. 

Most mental health information 
mailed to the repository

Five of the 14 States transmit mental health
information to the criminal history repository or
firearms processing agency online or by some other
automated method (Connecticut, Michigan, Oregon,
Utah, and Wisconsin).  Ten of the States mail hard
copies or tapes of the mental health information to
the repository at regular time intervals (California,
Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, Nebraska, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin).
Although a few States utilize more than one mode of
transmission, most do not. 

All State repositories have adopted 
security measures to protect mental 
health information

All State repositories reported security measures 
to ensure that only personnel determining firearm
eligibility have access to the mental health
information in the repository. Two States provide 
for broader access. In California law enforcement
personnel are granted access to the information
under statutorily specified conditions limited to
criminal investigations that involve the carrying 
or use of a firearm. In Pennsylvania the subject 
of the record and law enforcement officials who 
enforce State firearm laws are provided access to 
the mental health records in the repository.

In addition to personnel restrictions, each State
repository reported system security measures such
as firewalls, password-protected information, and
employee identification checks to prevent
unauthorized parties from accessing the mental
health information. 

State repositories often use quality control measures
to ensure the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness 
of the mental health information received. Most of 
the States (11 of the 14) conduct a manual review 
of the incoming data or a manual review of the data 
prior to making an eligibility determination. Five
States (California, Hawaii, Illinois, Michigan, and
Oregon) rely on computers to edit and verify the
information. The Hawaii and Illinois repositories
conduct regular audits of the system to ensure 
quality control. 

In the event of a breach of quality control, such as 
a complaint concerning the unauthorized release of
information or mistaken identity, most of the States
(10 of 14) provide a mechanism by which the
complainant can formally appeal the error. These
complaints are handled through an appeals process
in California, Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
New Jersey, Oregon, Utah, Virginia, and Wisconsin.
There is no appeals process for quality control
breaches in Michigan, Nebraska, and Pennsylvania. 

States overlap concerning the identifiers used with
mental health records. Nearly every State used the
subject's name, date of birth, Social Security
number/driver's license number, race, and gender.
Other identifiers include the adjudication date
(Virginia), admission date (New Jersey), date of
commitment (Pennsylvania), case number (Michigan), 
patient identification number (Illinois), address 
(Illinois), facility name/number (Illinois and
New Jersey), physical description (California, 
Virginia, and Wisconsin), and charge code(Michigan). 
    
11 States provide appellate review 
of denials of firearm purchase due 
to mental health history

Eleven of the 14 States have established an appeals
process for prospective firearms purchasers who are
initially denied access to a firearm because of a
disqualifying mental health history. These States 
are California, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, New 
Jersey, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. The three that do not 
provide appellate review of these denials are 
Connecticut, Michigan, and Nebraska.

Costs for accessing State mental 
health information varies across 
States
    
The costs of developing and maintaining access to
State mental health information depend on a number
of factors including the following: 
* the State's regulations concerning access to and
use of mental health records 
* the size of the State's mental health population 
* the presence or absence of procedures to lift the
firearms prohibition based on a mental health
disqualification 
* the presence or absence of interagency agreements
* the level of automation of the State's mental health
records.  

Cost estimates to develop systems to access mental
health information range from "minimal cost"
(Wisconsin) to $800,000 (California). Six States
provided cost estimates between these two. Systems
development cost $150,000 in Connecticut, $80,000
in Oregon, $54,000 in New Jersey, $25,000 in
Nebraska, $10,000 in Virginia, and $7,000 in Utah. 

Startup costs were higher than anticipated in
Connecticut, Hawaii, Nebraska, and Pennsylvania. 
They were lower than anticipated in New Jersey,
Oregon, Utah, and Virginia.

Similar variation occurred among State estimates of
annual costs to maintain these systems. New Jersey,
Nebraska, Virginia, and Wisconsin reported that
annual maintenance costs were negligible while
California estimated the annual cost to be $408,000.
Annual maintenance costs are estimated to be
$30,000 in Hawaii, $10,000 in Connecticut, $3,000 in
Oregon, and $1,500 in Utah.   

The nine States of Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii,
Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia, 
and Wisconsin reported that State funds support 
the systems by which mental health information 
is examined during a firearms background check.
These States rely on both long-term and annual
appropriations by the State legislature.

New Jersey and Nebraska reported relying on
Federal funds, while California, Pennsylvania,
Oregon, and Wisconsin finance all or part of 
their systems through fees. 

State systems that access mental 
health information report success

Most States report no significant operational changes
in the systems that provide the State repositories 
with mental health information. 

Illinois improved their system by incorporating more 
professional mental health consultants. Utah officials 
added an audit feature to permit the courts and the 
Department of Public Safety to compare and verify 
information on a weekly basis. California officials 
reported that corrective legislation was required to 
eliminate duplicative reporting.

Appendix II  Identifying prohibited purchasers:
Domestic violence misdemeanants and
subjects of restraining orders

The Gun Control Act as amended prohibits the
possession of a firearm by individuals who have
been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence. According to ATF regulations,
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence means --
 
"a Federal, State or local offense that:

* Is a misdemeanor under Federal or State law or, in
States which do not classify offenses as misdemeanors, 
is an offense punishable by imprisonment for a term 
of one year or less, and includes offenses that are 
punishable only by a fine. (This is true whether or 
not the State statute specifically defines the offense 
as a 'misdemeanor' or as a 'misdemeanor crime of 
domestic violence.' The term includes all such 
misdemeanor convictions in Indian Courts established 
pursuant to 25 CFR part 11.)
     
* Has, as an element, the use or attempted use of
physical force (e.g., assault and battery), or the
threatened use of a deadly weapon
  
* Was committed by a current or former spouse, parent, 
or guardian of the victim, by a person with whom the 
victim shares a child in common, by a person who is 
cohabiting with or has cohabited with the victim as 
a spouse, parent, or guardian,(e.g., the equivalent 
of a 'common law' marriage even if such relationship 
is not recognized under the law), or a person 
similarly situated to a spouse, parent, or guardian 
of the victim (e.g., two persons who are residing at 
the same location in an intimate relationship with 
the intent to make that place their home would be 
similarly situated to a spouse).

"A person shall not be considered to have been 
convicted of such an offense for purposes of this 
part unless:  

* The person is considered to have been convicted by
the jurisdiction in which the proceedings were held.
  
* The person was represented by counsel in the case, 
or knowingly and intelligently waived the right to
counsel in the case; and 
  
* In the case of a prosecution for which a person was
entitled to a jury trial in the jurisdiction in which 
the case was tried, either  (i) The case was tried by 
a jury, or  (ii) The person knowingly and intelligently
waived the right to have the case tried by a jury, by
guilty plea or otherwise.  

"A person shall not be considered to have been
convicted of such an offense for purposes of this part
if the conviction has been expunged or set aside, or
is an offense for which the person has been pardoned 
or has had civil rights restored (if the law of
the jurisdiction in which the proceedings were held
provides for the loss of civil rights upon conviction 
for such an offense) unless the pardon, expunction, or
restoration of civil rights expressly provides that the
person may not ship, transport, possess, or receive
firearms, and the person is not otherwise prohibited
by the law of the jurisdiction in which the proceedings
were held from receiving or possessing any
firearms."***Footnote 18: See 27 CFR 178.11. *** 

The Act as amended also prohibits possession of
firearms by individuals who are the subject of a
restraining order. Federal law defines this
prohibition as a person who --
"is subject to a court order that restrains such person
from harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate
partner of such person or child of such intimate
partner or person, or engaging in other conduct that
would place an intimate partner in reasonable fear of
bodily injury to the partner or child, except that this
paragraph shall only apply to a court order that --
(a) was issued after a hearing of which such person
received actual notice, and at which such person had
the opportunity to participate; and 
(b)(i) includes a finding that such person represents
a credible threat to the physical safety of such
intimate partner or child; or (ii) by its terms 
explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use, or 
threatened use of physical force against such intimate 
partner or child that would reasonably be expected to 
cause bodily injury."***Footnote 19: 18 USC sec 922.***
  
Several recent BJS and GAO reports make clear that
domestic violence misdemeanor conviction records
and restraining orders continue to pose significant
challenges to the NICS system: 
  
-- Use and Management of Criminal History Record
Information: A Comprehensive Report, 2001 Update,
(NCJ 187670) December 2001.-- Continuing Criminal
History Records Improvement Evaluation: Final
1994-98 Report, (NCJ-179768) February 2000.
-- Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearms
Sales, Midyear 2002, (NCJ-198830) April 2003.
-- Opportunities to Close Loopholes in the National
Instant Background Check System, General
Accounting Office, (GAO-02-720) July 12, 2002.  
-- Improving the National Instant Criminal Background
Check System, General Accounting Office,
(GAO-T-GGD-00-163) June 21, 2000.  
-- Gun Control: Options for Improving the National
Instant Criminal Background Check System, General
Accounting Office, (GAO/GGD-00-56) April 12, 2000.

The first section of this appendix examines the
principal impediments to accessing complete
domestic violence misdemeanor records and
restraining orders, including --

* Nonfelon information being generally unavailable 
to State repositories
* Unautomated conviction records for domestic
violence misdemeanors and unautomated restraining
orders 
* Incomplete records for domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions and incomplete restraining
orders
* Insufficient resources to examine domestic
violence records and restraining orders
* Problematic case management for domestic
violence 
* Complicated Federal definition of "misdemeanor
crime of domestic violence."

The final section of Appendix II presents five new
BJS initiatives to improve access to these records.

States improve access to domestic 
violence records

Since 1996 BJS has encouraged States to use NCHIP 
funds to flag records to designate misdemeanor 
convictions for domestic violence, stalking, 
protection orders, and crimes against children, the 
elderly, and the disabled. Between 1995 and 2002, 
BJS awarded over $18.5 million, or 5% of all 
available NCHIP funds, to 45 States and the
District of Columbia for the automating, upgrading,
and flagging of domestic violence records and
protection order files. States have also used NCHIP
funds to develop registries for protection orders and
restraining orders.

Improving records for domestic violence offenders
will remain one of BJS' most important priorities for
two reasons. First, domestic violence misdemeanants
represent a disproportionately large percentage of
firearm retrieval actions referred to the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF).
Across more than 34 months, 1998-2001, ATF data
indicate that domestic violence misdemeanants
accounted for 14% of all FBI NICS denials but nearly
26% of firearm retrieval referrals.***Footnote 20: 
Opportunities to Close Loopholes, pp. 18-20.***The
percentage of retrieval actions referred to ATF for
subjects of a protection order was not
disproportionate. Individuals subject to a protection
order comprised nearly 4% of NICS denials and 1%
of firearm retrieval referrals.  

Second, domestic violence caseloads have increased
in recent years, strongly suggesting an increase in
the number of domestic violence convictions.
According to the National Center for State Courts,
domestic violence filings increased 12% between
1996 and 2000.***Footnote 21: Examining the Work
of State Courts, 2001: A National Perspective from
the Court Statistics Project, National Center for 
State Courts, 2001.*** Ten States had increases of 
10% or more in the number of domestic violence filings
between 1998 and 2000: South Dakota (34%), Ohio
(27%), Illinois (21%), Indiana (21%), Tennessee
(19%), Montana (18%), Michigan (15%), North
Dakota (15%), West Virginia (12%), and Virginia
(11%).***Footnote 22:Examining the Work of State
Courts, 2001, p. 42. ***  

Without better procedures to identify domestic
violence offenders and persons with protection 
orders against them, the threat to public safety 
will become more severe as the number of domestic 
violence offenders increases.

States hampered in checks for domestic violence
misdemeanants and subjects of protection orders

Repositories miss domestic violence 
misdemeanor records 

As of midyear 2002, 36 State criminal history
repositories maintained data on domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions, and 43 repositories
contained information on restraining orders.***
Footnote 23: survey of State Procedures Related 
to Firearm Sales, Midyear 2002 (NCJ 198830) April 
2003.*** How complete these databases are or how 
frequently they are updated or audited is unknown.

The lack of comprehensive misdemeanor arrest and
disposition data has been identified as a major
deficiency in State criminal history record
systems.***Footnote 24: Use and Management of
Criminal History Record Information: A
Comprehensive Report, 2001 Update(NCJ 187670)
December 2001.*** In many States only suspects
charged with felonies are routinely fingerprinted, 
and only their arrests are reported to the 
repository for inclusion in a suspect's RAP sheet.

Automation remains a problem for some domestic
violence misdemeanor records and protection orders

In 2002 four States indicated that the lack of
automated misdemeanor records prevented officials
from fully checking domestic violence convictions.

Seven States reported in 2002 that State officials
could not retrieve accurate protection order
information because the records were not fully
automated. 

The lack of automation prevents many States from
forwarding these records to the FBI. Eight States
reported that lack of automated records prevented
them from sending misdemeanor domestic violence
information to the FBI. In 11 States, officials 
indicated that they were prevented from forwarding 
protection order information to the FBI because the 
information was not automated.

Records incomplete for domestic violence
misdemeanors and protection orders 

In response to a 2002 survey, 20 States reported 
that incomplete records prevented the State from
retrieving accurate domestic violence misdemeanor
information for background checks. These records
were incomplete for several reasons, including the
following: 
*  absence of a flag denoting domestic violence
misdemeanor
*  the age of the record 
* the lack of a final disposition
* the lack of information about the victim-offender
relationship
*  the failure of arresting agencies and courts to
report the information promptly to the repository
*  agency procedures that do not require
fingerprinting misdemeanants.

Twelve States also reported in 2002 that incomplete
restraining order information made it difficult to
conduct background checks. Most of these States
indicated that restraining order records were
incomplete due to the courts' inability to provide 
the repository with the necessary information. Other
factors included the failure to have proper identifiers
(such as date of birth) in the record, lack of
automation, and insufficient resources to process the
information accurately and promptly.

Incomplete records not only complicate background
checks, they also prevent States from submitting
material to FBI databases, such as the National
Protection Order File. Problems from incomplete
records prevented 15 States from providing domestic
violence misdemeanor information to the FBI and
prevented 13 States from providing protection orders.
Nineteen States reported that the absence of a flag 
in the record prevented the State from sending
domestic violence misdemeanor records to the FBI. 

State checking agencies lack time and resources to
access domestic violence records or restraining
orders

In 2002 eight States reported that they did not have
sufficient time or resources to access complete
domestic violence misdemeanor information for
background checks. Four states reported that
additional time or resources were needed before they
could retrieve complete restraining order information
for background checks.

Officials from five States reported that insufficient
resources were a factor that prevented them from
providing the FBI with complete domestic violence
misdemeanor information. In 10 States officials
reported that they did not have sufficient resources 
to provide complete protection order information to 
the FBI.

Tracking of domestic violence cases 
often difficult 

Handling of domestic violence-related cases varies
within and between States. Cases involving domestic
violence may arise from a variety of divisions 
within a State judicial system, such as civil, 
criminal, juvenile, and family divisions, as well as 
from specialized domestic violence courts. Case 
management systems vary in their ability to track 
case filings, the issuance of protection orders, and 
documenting case outcomes.   

The lack of data on domestic violence is also related
to the legal definitions of offenses. Recorded offenses 
may not include information about the victim. 

That information is essential to determine whether 
an assault, for example, occurred between intimate
partners, acquaintances, or strangers.  

To better understand how the courts handle domestic
violence cases, in 2002 BJS initiated a study of
case-processing flows through the criminal justice
system for persons charged with domestic violence
offenses.  Representative data from the 75 largest
counties will be collected. An estimated 16,000
domestic violence cases will be tracked from arrest,
through prosecution, to conviction and sentencing.
Information will be obtained on the types of
sentences imposed for domestic violence, including
supervision in the community under sentences to
probation.  

Factors affecting the likelihood of conviction will 
be documented. Apart from legal provisions, these
factors may include the following: the victim-offender
relationship, criminal histories of victim and 
offender, policies guiding issuance and enforcement of
restraining orders, prosecutorial policies regarding
domestic violence cases, and pretrial release and
sentencing practices.

The study's objective is to determine whether
domestic violence cases are handled differently from
other types of assault filings. Reporting to criminal
record repositories may be one of the differences.

Definition of "misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence" complicated
 
The GAO identified another impediment to domestic
violence misdemeanor reporting.***Footnote 25: 
Opportunities to Close Loopholes in the National
Instant Background Check System, pp. 21, 67.*** 
The GAO noted that the Federal definition of 
"misdemeanor crime of domestic violence" presents 
a unique challenge for States for at least two 
reasons: 
(1) the law is retroactive in scope
(2) the definition requires information about court
proceedings that may be available only through
manual research.

For a Federal firearms eligibility determination 
to be made, several elements must be known about the
misdemeanor domestic violence conviction, including
the following: 
(1) whether an offender was represented by counsel
or knowingly and intelligently waived the right to
counsel 
(2) whether there was a jury trial if the offender 
was entitled to one, or whether this right was 
intelligently waived
(3) whether a conviction that meets these criteria was
later expunged or set aside or was for an offense for
which the offender was pardoned or had his/her civil
rights restored. 

According to a 2002 BJS survey, seven States
reported that the complicated nature of the Federal
definition of a "misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence" prevented the State from retrieving
complete and accurate domestic violence
misdemeanor information.  

Four States reported that the cumbersome Federal
definition of a "misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence"  prevented the State from sending 
complete and accurate domestic violence misdemeanor
information to the FBI.

BJS has developed 5 initiatives to improve
access to misdemeanor domestic violence
records and to protection orders: 

1. NCHIP will focus on improving the flagging 
of domestic violence misdemeanor records

Since 1996, when a conviction for a domestic
violence misdemeanor was added to the list of
Federal firearm prohibitors, NCHIP has supported
State efforts to ensure that records of domestic
violence related offenses are included or "flagged" 
in criminal history records. Allowable costs under
NCHIP have included the costs of flagging or
algorithms used for flagging as well as those
associated with the identification of records to be
flagged. Since 1996 NCHIP funds have enabled
certain States to build centralized statewide domestic
violence databases and to upgrade their records;
however, not all States have done so.  

This new initiative will encourage State officials 
to place a higher priority on meeting the challenges
posed by domestic violence misdemeanor convictions. 
NCHIP funds will be made available to the States to 
allow them to implement procedures that ensure that 
misdemeanor convictions involving domestic violence 
are systemically incorporated into RAP sheets and 
made available for use during a NICS check.

The BJS evaluation of the NCHIP program will gather
systematic data on techniques used across States to
overcome impediments to identifying prohibited
firearm purchasers. The evaluation will document
changes in the ability of States to provide such
information to the NICS Index.

2. NCHIP will assist States in 
obtaining NIBRS certification 

BJS has provided funds under CITA to the States to
promote NIBRS, an emerging FBI data system designed 
to capture detailed offense, offender, victim,
property, and arrest data on each crime incident. 
BJS strongly encourages States to link NIBRS data on
offenders to RAP sheet arrest and disposition
transactions. The victim and incident characteristics,
such as victim-offender relationship, can thereby be
used in the State's background check.

The NIBRS system can improve State criminal records' 
identification of domestic violence offenders. For 
example, a criminal record that shows an assault
conviction might be linked with NIBRS information to
identify the relationship between the victim and
offender, including relationships within the family
(such as spouse, common-law spouse, and sibling)
and outside the family (such as acquaintance,
ex-spouse, and boy/girlfriend). This additional
information may replace the tedious manual research
currently required to determine whether a conviction
meets the Federal definition for a domestic violence
disqualifier. 

In 2001 BJS distributed $13 million to 26 States 
through the NIBRS Implementation Program to 
develop and operate NIBRS-compatible systems. 
As of August 2003, 24 States had their State UCR
programs approved by the NIBRS Certification Board.

BJS remains committed to assisting  States in
attaining NIBRS certification. BJS will place a 
higher priority on its collaboration with the FBI to 
reach the goal of having all States become NIBRS 
certified as soon as practicable. This collaboration 
will focus on the 14 States testing their systems to 
determine whether they may soon meet certification 
standards, on the 9 States developing their NIBRS 
systems, and on the 6 States with no formal plans to 
provide NIBRS data. 

3. BJS will improve its data collections domestic
violence misdemeanors and protection orders

Two BJS surveys examine States' ability to use data
on domestic violence misdemeanor convictions and
protection orders: the Survey of State Procedures
Relating to Firearms Sales and the Survey of State
Criminal History Information Systems. This initiative
will require BJS to expand upon these surveys,
learning more about the problems that the NICS
faces in checking these records.

In response to the Attorney General's 2001 directive
to BJS, BJS has followed up on the Survey of State
Procedures Relating to Firearms Sales and the
Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems. 

The Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm 
Sales an annual national survey, describes the 
scope and impact of firearm background checks
required under Federal or State law.  

The current survey asks States to indicate whether
they access a statewide database for domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions when conducting
a background check for a firearms transfer. A
separate question asks whether a statewide
database for restraining orders is accessed during
background checks.  

BJS has recently supplemented these questions to
gain in-depth information on-- 
* State procedures for checking domestic violence
misdemeanor records and protection orders
* impediments to checking these records
* whether this information is forwarded to the FBI
* impediments to transmittal of this information to 
the FBI
* whether improvements are underway or planned to
improve the State's ability to access or use domestic
violence misdemeanor records and protection orders.

The Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems is the primary source of information on the
size and level of automation of criminal history 
record holdings by State.

For the States that serve as points of contact for
background checks, BJS will follow up on the survey
to learn more about the centralized State databases
used for domestic violence misdemeanor records
and protection orders. BJS will also determine the
size, level of completeness, and accuracy of these
databases. 

If databases containing domestic violence information
are described as incomplete, follow-up questions will
seek reasons for the incompleteness and remedial
measures being undertaken. To examine the
accuracy of these databases, BJS will determine
whether and how frequently the databases are
audited to remove items such as expired protection
orders.

For those States that do not serve as points of
contact for background checks, the followup survey
will examine which State agencies maintain
information concerning domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions and the issuance of
protection orders. Survey questions will also examine
the impediments that prevent the transmittal of this
information to the FBI's NICS Index.

4. NCHIP will work to improve misdemeanor
domestic violence conviction reporting 
from the courts

The Federal prohibition against possessing firearms
attaches upon conviction in any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.  However,
current court reporting practices do not ensure that
misdemeanor domestic violence convictions are
consistently reported to a State's criminal history
repository.  

BJS will encourage States to expend NCHIP funds to
improve accessibility of domestic violence
misdemeanor records and to improve the reporting of
those records by courts to the repository and the
NICS Index. Several States have utilized NCHIP
funds for these purposes in recent years. BJS will
also work with all States to automate case
management systems.  

In addition to the provision of NCHIP funds, BJS will
continue its funding of the Court Statistics Project
through the National Center for State Courts.  

The National Center for State Courts recently
developed a Family Violence Data Reporting
Prototype to streamline the process of classifying,
counting, and reporting family violence cases for all
types of courts. This prototype assists the court in
accurately reporting whether domestic violence
related elements were present in a case, along with
trial outcome, case disposition, and sentencing
information.  

Recent tests of the Family Violence Data Reporting
Prototype revealed impediments such as courts that
lacked integrated data systems and jurisdictional
problems with the test cases. Despite these flaws,
most demonstration courts found the prototype to be
a viable tool.

Case reporting tools such as the Family Violence
Data Reporting Prototype will lead to the greater
availability and comparability of information on
domestic violence misdemeanors. 

5. BJS will encourage States to increase submissions
to the National Protection Order Database

The contribution of State protection order records to
the FBI's National Protection Order file is designed to
permit interstate enforcement of protection orders
and allow for more thorough NICS background checks.  
A 2002 report from the Department of Justice's Office 
for Victims of Crime estimated that in 1998 the FBI's 
national database contained less than 5% of the 2 
million protection orders believed to qualify for 
entry into the file.***Footnote 26: Office for
Victims of Crime, Enforcement of Protection Orders,
OVC Legal Series Bulletin No.4, January 2002, pg.
4.***  

As of February 2003, the National Protection Order
file held no records from Alabama, the District of
Columbia, Hawaii, Mississippi, Nevada, New Jersey,
Utah, Virginia, or West Virginia. In recent years 
the database has grown considerably, averaging nearly
200,000 additional records per year. BJS will
undertake a concerted effort to target non-
participating States for transmittal of protection
orders to the FBI for inclusion in the national system.

Appendix III   BJS surveys in the 
aftermath of September 11, 2001

Through its recent surveys BJS has learned
important details about some States' inability 
to routinely identify prohibited purchasers of 
firearms. Combined with the tragic events of 
September 11, 2001, these findings generated two 
research questions about the current capacity to 
protect U.S. residents against foreign threats.  

How adequate are State procedures in the event 
that a Federal immigration law violator is 
detained in the custody of local officials?  

The FBI arrested suspected conspirator Zacarias
Moussaoui on immigration charges on August 17,
2001, and detained him in a Minnesota county jail.
Based on this set of events, do States have policies
to obtain immigration offenders' fingerprints and
promptly provide them to the FBI, INS, or State
criminal history repository when Federal officials
apprehend the offenders and hold them in a local
jail?***Footnote 27: The BJS survey described in 
this section was administered before the INS was
incorporated into the Department of Homeland
Security as the Bureau for Citizenship and
Immigration Services.*** 

BJS commissioned a survey in November 2001 that
addressed this issue. State procedures vary widely
concerning these Federal detainees but generally 
do not ensure that their fingerprint information 
reaches the appropriate Federal authorities. 

The survey found that eight States do not have
policies to take fingerprints from a Federal detainee
charged with a violation of Federal immigration law
and placed in the custody of local authorities. Eight
States and the District of Columbia have policies to
fingerprint the individual and forward the information
to the FBI. Twenty-two States have policies to
fingerprint the suspect and send fingerprint
information to the INS.   

Are the Nation's criminal history record systems
physically safe from external threats? 

BJS surveyed the States to learn whether their
criminal history records are adequately protected 
by backup databases remote from the repository. 
All States reported having backup systems, and 
47 States indicated that the backup systems were
located offsite from the central repository. 

States vary in how they process Federal
immigration law violators 
    
Broad disparities exist among State procedures in
processing individuals apprehended by Federal
officers and detained locally for violating Federal
immigration laws. In the November 2001 survey of
State criminal history repositories, only 
Massachusetts reported that it fingerprints detainees
and forwards the prints to the State repository, the
FBI, and INS (table). 

Eight States reported that they do not have a policy 
to fingerprint the detainees. In one of the eight,
Maryland officials indicated that if an individual is
detained by State or local law enforcement authorities
for an immigration offense, fingerprints are taken,
forwarded to the State repository for a criminal
records check, and then kept on file. 

Fewer than half the States forwarding 
fingerprint information to the INS

Twenty-two States operate under a policy to
fingerprint locally held detainees suspected of
violating Federal immigration laws and forward the
information to the INS. Of the 22 States, 9 forward
the information to INS but do not conduct an in-State
criminal history check or create a permanent record. 

Fewer than a fifth of the States forwarding 
fingerprints to the FBI

California, Connecticut, Louisiana, Massachusetts,
and the District of Columbia reported that they collect
fingerprints from detainees held locally for violating
Federal immigration laws and routinely send them to
the State criminal history repository for trans-mission
to the FBI. Mississippi, Nevada, Texas, and Virginia
reported sending the fingerprints directly to the FBI. 

One State in three submitting 
fingerprints of Federal detainees 
to a State criminal records check

Eighteen States and the District of Columbia collect
fingerprints from Federal immigration detainees held
by local authorities and then perform a criminal
records check.  

Missouri retains the fingerprint and arrest information
in a separate classification created specifically for
Federal detainees. Seven States and the District of
Columbia have statutory authority to create a criminal
history record and to issue a State identification
number for individuals arrested in the State for
violating Federal law. Two States and the District of
Columbia retain the fingerprint and Federal arrest
information in a miscellaneous file created to store
records not meeting requirements for specific
classifications.  

1 in 5 States retaining fingerprints of Federal
detainees in State AFIS.

Twelve States operate under a policy to retain the
suspect's fingerprints in the State AFIS for
subsequent identification. In these States no new
criminal history record is created. The States are
Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware,
Idaho, Indiana, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire,
North Carolina, and Vermont. 
    
2 States obtain dispositions of cases 
of Federal detainees
              
Two States reported that they obtain dispositions for
cases involving Federal detainees in their State by
following up with other agencies. California reported
that the State repository obtains disposition
information from the INS and Federal courts. Alabama's 
repository follows up with the INS to obtain complete 
disposition information.

Although all States were surveyed to determine how
they obtained dispositions for cases involving Federal
detainees, most States either indicated that
dispositions are not obtained (14 States and the
District of Columbia) or did not respond (34 States).

State criminal history record 
systems respond to security 
concerns

The September 11th terrorist attacks on the United
States have forced Federal and State agencies to
re-examine the security of physical and information
infrastructures. As part of this effort, BJS surveyed
the States to determine whether the Nation's criminal
history record systems are physically safe from
external threats. 

Most States with offsite backup 
systems updated frequently

Every State maintains a backup of their criminal
history record system. Forty-seven States indicated
that their criminal record backups systems were
located offsite from the central repository (New
Hampshire, New Jersey, and New Mexico did not).

Data in the State criminal record repository backup
systems are updated frequently, although
improvements could be made in at least 15 States.
Six State repositories update their backup systems 
in real time (Alabama, Colorado, Florida, Indiana, 
New York, and Oklahoma). Nearly half of the State
repositories (24) reported that they update their
backup systems daily, and 15 repositories, weekly. 
The content of the backup systems varied among the
States

Nearly all of the States (49) reported that their 
backup systems contained automated criminal history
records; however, this does not mean that the
backup systems contained only automated records. 
In seven States, the criminal records repository
director reported that their backup systems contained
only automated criminal history records.  Fifteen
States reported that their backup systems contained;
(1) automated criminal history records, (2) hard
copies of criminal history records, and (3) electronic
fingerprint images.  

Twenty five States reported that their backup systems
contained automated criminal history records and
electronic fingerprint images. One State reported 
that its backup systems contained automated criminal
history records and hard copies of criminal history
records. One State reported that its backup system
contained only electronic fingerprint images.  

Among the States that include hard copies of criminal
history records in their backup systems, four States
update those records by creating an automated
version of the record.  Six States had policies to
manually add updated information to the record.


End of file
07/12/05 ih

