U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Highlights

National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP)

Improving Criminal History Records for 
Background Checks


May 2003

---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc.htm
----------------------------------------------------------

1 NCHIP Objectives

*  The goal of the NCHIP Program is to insure that accurate 
records are available for use in law enforcement, including 
sex offender registry requirements, and to permit States to 
identify ineligible firearm purchasers, persons ineligible 
to hold positions involving children, the elderly, or the 
disabled, and persons subject to protective orders or wanted,
arrested, or convicted of stalking and/or domestic violence. 
 
*  The NCHIP Program consolidates criminal records
improvement funding authorized under the Brady
Handgun Violence Prevention Act (P.L. 103-159); the
National Child Protection Act (P.L. 103-209); the Crime
Identification Technology Act (P.L. 105-251); the
Violence Against Women Act provisions of the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (P.L.
103-322); Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-386); and various provisions of
the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and
Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act, Megan's
Law, and the Pam Lychner Sexual Offender Tracking
and Identification Act.

*  NCHIP provides direct funding and technical assistance 
to the States to improve the quality, timeliness, and 
immediate accessibility of criminal history and related 
records. Funds and technical assistance are also provided to 
support the interface between States and the national record 
systems, including the FBI-operated National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) established pursuant to the 
permanent provisions of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention 
Act, the National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR), and the 
National Protection Order File which facilitates compliance 
with Federal full faith and credit requirements.

2. NCHIP Funding History

*  NCHIP was initiated in FY 1995 with total awards to
the States of $391 million through FY 2002. Every State
and territory has received funding under the program.
California ($29.9 million or 7.6% of all funds), New York
($24 million or 6.1% of all funds), and Texas ($20.0
million or 5.1% of all funds) account for the largest
amounts received under the program. Fund distribution
is based upon need rather than population or other
formula-based methodology.

*  BJS awarded approximately $37 million in NCHIP
funds from FY 2002 appropriations to the States and
territories to promote continued development of criminal
records infrastructure. The FY 2003 appropriation from
Congress includes $40 million to support continued
assistance to the States and localities and an additional
$3 million to support the development of anti-stalker
databases (protection order files). The FY 2004
President’s Budget includes an upgrade to NCHIP to
incorporate a court-directed component to improve
disposition reporting -- a total of $61 million to support
NCHIP and its consolidated approach to funding
criminal records improvements.

*  The FY 2003 NCHIP Program Announcement, publicly released 
in March 2003, provides for the continued development of the 
criminal records infrastructure to support the NICS and other
background check purposes. In addition, the announcement 
encourages States to coordinate their criminal records systems 
development with emergency management plans and antiterrorism 
activities within the State. 

3. NCHIP Accomplishments

*  Improved Records: Since the inception of NCHIP, the 
number of criminal history records held nationwide
grew 29% while the number of automated records increased 
35%.  Over the same period, the number of records available 
for sharing under the FBI's Interstate Identification Index 
(III) climbed 75%.

*  III Participation: Since 1993, the number of States
participating in III grew from 26 to 45.

*  New Identification Technologies: 43 States, 3 Territories, 
and the District of Columbia now participate in the FBI's 
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System. The 
system began operation in July 1999, but States had used their 
NCHIP funds to prepare to participate.

*  National Instant Criminal Back-ground Check System (NICS): 
The NICS is now supporting over 8 million checks annually at 
the presale stage of firearms purchases. The State NICS 
infrastructure, developed through NCHIP funding, seamlessly 
transitioned from the Interim Brady system of checks 
conducted by the chief law enforcement officer (CLEO) to 
the current permanent system in which certain States have
approved background check systems of their own (called Point-
of-Contact States or POC States) while others rely exclusively 
on the FBI’s NICS. 

From the inception of the Brady Act on March 1, 1994,
to December 31, 2001, about 38 million applications for
firearm transfers were subject to background checks.
About 840,000, or 2.2% of all applications, were
rejected, primarily for the presence of a prior felony
conviction history. State and local agencies maintain a
significant role in background checks, conducting
checks on almost half of the applications for firearm
transfers or permits in 2000, while the FBI was
responsible for the remainder. NCHIP funds have
facilitated the integration of databases within States:
the number of rejections for reasons other than felonies
increased 256% from the beginning of the Brady Act to
yearend 2001.

*  Sex Offender Registries: NCHIP funds have assisted the 
States in building sex offender registries and participating 
in the FBI's National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR) which 
became operational in July 1999. As of February 2003, all 50 
States plus 3 Territories and the District of Columbia have 
provided more than 280,000 records to the NSOR.

*  Domestic Violence and Protection Orders:
States have used NCHIP funds to initiate the flagging
of criminal history records evidencing convictions for
domestic violence or the issuance of a protection
order. Forty-two States and the Virgin Islands now
submit data to the NCIC Protection Order File, which
became operational in May 1997 and included over
754,000 records of protection orders in February
2003.

4. Efforts to Promote Involvement of the Courts and Systems 
Integration to Improve Disposition Reporting

*  Among the most important priorities of the NCHIP
Program is to insure that each State implements
compatible and integrated records systems. Annually,
the NCHIP Program Announcement to the States has
indicated that the first priority of the program is to
exhibit in the grant application a "commitment to
support court efforts relating to development of record
systems." All State applications are "required to
demonstrate that court needs have been considered,
and, if no funds for upgrading court systems capable of
providing disposition data are requested, applicants
should include a statement from the State Court
Administrator or Chief Justice indicating that the courts
have been consulted in connection with the
application." 

In FY 2002, approximately 18% of the $37 million in
NCHIP funds distributed to the States provided direct
funding to the courts and another 18% assisted in
court-related activities and disposition reporting.

To further stimulate courts involvement in the program,
the BJS Director has formally encouraged each State
repository director to dedicate NCHIP funds for
disposition reporting or for identification efforts
consistent with State anti-terrorism plans.

Some examples of court improvement projects under
NCHIP include:

Alabama, through its Administrative Office of the Courts, 
is conducting a test project for municipal courts. The 
project is testing a variety of data collection efforts
that will enhance misdemeanor disposition reporting
from municipal courts (especially domestic violence
misdemeanors). 

Florida, as of February 2002, has 61 of 67 clerks of
court submitting disposition data online which means
that criminal history records are being updated and
disseminated in a more timely and accurate manner. As
a result of working closely with the Clerks of Court,
Florida has added over 4.1 million dispositions to the
State's criminal history system since 1995.

Georgia, through its Superior Court clerks, are entering
protection order files populated with images and NCIC
data into its web-based protection order registry. All
relevant data are sent to the National Protection Order
File.

Maine, through its Administrative Office of the Courts, is 
using a combination of State, Byrne, VAWA, and NCHIP funds 
to update the court case management system. This update allows
electronic reporting of dispositions to the State Police.
Currently, the State reports receiving 100% reporting of
dispositions from the Courts.

Mississippi is providing workstations to courts in all 82
counties in the State. These workstations will be used
to supply disposition data to the Administrative Office of
the Courts' central server. Software currently being
developed will extract information from the central
server and forward final dispositions to the State's
central repository. 

South Carolina is conducting a joint initiative between
the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED)
and the South Carolina Judicial Department (SCJD) to
restructure the system for delivery of dispositions from
the courts to the State Identification Bureau (SIB).
Plans include providing new Internet connectivity for
Clerks of Court and Magistrates in each county and
allowing direct linkage of dispositions with records
already in SIB.

Illinois, through its State Police,  is initiating a pilot
program that will use single fingerprints to create a
fingerprint-based link between arrest, final disposition,
and custodial information. The State Police are working
with local courts and county sheriffs to test and
implement this system. 

Ohio is using NCHIP funds as a pro-rata share of costs
to automate the last eight manual-based courts. These
courts will then possess the capability to electronically
transmit dispositions to the central criminal history
records repository. 
  
Rhode Island is identifying missing dispositions and
the courts to locate and forward them to the central
criminal history repository, as well as pay overtime for
data entry by repository personnel, to reduce a backlog
of dispositions.

Pennsylvania will use funds to continue pilot testing
and implementation of the live posting (electronic) of
dispositions by all courts in the State to the
Administrative Office of the Courts records system and
the State Police criminal history repository. 

Virginia will use funds to conduct a needs analysis to
determine what changes to the system infrastructure
will improve the completeness of court disposition
reporting, particularly as it relates to NICS. Funds will
also be used to provide for the electronic submission of
protection orders from the courts for use by the Virginia
State Police and local law enforcement agencies. 

5. Directive by the Attorney General to BJS

On June 28, 2001, the Attorney General issued directives 
which require BJS to --
               
*  obtain data from the FBI on missing dispositions and
their effect on NICS checks

*  conduct a survey of the States to identify major
impediments to disposition completeness, with a
primary focus on the linkage between criminal records
repositories and the courts and prosecutors

*  assess the NCHIP program as currently designed
and recommend changes which will improve record
completeness

*  review the availability of records which could be used
for presale checks for other classes of prohibited firearms 
purchasers enumerated in the 1968 Gun Control Act, as 
amended.

BJS has been working closely with FBI Criminal Justice
Information Services staff to implement the first element
in the directive. The FBI drew a sample of NICS checks
which could not be completed instantly due to "open
arrests" and, at the request of BJS, examined the age
distribution of the most recent arrest transaction on the
RAP sheet. More than three-quarters of the "open
arrests" dated to years prior to 1995 when the NCHIP
program began. Half the "open arrests" were from 1984
and earlier. This assessment indicates that a major
"clean-up" of older records would be necessary to
reduce the number of dispositions missing from the
databases checked by NICS.

BJS, in collaboration with DOJ's Office of Legal Policy
(OLP), the FBI, and the State criminal records
repositories developed a questionnaire for collecting
data on the second requirement of the Attorney
General's Directive. The survey was fielded in early
September with data for all States now complete. The
survey sought information on: 

(1) procedures for transmission of arrest and disposition 
data from law enforcement agencies and the courts to the 
repository
 
(2) processes for integrating justice systems records in
terms of disposition capture and linking of dispositions
to arrest records 
 
(3) participation in national programs of the FBI such as
the Interstate Identification Index and the National
Fingerprint File 
 
(4) NICS and POCs inquiries and record accessibility
 
(5) an analysis of the age of records and their
completeness.

Survey findings will assist BJS in assessing such concerns 
as "default-proceed sales," participation in the FBI's 
"denied persons" file, and the extent to which retrievals 
of firearms for which an erroneous clearance occurred are 
a consequence of record inadequacies. 

Preliminary findings from the AG Survey of the State
Criminal Records Repositories include:

Repository databases

*  There were 64.3 million records in the criminal history
files of the State criminal history repositories at yearend
2001. Approximately 90% of these criminal history records were 
automated. Since 1995, the number of criminal history records 
held nationwide grew 29% while the number of automated records 
increased 35%.

*  The States have made significant improvements in
automating their records in recent years. In 2001, 30
States had over 90% of their criminal history records
automated, compared to 22 states in 1995.

*  The number of States with relatively low levels of
automation (defined as having less than 70% of records
automated) declined from 13 States in 1995 to 6 States
in 2001.

* Over 29 million III records (60% of all III records) are
supported by the State rather than the FBI. The FBI
maintains another 19.2 million records for States which
are accessible under the III system. Some States have
significantly increased the number of III records that are
supported by the State. From 1999 to 2001, the number
of State-supported III records increased by nearly 7
times in West Virginia, quadrupled in Maryland, and
more than quadrupled in Arizona.

*  Of those States that maintain partially automated
criminal history files, 21 have a policy to automate the
offender’s entire record if an offender with a prior
manual record is arrested. Four States and the District
of Columbia only automate the new information on the
record.

Identifying dispositions in the criminal history 
file 

*  There was considerable variation among the States
in the method they use to measure a missing final
disposition by using an arrest event or an arrest charge.
Twenty-one States measure a final disposition by an
arrest event, 17 States identify it by an arrest charge,
and 10 States and the District of Columbia measure a
missing final disposition by both an arrest event and an
arrest charge. 

*  There is considerable variation among the States’
definitions of a “missing disposition.” Thirty-four States
and the District of Columbia consider any arrest event
or charge without a disposition to be a “missing
disposition,” while 16 States require a specified amount
of time to pass before an arrest event or charge will be
officially considered a "missing disposition." 

*  Of the 16 States requiring a specified time period to
pass, 6 States require that 1 year pass before a missing 
disposition is considered a final missing disposition, 2 
States require that more than 1 year elapse, and the remaining 
7 States use another time interval. In some States, the time 
period depends on the offense.

*  The source of missing dispositions varies among the
States. The court is the primary source in 25 States and
the District of Columbia; a statewide court administrator
system is the primary source in 12 States; and the
prosecutor is the primary source in 5 States. 

*  By far, the most common method for obtaining a
missing disposition -- used by 45 States -- is to make a
manual inquiry to a specific court or statewide court
administrator after receiving a query. Twenty-seven
States make a manual inquiry to the prosecutor’s office
upon receipt of a criminal history inquiry. Twenty-six
States made manual inquiries to both the prosecutor
and the courts.

*  Only 11 States used automated inquiries to obtain
missing dispositions. Upon receipt of a query, eight
States made an automated inquiry only to the courts,
and three States made automated inquiries to the
courts as well as the prosecutor’s office. One State
(Pennsylvania) reported that they rely only on
automated inquiries in order to obtain missing
dispositions. One State (Michigan) made automated
inquiries to the prosecutor on a monthly basis. Six
States made automated inquiries to the courts on a
regular basis (typically on an annual basis).
         
Capabilities of State repository databases to detect
missing dispositions

*  There were 41 State databases that could distinguish
between new arrests (less than 1 year old) that lack a
disposition and older arrests. Nine States and the District of
Columbia reported that their databases cannot make this
distinction.

*  Of the States with databases that are capable of making 
the distinction, 14 States indicated that the information 
is available without needing special computer programming.
Twenty-seven States reported that special programming
would be needed to generate this information.
 
*  Forty-five States and the District of Columbia have
databases that are able to distinguish between felony
arrests/charges and misdemeanor arrests/charges.
Of these, 27 States are able to retrieve this
information without special programming, and 18
States and the District of Columbia are not.

Integrating Justice System Decisions into Criminal
Records

At each decision-point in the criminal justice system --
determinations by law enforcement agencies, prosecutors' 
offices, and trial courts -- decisions are made with respect 
to further case-processing. A case may terminate further 
processing or continue to move through the justice system. 
In order to address the problem of "open arrests," the results 
of a case passing through a decision-point or the disposition 
of the case must be entered into the criminal record. 

The Survey queried States about their ability to
associate decisions or case dispositions made by
justice system components back to an arrest
transaction on an individual’s criminal history record.
Thirty-two States reported that they received prosecutor
dispositions during the year which could not be linked
to arrest information on a criminal history record; 45
States and the District of Colombia said they had
received final court dispositions which could not be
linked; and 34 States said they had received
correctional disposition information which was
insufficiently identifiable to enter on a criminal record.
For the year ending on July 1, 2001, some States
indicated substantial numbers of dispositions which
could not be initially linked to a record -- about half the
States indicated that they had received correctional
information for individuals for whom no prior conviction
record existed.

The link between the State repository and law 
enforcement

State criminal history repositories receive final
disposition information from law enforcement in a
variety of ways. Twenty-six States receive final
disposition information from law enforcement
agencies. Twelve of these States rely only on the
mail to receive disposition information. One State
repository (Hawaii’s) receives disposition information
only in an electronic format from law enforcement.
Pennsylvania’s repository only receives this
information by fax. The remaining States receive
disposition information from law enforcement
agencies by some combination of electronic
transmission, fax transmission, and the mail. 

The link between the State 
repository and prosecutors

Thirty-six States receive final disposition information
from prosecutors. Nearly half of these States (16)
only receive this information through the mail. There
are four States that rely solely on the electronic
transmission of this information. The remaining
States receive final disposition information from
prosecutors by some combination of mail, fax, and
electronic transmission.

The link between the State 
repository and trial courts
          
Forty-five States and the District of Columbia receive
final disposition information from the trial courts, and
15 of the States receive this information only through
the mail. 

Thirty-two States and the District of Columbia relied
on the electronic transmission of disposition
information from either the trial court or the State
court administrator’s office. Of these States, there
were 19 States that relied exclusively on the
electronic transmission of final disposition information
from the trial courts or from the State court
administrator’s offices.

6. Protecting Records from Terrorism
          
Following the September 11 terrorist attacks, BJS
determined that a major concern for the adequacy of
criminal records was the ability of States to insure the
backup maintenance of records in the event of the
destruction of primary record holdings. In early
October, BJS conducted a special survey of the
States to learn more about the backup procedures in
place across the States. 

Findings

All States (but not the District of Colombia)
responded to a BJS special survey addressing
records redundancy and the findings are:

*  All of the States maintain a backup of their criminal
history record systems.

*  All States except three (New Hampshire, New
Jersey, and New Mexico) have their backups located
offsite from the repository.

*  The data in the backup systems are updated
frequently. Six States update their backup systems in
real time, and 24 States update on a daily basis.
Fifteen States have a policy to update their systems
on a weekly basis. The remaining five States update
their backup systems on some other time interval.

The content of the backup systems varied among the
States:

*  Seventeen States reported that their backup systems 
contained automated criminal history records, hard copies 
of criminal history records, and electronic fingerprint 
images. 

*  Twenty-four States reported that their backup
systems contained automated criminal history records
and electronic fingerprint images. 

*  Seven States reported that their backup systems
contained only automated criminal history records.

*  One State reported that its backup systems contained 
automated criminal history records and hard copies of 
criminal history records.

*  One State reported that its backup system contained
only electronic fingerprint images. 

*  Among the States that include hard copies of criminal
history records in their backup systems, four States
update those records by creating an automated version
and six States add updated information in a
non-automated fashion. 

7. New NCHIP Initiatives to Improve Disposition
Coverage and Address Terrorism

Survey of Prosecutors

BJS has recently awarded a grant to the American
Prosecutors Research Institute (APRI), which is the
research arm of National District Attorneys Association,
to field a survey of prosecutors’ offices across the
Nation to see how they can work to improve the
problem of missing dispositions in criminal history
records.  Of particular concern is measuring the extent
to which prosecutors provide information identifiable to
a particular criminal history record, on non-prosecution
outcomes such as nolle prosequis. An examination of
the “open arrest” problem clearly reveals that
prosecutors may not be systematically providing such
information. This survey will provide an improved
understanding of the impact of this problem on
disposition completeness. 

NCHIP supports antiterrorism efforts

BJS has initiated changes to the NCHIP Program
based upon our preliminary findings and, of course, the
September 11 events. BJS recently published a
program announcement to the States for FY 2003 and
expects to make funds available to support the
traditional records improvement activities such as
improvements in disposition reporting, NICS, III
participation, systems integration, IAFIS, sex offender
registries, and protection order files. 

The 2003 program announcement asks the States to
undertake new initiatives using criminal records to
support anti-terrorism efforts. New concerns about the
adequacy of redundant and backup records systems,
building better ties between immigration and criminal
records, and better coordination with homeland
defense and emergency management agencies within
the States are all matters where BJS would like to
assist State efforts. However, it is important to reiterate
that all of these efforts must be focused on the
development of better records systems.

Supporting the NICS Index

One other potential area for funding in FY 2003 which
BJS encourages the States to consider is the
transmittal of rejected firearms purchasers and denied
applicants to the FBI's NICS Index. The Denied
Persons file in the NICS Index can be an important
resource for improving the timeliness of NICS checks
and insuring that repeated record research is not
needed. The submission of data by POC States on
persons prohibited from purchasing firearms due to
non-felony background characteristics will also assist
the NICS to conduct more comprehensive back-ground
checks. Asking jurisdictions to research “open arrests”
has become a very time-consuming and burdensome
activity for localities when an “open arrest” is identified
in the course of a background check. A more
coordinated approach to building the national
data-base will help ameliorate this problem. 

The FBI study of failed instant checks, noted earlier,
was critical to determining that open arrest problems
are most often occurring when an older record is being
checked. Better development and use of the NICS
Index files, particularly by POC States in submitting
such data, should avert recurring checks of the same
person and will help to alleviate the problem of
insufficient access to databases on non- felony
categories of denied persons. 

It is important to note that BJS survey data indicate that
there are about 63 million criminal records in the United
States, and there are still approximately 7 million
manual criminal records among these holdings. There
are also an estimated 16 million auto-mated records
that are not accessible to III for background checks. Of
the remaining 40.7 million records which are automated
and accessible under III, the most recent BJS data
indicate that perhaps 37% may not be fully useful for an
instant check due to missing data on arrest
dispositions. This may mean that as many 15 million
additional criminal records will need to be evaluated for
the presence or absence of sufficient information on
dispositions if they are to be useable for the instant
check. 

The BJS survey of the State criminal records
repositories also revealed that NICS and other
background checks will be conducted with far greater
accuracy if justice system components provide
improved data and identifiers to link arrest transactions
to case-processing outcomes. The problem of
disposition coverage in criminal records is not simply a
problem of missing data; it is also a problem of data
that have been received but cannot be properly
associated with an individual or an arrest event. 

To address the record completeness problem with
criminal records, the FY 2004 President’s Budget
includes funds for a supplement for the Courts to the
NCHIP Program. This funding initiative would focus
upon the task of cleaning up the older criminal history
records which, as our research reveals, are a large part
of the problem associated with completing instant
checks instantly. The funds will be distributed primarily
to those States with high volume firearms sales and for
whom a substantial fraction of older records have not
been automated and may not be accessible under the
III system. In addition, BJS NCHIP funds may also be
devoted to system upgrades which allow justice system
components to better link dispositions and case
outcomes to the arrested individual and the arrest
event.

BJS has also funded the continued evaluation of
NCHIP. The evaluators, at BJS's request, will construct
an index of the key components of back-ground check
systems and score States on their relative strengths
and weaknesses to perform specific tasks associated
with these checks. The Index will be a barometer of
performance (i.e. time it takes to post a transaction to
a record) that will permit BJS to target very specific
problems and deficiencies in future funding at the
individual State level.  

End of file 
06/02/03 ih



                


                






