U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Program Report

National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP)

Improving Criminal History Records for Background 
Checks, 2005


July 2006, NCJ 211485


------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the ful report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc05.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ichrbc
--------------------------------------------------------

Gerard F. Ramker 
Chief, BJS Criminal History 
Improvement Programs 

-----------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Since 1995 criminal records accessible for background 
checks increased 83% and the growth rate in automated
records was 57%

* At the end of 2003, States held approximately 71 
million criminal records on individuals. 

* About 9 out of 10 of these records were automated 
and 3 out of 4 automated records were accessible for 
conducting presale firearms and other background checks. 

* As of December 2005, 48 States belonged to the 
Interstate Identification Index (III), meeting the 
FBI's rigorous standards for participation.

* The National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
(NICS) supports nearly 8 million checks annually at the 
presale stage of firearms purchases. 

* Approximately 1.9% of all applications for firearm 
purchases were rejected, primarily for the presence 
of a prior felony conviction history.

As of January 2006-- 

- all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto 
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands were contributing to 
the National Sex Offender Registry file which held 
414,470 records.

- 45 States, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. 
Virgin Islands were submitting data to the National 
Protection Order File which held over 949,810 records.
------------------------------------------------------

Introduction

Criminal history records describe an arrest and all
subsequent actions concerning each criminal event that
are positively identifiable to an individual. Accurate,
timely, and complete criminal history record information-- 
 
* enables States to immediately identify persons who are
prohibited from firearm purchase or are ineligible to 
hold positions of responsibility involving children, the
elderly, or the disabled 

* enables criminal justice agencies to make decisions on
pretrial release, career criminal charging, determinate 
sentencing, and correctional assignments 

* is critical to assist law enforcement in criminal
investigations and decision making 

* is required for background checks for national security,
employment, licensing, and related economic purposes, as 
required under recent legislation.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics' National Criminal History
Improvement Program (NCHIP) provides grants and technical 
assistance to the States to improve the quality, timeliness, 
and immediate accessibility of criminal history records and 
related information.

The goal of the NCHIP grant program is to improve the
Nation's safety and security by enhancing the quality, 
completeness, and accessibility of criminal history
record information and by insuring the nationwide 
implementation of criminal justice and noncriminal 
justice background check systems. Achieving this goal 
is contingent upon accomplishing four objectives --  

providing direct financial and technical assistance to 
the States to improve their criminal records systems
and other related systems to support background checks

ensuring the infrastructure is developed to connect each
State's records systems to FBI records systems and, in 
turn, to connect each State's background check databases 
to one another

providing the training and technical assistance to States
needed to insure that records systems are developed and 
managed to conform to FBI standards and the most appropriate 
technologies and that States adhere to the highest standards 
of practice with respect to privacy and confidentiality

assessing and measuring through systematic evaluation and
standardized performance measurement and statistics, the 
extent of progress in implementing improvements in state-
level and national records holdings and background check 
systems. 

The NCHIP program serves as an umbrella for various records
improvements activities and funding streams each of which has 
unique goals and objectives. 

Program history

Initiated in 1995 the NCHIP program has made awards to all
the States, the District of Columbia, and 5 U.S. Territories 
totaling $495 million through fiscal year 2005 (see appendix). 
NCHIP awards are based on need rather than population or 
other formula-based methodology. California (7.3%), New York 
(6.1%), and Texas (5.2%) have received awards totaling $92 
million or about 19% of total NCHIP funds awarded.

In FY 2005 BJS awarded approximately $26 million in NCHIP
funds to promote continued development of criminal records 
infrastructure. The FY 2005 appropriation from Congress
included $24.7 million to support continued assistance to
the States and localities and an additional $2.91 million 
to support the development of anti-stalking databases 
(files of protection and/or restraining order records). 

The FY 2006 NCHIP Program Announcement, released in March
2006, provides for the continued development of the criminal 
records infrastructure to support NICS and other background 
check purposes. BJS urges States to develop a component of 
their program for the courts and prosecutors to electronically 
communicate disposition transactions for inclusion in criminal
records. The announcement also encourages States to incorporate 
mental health records into background check systems.

The FY 2006 appropriation is $9.87 million for NCHIP plus
$2.9 million for antistalking databases. The President's 
proposed budget for FY 2007 seeks $39.18 million for NCHIP 
(plus $2.94 million for anti-stalking databases) to support 
a court-directed special emphasis on improving disposition 
reporting.

-----------------------------------------
Authorizing legislation

For 2006 the appropriation for the NCHIP program was 
made pursuant to the Crime Identification Technology 
Act of 1998 and the procedures for applying for NCHIP 
grants reflect the provisions of that act. State 
matching funds are required for NCHIP applications. The 
NCHIP program implements the grant provisions for —

* the Crime Identification Technology Act of 1998(CITA), 
Pub. L. No. 105-251, 112 Stat. 1871(1998), codified at 
42 U.S.C. Section 14601 et seq.

* the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act(Brady Act), 
Pub. L. No. 103-159, 107 Stat.1536 (1993), codified as 
amended at 18 U.S.C. Section 921 et seq.
 
* the National Child Protection Act of 1993 (NCPA), Pub. 
L. No. 103-209, 107 Stat. 2490 (1993), codified as amended 
at 42 U.S.C. Sections 3759, 5101 note, 5119, 5119a, 5119b, 
5119c 

* those provisions of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
Streets Act of 1968 (Omnibus Act), Pub. L. No. 90-351, 
82 Stat. 197 (1968), codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. 
Section 3711 et seq., as amended; and the Violent Crime 
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Violent Crime 
Control Act), Pub. L. No.103-322, 108 Stat. 1796 (1994), 
codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. Section 13701 et seq., 
which pertain to the establishment, maintenance, 
analysis, or use of criminal history records and 
criminal record systems 

* relevant requirements of the Jacob Wetterling Crimes 
Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender 
Registration Act, Pub. L. No. 103-322, 108 Stat. 2038, 
Megan's Law, Pub.L. No. 104-145, 110 Stat. 1345, and 
the Pam Lychner Sexual Offender Tracking and 
Identification Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-236, 110 
Stat. 3093

* the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act 
of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106-386, 114 Stat. 1464 (2000) and 
related laws pertaining to the identification, collection, 
analysis and interstate exchange of records relating to 
domestic violence and stalking (including protection 
orders).
----------------------------------------------

Accomplishments 

NCHIP-funded criminal records improvement efforts have
achieved several successes.

Improved accessibility of records 

All States have received funds under NCHIP to upgrade the
quality and availability of criminal history record systems. 
Funds have been awarded for acquisition of advanced
equipment, development of software, and conversion of manual 
records to an automated format which permits instant access 
and linkage. Automated criminal records permit immediate 
access for law enforcement and other purposes such as 
background checks. At the end of 2003, States held
approximately 71 million criminal records on individuals. 
About 9 out of 10 of these records were automated and 3 out
of 4 automated records were accessible for conducting presale 
firearms and other background checks. Since 1995 the number 
of criminal records accessible for background checks has
increased 83%, while the rate of growth in the number of 
automated records over the same years was 57% (highlights).

Full participation in the Interstate 
Identification Index (III) 

To ensure compatibility, all record enhancements funded
under NCHIP are required to conform to FBI standards for 
III participation. III participation is critical since it 
constitutes the primary system through which the FBI 
accesses State-held data for NICS checks. In 1989 only 20
States were members of the FBI's III system that permits 
instant access to out-of-state data. By yearend 1993, 26 
States were participants. As of January 2006, 48 States 
are members of III indicating that they meet the FBI's 
rigorous standards for participation.

Automation of records 
and fingerprint data 

States have used funds to establish automated fingerprint
identification systems (AFIS) and to purchase live-scan 
equipment for State and local agencies. AFIS enables 
States to conduct automated searches for records based 
on fingerprint characteristics and to interface with the 
FBI's Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification 
Systems (IAFIS). 

As of January 2006, 48 States, the District of Columbia, 
and 3 territories (American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. 
Virgin Islands) participate in IAFIS, which became 
operational in July 1999. In addition to ensuring that 
records are properly matched to the correct offender, 
AFIS minimizes the time and manpower required for 
searching fingerprint databases, which facilitates 
matching of latent prints obtained at a crime scene. 

Livescan equipment permits law enforcement to take 
fingerprints without use of inkpads or other similar
procedures and to electronically transfer fingerprints 
to the State's AFIS for comparison and matching against 
State and FBI held prints. Almost all States have 
received NCHIP funds to use in connection with 
fingerprint automation systems.

National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS) 

The Brady Act requires that a background check be conducted
using the FBI's NICS to identify potential purchasers who 
are prohibited from purchasing firearms. Over 63 million
records in thirteen files are used for NICS checks. The 
effectiveness of the system is dependent on the extent to 
which complete records are available in response to system 
inquiries. NCHIP funds have been used to increase the
number of records which are accessible to the system and to
fund the development of court systems to ensure that records 
include final dispositions. 

The NICS is now supporting nearly 8 million checks annually
at the presale stage of firearms purchases. Since 1999 under 
the permanent provisions of the Brady Act, almost 48
million applications for firearm transfers were subject to 
background checks. Approximately 896,000, or 1.9% of all 
applications were rejected, primarily for the presence of a 
prior felony conviction history, but also in a growing 
proportion of checks for nonfelony prohibiting background 
factors, enumerated in the 1968 Gun Control Act as amended. 
State and local agencies maintain a significant role in 
background checks, having conducted checks on almost half of 
the applications for firearm transfers or permits in 2003, 
while the FBI was responsible for the remainder.

National Sex Offender Registry 

Beginning in FY 1998 NCHIP funds have been provided to assist 
States in developing and enhancing the operation of State sex 
offender registries that include information on convicted sex 
offenders. These funds have been used for purchase of equipment, 
training, and development of procedures required to ensure
that released offenders are registered with proper authorities 
and that State systems are capable of interfacing with the FBI's 
National Sex Offender Registry system. The FBI's permanent 
National Sex Offender Registry became operational in July 
1999. As of January 2006 all 50 States, the District of
Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands
were contributing to the National Crime Information Center 
(NCIC) file that held 414,470 records.

Domestic violence records 
and protection orders 

NCHIP has put special emphasis on ensuring that domestic
violence-related offenses are included in criminal records. 
The Federal Gun Control Act as amended prohibits sales of 
firearms to persons subject to a qualifying domestic 
violence related protection order or convicted of a
qualifying domestic violence misdemeanor. Funds have been 
awarded specifically for development of State protection 
order files that are compatible with the FBI's national file 
so as to permit interstate enforcement of protection orders 
and the denial of firearm transfers to prohibited persons
subject to a protection order. The NCIC's National
Protection Order File became operational in May 1997. As 
of January 2006, 45 States, the District of Columbia, and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands were submitting data to the file
which held over 949,810 records of protection orders. 

Involvement of the Courts and 
Systems Integration to Improve
Disposition Reporting 

Ensuring that States demonstrate a commitment to support
court efforts relating to the development of record 
systems is among the most important priorities of NCHIP. 
All NCHIP applications are required to demonstrate that 
court needs have been considered.

For FY 2005, 37 States included direct funding to the courts
or funded court-related activities and disposition reporting. 
Such projects totaled over $6 million(25%)of the NCHIP funds 
awarded in 2005. The following are examples of court 
improvement projects that States are undertaking with 2005 
NCHIP awards:

The Administrative Office of the Courts in Alabama is
continuing to expand its project to collect criminal
disposition data from the municipal courts, flagging all
court dispositions that are domestic violence related, and 
is developing a new arrest-to-court disposition automated
matching program. 

The Alaska Department of Public Safety (DPS) is providing
funds to the Alaska Court System for data exchange and 
infrastructure projects, including the exchange of court
records and criminal history data between the court system 
and other criminal justice agencies, and providing training 
and technical assistance to users of the court information 
system.

The Arizona Criminal Justice Commission is developing a
comprehensive disposition reporting system involving an 
improved web entry front-end to include error checking, 
mass update capabilities, enhanced charge tracking, 
utilization of the Global Justice XML Data Model, and
improved justice and law enforcement system integration. 

The Arkansas Crime Information Center (ACIC) is using 
funds to support the identification and collection of 
missing disposition information. Funds are also being
used by the Administrative Office of the Courts for
completion of a technology project resulting in the
automatic transmission of criminal case dispositions 
to the ACIC.

The California Department of Justice is implementing a 
pilot project in two county courts to add electronic
thumbprint images to dispositions and supporting both 
the transmission of disposition data from the
Administrative Office of the Courts to the State 
repository and the processing of real-time automated
disposition reporting from five counties. 

The Florida Department of Law Enforcement(FDLE)is
implementing a project with the Florida Association of 
Court Clerks to research and obtain missing disposition
data. FDLE will also complete system enhancements to 
provide criminal judges, Clerks of Court, and State 
Attorneys electronic access to sentencing and commitment 
data. 

The Georgia Bureau of Investigation is assisting the 
courts in developing a new court case management
system that will enable electronic transmission of
disposition data from the courts to the central criminal
history repository.

The Hawaii Department of the Attorney General is supporting
the upgrade of the Judiciary's current telecommunications 
technology to allow the transmission of criminal justice 
information over the State network to CJIS-Hawaii.

The Louisiana Commission on Law Enforcement, in cooperation
with the Integrated Criminal Justice Information System
(ICJIS)Policy Board, the Supreme Court, the District 
Attorneys' Association, the Sheriffs' Association, and the 
State Police, is continuing the development and implementation 
of the ICJIS and its component systems. 

The Maine Department of Public Safety is conducting an
analysis of both the quality of court disposition
reporting to the criminal record repository and the
contributory factors related to low reporting rates,
developing a plan to mitigate low disposition reporting
rates, and finalizing a strategy to link dispositions to
the State's criminal history record system.

Maryland is researching and identifying existing Arrest 
and Disposition Reporting(ADR)system records lacking 
final court dispositions and matching arrests to the 
correct disposition for entry into the repository. Also, 
a process will be created to update the ADR system with 
court disposition information for older records that 
have no court tracking number associated with them.


The Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension is using 
funds to improve information about both misdemeanor 
domestic violence offenses and dispositions and orders 
of protection by developing integrated standard business 
practices on gathering proper identification on targeted 
misdemeanors and other court disposition data to be 
transferred to the criminal history files. 
 
The Mississippi Department of Public Safety, Criminal
Information Center(CIC)is initiating the testing and 
installation of an interface between the Mississippi
Criminal History System and the courts and
prosecutor's new case management system.

The Missouri State Highway Patrol and the Office of State
Court Administrators is supporting an initiative aimed at 
improving the accuracy and completeness of Missouri's 
Criminal History Record System. The project involves the 
identification of missing criminal arrests and final
disposition information through manual field research at 
the criminal justice agencies. 
 
New Hampshire is using grant funds to continue support for
its Administrative Office of the Courts to review and enter 
domestic violence and stalking restraining orders into the
State criminal justice information system and to the FBI's 
NCIC.

The New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety, in
collaboration with the Administrative Office of the 
Courts (AOC), is installing livescan units in a Camden
County Jail which will permit an interface with the 
County Correction Information System. Also, the AOC will
continue to build interfaces between its database and the 
information systems of several State criminal justice
agencies to allow for an easy exchange of critical 
information and to eliminate duplication of effort. 

The New Mexico Department of Public Safety is implementing
security measures in the Magistrate Courts of New Mexico 
and providing ongoing technical support to the courts and 
counties in transferring data to the State's Repository.  
Funds will also support protective order database 
enhancements necessary to transfer data to the New Mexico 
Law Enforcement Telecommunications System and the FBI's 
NCIC.

The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services
providing support to the Administrative Office of the 
Courts to continue the identification and correction of
inaccurate court information and to reduce the current 
number of missing dispositions in the State Repository. 

North Carolina is initiating the development of a new
Criminal Court Information System (CCIS) to replace the 
outdated Automated Criminal Infraction System (ACIS)
currently being used by the courts in North Carolina. 
The CCIS will greatly increase efficient, accurate, and
timely reporting of court data into an electronic 
database accessible to all law enforcement agencies.

The Ohio Office of Criminal Justice Services is continuing
its development of the Ohio Courts Network to automate 
reporting and sharing of information.

The Oregon State Police is carrying out a disposition
acquisition project with the Oregon Judicial Department. 

In Tennessee, funds are being used by the Administrative
Office of the Courts (AOC) to enhance existing databases 
to verify judgment information electronically submitted 
to the AOC and to enable access to the data by other 
courts and criminal justice agencies. 

Utah is supporting the development and implementation of 
an electronic filing interface between county prosecutors 
and the Administrative Office of the Courts to eliminate
duplicate, manual data entry of prosecutor information by 
the courts and to research and update missing disposition 
data from the courts to be included into the Utah 
Computerized Criminal History system.

In Vermont, the Office of the Court Administrator is
improving access to the judiciary's criminal case and
disposition information, electronic protection orders, 
and mental health records.

The Wyoming Supreme Court is developing a data extraction
system that maps data from those district courts that are 
experiencing difficulty transmitting data to the court's
central database.

Improved performance 
measurement--The Records 
Quality Index 

To help quantify the impact of NCHIP funds, BJS created a 
Records Quality Index(RQI). The purpose of the RQI is to 
measure the performance of criminal history record systems
and to help BJS to-- 
  
* assess the status of records quality at both the State 
and national levels

* identify critical records improvement activities by
pinpointing areas of deficiency

* help BJS target specific State- and local-level problems 
and deficiencies in NCHIP program announcements.

The Records Quality Index(RQI)is a composite of different
outcome and process measures, including:

* the extent of automation of the State's criminal history
records

* the response to Interstate Identification Index (III)
inquiries

* the automated transmission of arrests to the repository

* the criminal history database flagging of certain 
convictions

* the transmission of criminal fingerprints to IAFIS, the
FBI's automated fingerprint identification system

* the transmission of applicant fingerprints to IAFIS

* the extent of electronic data submission to FBI files

* the transmission of dispositions to the repository

* the authorized access to State files including sex 
offender registries and registries of the courts'
protection or restraining orders

* the State's participation in the National Fingerprint 
File and National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact

* the timeliness of criminal case processing in the State

* the completeness of disposition reporting in the State.

Similar to how the Dow Jones Industrial Average may be 
used to gauge the performance of the overall stock market, 
the criminal history Records Quality Index, based on a 
small set of key measures, characterizes the performance 
of the States' criminal history record systems toward
achieving the goals of the Federal records improvement
programs.

The National RQI(NRQI)is a weighted average of the individual 
State RQI's for which the weights reflect the number of 
criminal history records in each State as a proportion of the 
total. During the seven-year measurement period, the NRQI 
reflects steady records quality improvement. The NRQI nearly 
tripled between 1997 and 2003, growing by 169% during this 
period.

---------------------------------------------------
Program assessment

In 2003 the NCHIP program was reviewed by the Office of 
Management and Budget using the Program Assessment 
Rating Tool (PART) and was determined to be effectively 
meeting its goals and objectives. A 2004 U.S. Government 
Accountability Office study for House of Representative 
Committee on the Judiciary also found that NCHIP helped 
States make significant progress in building a national 
criminal records infrastructure.

Efforts carried out under the National Criminal History 
Improvement Program are highly consistent with the U.S. 
Department of Justice's strategic goal to, "Improve the 
crime fighting and criminal justice system administration 
capabilities of State, tribal, and local governments." 
The efforts to improve the Nation's criminal history 
records also contribute directly to the Office of 
Justice Programs' goal of providing and coordinating 
information, research and development, statistics, 
training, and support to help the justice community 
build the capacity it needs to meet its public safety 
goals.
-----------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director. 

This report was written by Gerard F. Ramker, Chief, BJS Criminal 
History Improvement Programs. Carolyn C. Williams produced the 
report and provided editorial review. Jayne Robinson prepared 
the report for final printing. July 2006, NCJ 211485
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its related 
statistical data and tables are available at the BJS World Wide Web 
Internet site: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>
--------------------------------------------------------------------

End of file 
07/20/06 ih