U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Program Report

Tribal Criminal History Records Improvement Program (T-CHRIP)

Improving Criminal History Records in Indian Country,
2004-2006


July 2007, NCJ 218913

--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichric06.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

Steven W. Perry
BJS Statistician

Between FY 2004 and 2006, the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) made 17 awards totaling nearly $2.8 million to tribal 
justice agencies through the Tribal Criminal History Records 
Improvement Program (T-CHRIP). The main goal of the program 
is to improve the completeness, quality, and accessibility 
of tribal criminal history records. Federally recognized
tribes located in New Mexico and Arizona received more than
half of the T-CHRIP funds awarded.

Among the 341 federally recognized tribes located in the 48
contiguous States, 165 operated a tribal police department, 
175 operated a tribal court, and 71 operated a tribal jail 
or detention facility, according to information in the
BJS Census of Tribal Justice Agencies, 2002. More than half
of the federally recognized tribes are located in Public Law 
83-280 States, where primary jurisdiction for felonies falls 
under the State authority.***Public Law 83-280 (commonly 
referred to as Public Law 280 or P.L. 280), enacted in 1953, 
transferred Federal jurisdiction over offenses involving 
Indians in Indian Country to States or gave States an option 
to assume jurisdiction. See
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/ctjaic02.pdf>.***

Established in 2004, T-CHRIP supports federally recognized
tribes to promote justice related data sharing across tribal, 
State, and national criminal records systems. The capturing, 
reporting, and sharing of fingerprints and access to complete 
arrest disposition records will improve the ability of 
justice agencies to identify individuals for criminal justice 
and noncriminal justice purposes. Noncriminal justice purposes 
include identifying persons --
 
* subject to protection orders 
* ineligible to be employed or licensed for specific 
  occupations
* subject to sex offender registration
* ineligible to purchase firearms.
The capacity of tribal justice agencies in Indian Country to
share criminal history data varied by State and tribe. In the 
2002 census an estimated 72% of tribes reported that they did 
not regularly submit criminal history records to State or 
Federal databases. Fewer than 25% said they submitted basic 
criminal records to State or Federal repositories. Three-
quarters of the tribes did not submit sex offender information 
to the National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR), and fewer than 
20% indicated that their justice agencies were electronically
networked within their jurisdiction or with Federal, State,
or local law enforcement agencies.

In FY 2004 and 2005 BJS awarded approximately $1.5 million in
T-CHRIP funds to nine tribes in six States to promote the 
development of a criminal history infrastructure. In FY 2006 
BJS awarded approximately $1.2 million in additional T-CHRIP 
funds to six tribes in three States. The tribes received
direct funding to purchase and install electronic livescan
fingerprinting equipment that conforms to State and FBI 
standards and to train staff in its use.

Program goal emphasizes information sharing

The goal of T-CHRIP is to improve public safety in Indian
Country by enhancing the quality, completeness, and 
accessibility of criminal history records and by implementing 
criminal justice and noncriminal justice background check
systems. Objectives of T-CHRIP include:

* providing direct financial and technical assistance to
improve criminal history records systems and facilitate 
background checks for criminal justice and authorized 
noncriminal justice purposes

* developing the infrastructure to connect tribal record
systems to State or FBI records' systems and criminal 
records databases of other tribes

* providing training and technical assistance to tribes 
to ensure that record systems conform to State and FBI 
standards, use the most appropriate technologies, and 
adhere to privacy and confidentiality regulations

* evaluating improvements in tribal and national record
holdings and criminal records sharing.

Criminal history records represent a chronological description 
of offenders and their contacts with the criminal justice system. 
These records include offender fingerprint identification and 
notations of arrest and subsequent court dispositions. Criminal 
record systems are dependent on up-to-date automated fingerprint
identification systems to ensure transactions accurately
identify the correct individual and that such records can be
reliably linked across jurisdictions in a timely manner.

T-CHRIP supported range of activities

T-CHRIP allowable expenses include AFIS participation, record
automation, and training and technical assistance.

Automated Fingerprint Identification Systems 
T-CHRIP has supported tribal participation in electronic
fingerprinting systems for 11 tribes across the U.S.
T-CHRIP awards may be used to purchase equipment, develop 
procedures, and implement protocols related to activities 
involving the Automated Fingerprint Identification System 
(AFIS), State repository, and the operation of the
offender registry. This may include purchase of fingerprint 
capture and storage equipment for relevant agencies. Funds 
for this purpose must be justified on the basis of
geographic, population, criminal and noncriminal background
check inquiries, or other related factors. LiveScan can only 
be purchased where the State has established an AFIS system 
compatible with FBI standards. Systems funded under
T-CHRIP must be compatible with FBI standards for national
data systems.

Record automation

Complete criminal history records require disposition 
information. Tribal record automation includes activities 
to develop electronic criminal justice records. T-CHRIP 
funds may be used to convert manual fingerprint records to
electronic records that conform to FBI specifications and
requirements (i.e., scanning inked fingerprint cards into 
an AFIS system). T-CHRIP funds may be used to automate and 
update criminal records, including arrest records, court
dispositions, domestic violence and protection/restraining
orders, DWI/DUI convictions, and sex offender records. The 
funds can be used to enhance the transmission of tribal 
records to State and national systems.

Training and Technical Assistance

Limited funds may be used to cover costs of training and
participation in State, regional, or national meetings 
(including travel) on the use and implementation of livescan. 
BJS also makes available technical assistance to tribal 
authorities through the Tribal Violence Prevention Technology 
Assistance Program.

T-CHRIP funded 12 tribal projects from FY2004 to 2006; four
projects received multiple awards

Fiscal Year 2004

American Indian Development Associates (AIDA): Pueblos of
Acoma, Laguna, and the Zuni Tribe of the Zuni Reservation 
(New Mexico), $400,000. 

Stockbridge Munsee Community(Wisconsin), $48,280. 

Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians(LTBB)(Michigan), 
$139,222. 

Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians(North Carolina), $291,430. 

National Center for Rural Law Enforcement(NCRLE) at the
University of Arkansas, Hopi Tribe (Arizona) and the Zuni 
Tribe of the Zuni Reservation (New Mexico), $450,000.

Fiscal Year 2005
Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation (FMYN) (Arizona), $49,936.

Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, located on the
Flathead Indian Reservation (Montana) $86,477.

Lac Vieux Desert Band of Lake Superior Chippewa (Michigan),
$21,834.

Fiscal Year 2006

National Center for Rural Law Enforcement(NCRLE): White
Earth Indian Reservation (Minnesota), $350,000.

Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians(LTBB)(Michigan),
$137,764.

Pueblo of Isleta (New Mexico), $184,552.

American Indian Development Associates (AIDA): Pueblos of
Acoma, Laguna, and the Zuni Tribe of the Zuni Reservation 
(New Mexico), (2007-2008) $607,273.

OJP launches Indian Country Justice and Safety Web site

The new Tribal Justice and Safety in Indian Country web site
is a resource available to improve the safety of Native 
American communities. This web site contains information on 
crime statistics, crime prevention, courts, corrections, law 
enforcement and other public safety issues. For additional
resources that are available to improve tribal criminal data
access and collection, research and evaluation, and 
information sharing, see
<http://www.tribaljusticeandsafety.gov/index.htm>.

------------------------------------------------------
Tribal Violence Prevention Technology Assistance Program
BJS has funded SEARCH (the National Consortium for Justice 
Information and Statistics) to provide tribal jurisdictions 
with technical assistance for criminal record development 
and improvement. This includes participation in the National 
Sex Offender Registry (NSOR), National Sex Offender Public 
Registry (NSOPR), State and Federal protection order 
registries, National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
(NICS), National Crime Information Center (NCIC 2000), and the 
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS).

Technical assistance is also available to help tribal 
jurisdictions respond to criminal history record-related 
provisions contained in two recent legislative enactments:

* Violence Against Women and Department of Justice 
Reauthorization Act of 2005 (Public Law No: 109-162)

* Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006 
(Public Law No: 109-248). For information on technical 
assistance, contact SEARCH at <http://www.search.org>.
-------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is 
director.

This Program Report was written by Steven W. Perry, 
under the supervision of Steven K. Smith. Kristen A. 
Hughes provided verification. Joanna S. Bradford 
produced and edited the report under the supervision 
of Doris J. James. Jayne Robinson prepared the report 
for final printing.

July 2007, NCJ 218913
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII 
and its related statistical data and tables are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichric06.htm>.
--------------------------------------------------


End of file
07/09/07 ih