U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Indigent Defense Services
in Large Counties, 1999


November 2000, NCJ 184932

Revised 12/6/00

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphic and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/idslc99.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------------

By Carol J. DeFrances, Ph.D.
Marika F. X. Litras, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians


--------------------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

Operating expenditures and cases handled by indigent criminal 
defense programs in the Nation's 100 most populous counties, 
1999

                                Type of indigent defense service
Expenditures and                    Public        Assigned
cases (in thousands)     Total      defender/a    counsel/b   Contract
 
Number of counties            100          90           89         42
 
Total expenditures     $1,205,136    $880,920     $247,204    $70,012
Median per county           6,941       5,689        2,450        517
 
Total cases                 4,174       3,413          618        143
Median per county              24          20            4          2
 
Number of programs            314         123          126         65
 
a/Expenditure and caseload data include the contract public 
defender programs in Multnomah County, OR.
Caseload data not included for the 4 large counties in Maryland.

*  An estimated $1.2 billion was spent on indigent criminal 
defense in the Nation's 100 most populous counties during 1999, 
with about 73% spent by public defender programs, 21% by assigned 
counsel programs, and about 6% on awarded contracts.

*  Indigent criminal defense expenditures in the largest 100 
counties comprised 3% of all local criminal justice expenditures 
and 16% of judicial expenditures in these counties.

*  County governments provided 60% and State governments 25% of 
total funding used by indigent criminal defense service providers. 

*  Indigent criminal defense providers in the 100 most populous 
counties received an estimated 4.2 million cases in 1999.   

*  Public defenders handled about 82% of these 4.2 million cases, 
assigned counsel attorneys 15%, and contract attorneys about 3%.

*  Over 12,700 individuals were employed by public defender 
programs in the largest 100 counties in 1999.  Half of the 123 
public defender programs had 33 or more assistant public defenders.

*  In 1999, over 30,700 attorneys received appointments through 
assigned counsel programs to represent indigent defendants.  Half 
of the 126 assigned counsel programs had 109 or more appointments.

*  Over 1,000 contracts for indigent defense services were 
administered in the top 100 counties during 1999.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Court-appointed legal representation for indigent criminal 
defendants plays a critical role in the Nation's criminal justice 
system.  In 1999 an estimated  $1.2 billion was spent by indigent 
criminal defense programs that primarily handled felony cases at 
the trial level in the 100 most populous counties.  These programs 
received approximately 4.2 million cases.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics, with funding from the Bureau of 
Justice Assistance, conducted the National Survey of Indigent 
Defense Systems  (NSIDS) in 1999-2000.  The survey represents the 
first systematic study of indigent criminal services since the
1980's.***Footnote 1: National Criminal Defense Systems Study,
BJS, September 1986, NCJ 94702, and Criminal Defense for the
Poor, 1986, BJS Bulletin, September 1988, NCJ 112919.***

In the 50 counties with comparable data, 1982 expenditures totaled 
about $464 million when adjusted for inflation.  In 1999 these same 
50 counties spent approximately $877 million on indigent criminal 
defense services, an increase of 47% from 1982.  

This report details the methods by which indigent criminal defense 
is delivered in the Nation's 100 most populous counties.  It also 
compares the operating expenditures, staffing, and caseloads of 
the different types of indigent defense services used in these 
counties.***Footnote 2: For information on the characteristics of 
the defense counsel received by defendants see Defense Counsel in
Criminal Cases, BJS Special Report, November 2000, NCJ 179023.***

The indigent defense programs examined in this report primarily 
handled felony criminal cases at the trial level.  Some of these 
programs also had responsibility for misdemeanor, juvenile, civil, and
appellate cases.  The study was not designed to include programs that
exclusively handled misdemeanor, juvenile, civil, or appellate cases.

State governments exclusively funded indigent defense services in 21 
States. About a quarter of the largest 100 counties were in the States 
that totally funded indigent defense services.  This report does not 
provide State-level data.***Footnote 3: For more information on state-
wide systems see Improving Criminal Justice Systems Through Expanded
Strategies and Innovative Collaborations: Report of the National
Symposium on Indigent Defense, Office of Justice Programs, March 2000,
NCJ 181344, and National Criminal Defense Systems Study, BJS, September
1986, NCJ 94702, table 19.***

Background

The legal mandate

The sixth amendment to the U.S. Constitution establishes the right to 
counsel in Federal criminal prosecution.  Through a series of 
landmark cases, the U.S. Supreme Court extended the right to counsel 
for indigent defendants to State criminal prosecution.  In 1963 the 
Court held in Gideon v. Wainwright that indigent persons facing 
felony charges must be provided with legal counsel.***Footnote 4: Gideon V.
Wainwright 372 U.S. 335 (1963).***  Nine years later in Argersinger v. 
Hamlin  the Court extended a defendant's right to counsel to all criminal
prosecutions, felony or misdemeanor, that carry a sentence of imprisonment.
***Footnote 5: Argersinger V. Hamlin 407 U.S. 25 (1972).*** 

Types of indigent defense services 

Although the U.S. Supreme Court has mandated States and localities to 
provide counsel for indigents accused of crimes, the implementation of 
how such services are to be provided has not been specified.  As a
consequence, States and localities have devised various systems, rules 
for organizing, and funding mechanisms for indigent defense services.  

Three primary ways of providing indigent defense services have emerged
throughout the Nation.  States and localities use these methods of 
delivering indigent defense services either singly or in combination.  
The following categories are used to help describe indigent criminal 
defense services in this report.  Local programs may use different
terminology.
                                                    
Public defender -- A salaried staff of full-time or part-time attorneys 
that render criminal indigent defense services through a public or private
nonprofit organization, or as direct government  paid employees.

Assigned counsel -- The appointment from a list of private bar members 
who accept cases on a judge-by-judge, court-by-court, or case-by-case 
basis. This may include an administrative component and a set of rules 
and guidelines governing the appointment and processing of cases handled 
by the private bar members.

Contract -- Non-salaried individual private attorneys, bar associations, 
law firms, consortiums or groups of attorneys, or nonprofit corporations 
that contract with a funding source to provide court-appointed 
representation in a jurisdiction.  This does not include public 
defender programs primarily funded by an awarded contract.

---------------------------------
The Nation's 100 largest counties
 
*Of the approximately 3,100 counties or independent cities,
the most populous 100 counties comprised 42% of the
1999 U.S. population. (1999 population estimates for the 
United States and for each county came from Census Bureau websites,
http://www.census.gov/population/www/estimates/countypop.html a
http://www. census.gov/population/www/estimates/uspop.html).
 
*Of the 36 million Americans that lived below the poverty level
in 1995, 44% resided in the Nation's largest 100 counties. (The latest 
poverty estimates came from the Census Bureau webs
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/saipe/stcty/estimate.html). 

*A majority of all arrests for Part I crimes (52%) and violent
crimes (55%) during 1997 occurred in the largest 100 
counties.  (Arrests by county were taken from U.S. Department of 
Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. Uniform Crime Reporting 
Program Data [United States]: County-Level Detailed Arrest and Offense
1997 [computer file].  ICPSR. ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university 
Consortium for Political and Social Research.  Arrest data by county 
were for four counties in Florida and the District of Columbia).
----------------------------------

Indigent criminal defense in the 
Nation's 100 largest counties

Among the Nation's 100 largest counties, public defender programs 
including those primarily funded by an awarded contract operated 
in every county except eight.  Assigned counsel programs were 
available in 89 counties and contract programs in 42.  In most 
counties (95) more than one type of indigent criminal defense 
services was available.

County operating expenditures and 
funding sources

During 1999 the Nation's 100 most populous counties spent an 
estimated $1.2 billion to deliver indigent criminal 
defense.***Footnote 6: In 1990 all States and U.S. localities
spent $1.3 billion (unadjusted for inflation) on criminal and
civil public defense.  See Indigent Defense, BJS Selected Findings,
February 1996, NCJ 158909.***  Half of these counties reported nearly 
$7 million or more in operating expenditures.  County governments 
funded all of the indigent defense services in 24 counties and 75% or 
more of those services in another 25.

State governments also were an important source of funding, providing 
100% of indigent criminal defense expenditures in 8 counties and 75% 
or more in 23 counties.  Three counties were funded primarily through 
city governments and one -- the District of Columbia -- entirely 
through the Federal Government.

------------------------------
State court prosecutor budgets
and indigent criminal defense
expenditures
 
Prosecutorial budget information for
81 of the counties surveyed in
NSIDS was available from the BJS
 1996 National Survey of Prosecu-
tors (NSP).  In 1999 these 81
counties spent $1.1 billion on
indigent criminal defense services.
When adjusted for inflation, State
court prosecutors' offices in these
same counties reported estimated budgets
totaling $1.9 billion.*
 
*Some categories of expenses are typically borne 
by indigent defense but not necessarily by local 
prosecution agencies, thus hindering direct 
comparisons (e.g., expenditures of prosecutors' 
offices may not include investigative resources 
provided by law enforcement agencies, forensic 
laboratory work or expert witnesses, office space 
or technology, and training).   These data assume 
no programmatic increases and an inflation rate 
of 6.2% between 1996 and 1999 for prosecution budgets.

 
NSIDS 1999 question:  What amount out of
[total operating expenditures] was spent to
provide different types of criminal defense
services [public defender, assigned contract,
and contract program]?
 
NSP 1996 question:  What was the total
budget of the office for prosecutorial
functions in 1996?
 
For more information about prosecutors in
State courts, see Prosecutors in State
Courts, 1996, BJS Bulletin, July 1998,
NCJ 170092.

--------------------------------------

Total operating expenditures
of 100 largest counties (in
thousands)                              $1,205,136
 
Percent of total expenditures
provided by-                                   100 %
State                                         25.3
County                                        59.8
City                                           9.0
Federal                                        2.5
Other                                          3.4

Note:  County governments provided 60% and
State governments 25% of total funding used by
indigent criminal defense providers.  The remain-
ing 15% was provided by city governments (9%),
the Federal Government (3%), and other
sources of funding (3%).

County staffing, attorney appointments, 
and contracts

In counties with public defender programs, over 12,700 staff members 
were employed during 1999.  The median per county was 92 staff members. 
Assistant public defenders made up about half of all public defender 
staff, averaging about 70 per county.  In addition, half of the counties 
had 10 or more investigators and 19 or more support staff. 

Local government criminal justice expenditures
 
*Local criminal justice expenditures in the United States
were estimated at over $65 billion in 1999.  More than half 
(58%) of these expenditures occurred in the largest 100 
counties.
 
*Indigent crimianl defense expenditures in the largest
100 counties comprised 3% of all local criminal justice
expenditures and 16% of judicial expenditures in these counties.
 
                      1997 direct expenditures by local governments
                      in 1999 dollars/a (in thousands)

                      Entire United States   Largest 100 counties
Total                       $65,467,412         $38,209,104
Police/b                    $40,255,402         $23,333,254
Judicial/c                   12,800,309          $7,521,505
Corrections/d               $12,411,701          $7,354,346

Note:  1997 expenditure data are adjusted for inflation and
presented in 1999 dollars.  Total expenditure includes police, 
judicial, and corrections expenditures.  Total U.S. police 
expenditures are based on reporting of 20,104 government units; 
U.S. judicial expenditures on 13,633 government units; and U.S. 
corrections expenditures on 3,365 government units.  Total police 
expenditures for  100 largest counties are based on reporting of 
97 counties; judicial expenditures on 97 counties; and corrections
expenditures on 91 counties.  Data were not adjusted for
nonresponse.
a/Expenditures include all funds spent by county and city
governments but exclude intergovernmental expenditures.
b/Police expenditures include State police, local police,
and county sheriff.
c/Judicial expenditures include criminal and civil public
defense, prosecutor, and court expenditures.
d/Correction expenditures include jail, prison, probation,
and parole expenditures.
Source:  U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1997 Census
of Local Governments.

An estimated 30,751 attorneys were appointed to represent indigent 
criminal defendants in counties that delivered criminal indigent 
defense all or in part through assigned counsel services.  In half 
of the 70 counties that provided data, assigned counsel programs 
appointed 210 or more attorneys.

Among the 42 counties with contract services, 1,054 contracts were
administered in 1999.  Half of these 42 counties administered 6 or 
more contracts.

County caseloads

In 1999 indigent criminal defense programs in the 100 largest counties
received 4.2 million cases (see Methodology, page 6).  Half of these 
counties handled an estimated 23,873 or more cases.  The average 
number of cases per county was 43,480. 

Criminal cases accounted for most of the cases handled in the largest 
100 counties, with half of the counties receiving 20,273 or more 
criminal cases during 1999.  The average county in the largest 100 
handled nearly 35,000 indigent criminal cases, nearly 4,000 juvenile 
cases, about 909 civil cases, and 3,590 other types of indigent criminal 
cases (juvenile dependency, abuse and neglect, and contempt cases).
Public defender, assigned counsel, and contract programs in the 
Nation's 100 largest counties

Over 300 indigent criminal defense programs were identified in the 
Nation's 100 largest counties.  About 40% were assigned counsel 
programs, 39% public defender programs, and 21% contract attorney 
programs. 

About 52% of all the identified indigent criminal defense programs 
indicated that all their funding came from the county government, 11% 
all from state government, 4% all from city government, and 33% from 
mixed sources (not shown in a table).

Public defender program expenditures

Public defender programs spent an estimated $881 million, or about 
73% of the $1.2 billion expended on criminal indigent defense in the 
largest 100 counties.  Half of the 123 public defender programs spent 
$4.5 million or more to provide services.  

Eighty percent or more of the public defender programs indicated their
expenditures included funding for expert, investigator, interpreter, and
transcript services.  Public defender programs were more likely than either
assigned counsel or contract programs to have expenditures for interpreters
and transcript services.  Fifty percent of the public defender programs
reported funding for social services, over twice the percentage for 
assigned counsel (21%) and contract programs (19%). 

Assigned counsel program expenditures

In 1999 assigned counsel programs in the largest 100 counties spent an
estimated $247 million to provide indigent criminal defense.  The median
amount expended by the 126 assigned counsel programs for which data were
obtained was $538,000.  Expenditures for expert and investigative services
were reported by 80% or more of the assigned counsel programs, for 
interpreter and transcript services by 60% or more, and expenditures for
social services by 21%. 

Contract program expenditures

Contracts awarded to provide indigent criminal defense services in 
the largest 100 counties totaled an estimated $77 million in 1999.  
Half of the 65 contract programs expended $319,000 or more.  Eighty-one
percent of the contract programs reported that the contract they 
administered did not have funds for social services.  Expenditures for
interpreter (54%) and transcript services (51%) were reported by more 
than half of the contract programs.  Most of the contract programs 
reported funding for expert (85%) and investigator services (96%).

Program caseload

Indigent criminal defense programs in the most populous 100 counties 
received an estimated 4.2 million cases in 1999.   About 80% of the 
cases were criminal cases that included felony capital or death penalty 
cases, felony non-capital cases, misdemeanors that carry a jail sentence,
ordinance infractions, appeals, probation, and parole revocations. 
Juvenile-related cases accounted for about 8% of the total.  Civil cases 
such as mental commitment, State post-conviction habeas corpus, and 
Federal habeas corpus comprised approximately 2% of all cases.  An 
estimated 9% were other types of cases such as juvenile dependency, abuse 
and neglect, and contempt cases.  Half of the 314 identified indigent 
criminal defense programs received 2,351 or more cases.

Public defender program caseload

Public defender programs handled 82% of the 4.2 million cases with 
indigent defendants.  In 1999 public defender programs in the largest 
100 counties received over 2.7 million criminal cases, 277,000 juvenile 
cases, 78,000 civil cases, and 314,000 other types cases.

In terms of their total caseload, public defender programs (9%) were more
likely to receive other types of cases than either assigned counsel programs
(4%) or contract attorneys (5%).  Half of the 123 public defender programs
received 12,504 or more criminal cases and 1,188 or more juvenile-related
cases.

Assigned counsel program caseload

About 618,000 cases were received by assigned counsel programs.  
Approximately 85% of these cases dealt with criminal matters, 10% with
juvenile-related matters, 1% with civil matters, and 4% with other types 
of matters.  The median number of criminal cases handled by assigned 
counsel programs was 1,007.  Half of the assigned counsel programs 
received no juvenile, civil, or other types of cases during 1999.        

Contract program caseload

Contract attorneys handled approximately 143,000 cases in 1999, of which
almost two-thirds (64%)  were criminal cases.  As a percentage of their 
total caseload, contract attorneys were more likely than public defender 
or assigned counsel programs to receive juvenile cases.  Approximately 
29% of the caseload received by contract attorneys dealt with juvenile-
related cases compared to 10% for assigned counsel programs and 8% 
for public defender programs.

Public defender program staffing

In 1999 public defender programs in the largest 100 counties employed 
almost 12,800 individuals.  The median total staff size was 80.

Approximately 6,400 assistant public defenders were employed by public
defender programs and comprised half of all staff employed by these 
programs. The median number of assistant public defenders was 33.  
About 4% of all assistant public defenders were employed on a 
part-time basis.  

About a quarter of those employed by public defender programs were 
support staff.  Half of the public defender programs had 14 or more 
support staff.  Public defender programs in the most populous 100 
counties employed approximately 1,267 investigators in 1999.  Half 
of the programs had six or more investigators on staff.  Staffing 
of the public defenders programs also included 314 social workers 
and 395 paralegals.  Assigned counsel private attorney appointments

Assigned counsel programs appointed an estimated 30,751 private 
attorneys to represent indigent criminal defendants in 1999.  Half 
of the assigned counsel programs had 109 or more private attorney
appointments.  The largest number of appointments reported by any 
program was 1,782 private attorneys.  

Contracts administered

Approximately 1,054 contracts were administered by the 65 contract 
programs. The median number of contracts administered was one.  
The largest number of contracts administered by one program 
was 245.  

Methodology

Respondent selection

The universe for this study consisted of indigent criminal defense 
programs that handled felony cases at the trial level in the 100 most 
populous counties in the United States.  These counties were selected 
with certainty from a list of approximately 3,100 counties and 
independent cities in the United States ranked according to 1997 
intercensal population estimates.

Once the 100 largest counties were selected, the indigent criminal 
defense programs and county officials in these counties were 
identified.  

County and program surveys

Data were collected through two surveys.  The county survey, 
which consisted of 16 questions, was used to gather expenditure 
information and to assist in identifying indigent criminal defense 
programs operating in the county.  The program survey was sent to the
identified program respondents to collect specific information about
expenditures, staffing, caseloads, policies and practices of public
 defender, assigned counsel, and contract defender programs within the
counties, and to identify any additional programs.  

The program survey consisted of 141 questions divided into major 
sections. The 58 questions in Part A asked about program expenditures 
and other areas such as indigency determination, cost recovery, 
standards and guidelines, training, and computer resources; the 27 
questions in Part B asked for information about public defender programs 
such as staffing, caseload, and conflicts; the 26 questions in Part 
C asked for information about assigned counsel programs such as program
administration, caseload, and assigned counsel compensation; the 25 
questions in Part D asked for information related to contract programs 
such as contract administration, awards and monitoring, caseload and 
contract attorney compensation; and the 5 questions in Part E
asked for information about additional programs in the county other 
than the respondent's.   

All program respondents were required to complete Parts A and E, 
and Part B, C, or D according to their program type.  Most respondents,
therefore, needed to answer only the survey parts that were relevant to 
their type of program. Both survey instruments are available on the BJS
website at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs.

A review of a compilation of existing information determined that 28 
of the most populous 100 counties were entirely funded by State 
governments and 72 all or in part by county governments.  

County surveys were mailed to counties that provided partial or all 
county funding for indigent criminal defense programs.  For counties 
located in States that totally fund indigent criminal defense services, 
only a program survey was sent.

Data collection and follow-up

The data collection for the study was conducted by the National 
Opinion Research Center (NORC).  In August 1999, NORC mailed the 
county and  program surveys to identified respondents.  For the 28 
counties totally State funded, program surveys were sent directly to 
the State and in a few cases directly to the program as well.  If 
State agencies could only provide data for the entire State, 
apportionment was used to produce county-level information.  Estimated
county-level data were provided by only three States: North Carolina,
Virginia, and Wisconsin.

For the remaining 72 counties, both county and program surveys were 
mailed to appropriate officials.  In some instances, multiple mailings 
were required to different county offices in the same jurisdiction or 
to multiple offices for the same indigent criminal defense program 
because different types of cases (non-capital felony, misdemeanors, and
juvenile delinquency) were handled by different units or branches of a
program.  In January to May 2000 the additional indigent criminal defense
programs identified by the county or program survey were mailed a program
survey.  In total 78 county surveys and 345 program surveys were mailed.

After the initial mailing, NORC engaged in extensive follow up to obtain 
a returned survey from each county and program survey respondent.  For 
the program survey, critical information, included the type of program,
expenditures, staffing, and caseload.  The follow up process involved 
phone calls, e-mail communication, re-mailing questionnaires, faxing or
re-mailing only the critical items, and sending follow-up letters.  Staff 
of the National Legal Aid and Defender Association and the State 
coordinators for the study also assisted NORC by providing additional 
follow up.  Both efforts contributed to improving survey response.

Each completed survey in the NSIDS study also required a unique follow 
up procedure to clarify discrepancies with county-level information,
discrepancies and duplication of data in programs within counties, and 
to retrieve missing critical items.  Follow up with survey respondents
continued until July 2000.  An estimated 5,000 phone calls were logged 
for non-response follow-up and respondent verification.  

Survey response

Among the 78 county surveys mailed, 4 were determined to be duplicates 
and 5 were determined to be ineligible, leaving 69 surveys eligible for 
the study. Of the eligible surveys, 4 were not returned and 65 were 
completed for a response rate of 94%.

For the program survey, 345 surveys were mailed to either individual 
indigent criminal defense programs or State agencies for programs 
located in counties with all State funding.  Of the 345 program surveys, 
36 were determined to contain duplicate information already provided 
on another program survey and48 were determined to be ineligible because 
the program exclusively handled juvenile-related, misdemeanor, or 
appellate cases.  

Eighteen known programs did not return the program survey.  These 
include one program in each of the following counties: Cook County, 
IL; Kent, MI; Oakland, MI; Nassau County, NY; Westchester County, NY;
Montgomery County, OH; Bexar County, TX; El Paso County, TX; two 
programs in Erie County, NY; and eight programs in Tarrant County, TX. 

The Maryland State Public Defender Program did not provide any 
information for their four jurisdictions (Baltimore County, Baltimore 
City, Montgomery County, and Prince George's County) in this study.  
Some information for the public defender program (e.g., expenditures 
and staffing) was taken from statistics available from their website.  
No information was available for the assigned counsel program.  For nine
programs in Riverside, CA, expenditures, funding source, and program 
type was obtained from the county.

In fifteen counties (Hillsborough County, FL; Honolulu County, HI; 
Jefferson County, KY; Hennepin County, MN; Bergen County, NJ; Essex 
County, NJ; Hudson County, NJ; Middlesex County, NJ; Monmouth County, 
NJ; Tulsa County, OK; Multnomah County, OR; Allegheny County, PA; 
Davidson County, TN; Shelby County, TN; and Salt Lake County, UT) 
information was received for the public defender or contract program
identified within the county but not for the assigned counsel program.

Of the returned program surveys, 23 contained information either 
for an entire State or a multi-jurisdictional program.  The data in 
these 23 surveys were apportioned to the individual counties or 
jurisdictions within the State based on 1990 Census population data.  
The 23 source surveys were then deleted from the final program data 
file leaving 220 returned surveys, for a response rate of 92% of the 
238 eligible surveys.

Since there is no complete roster of indigent criminal defense 
providers in the largest 100 counties the actual number of programs 
is not known.

Data used for this report

All information provided in this report came from data taken from 
the program surveys.  A comparison between expenditure information 
reported on the county survey and the program survey revealed 
discrepancies in many counties between the information provided on 
the two surveys.  This discrepancy was due in part to the fact that 
many programs received more than just county funding. Therefore 
expenditure data from the program surveys were used because they
provided a more accurate accounting of what the programs actually 
spent in providing indigent criminal defense.

The data for the 18 non-respondents to the program survey were 
imputed for all critical items, and then added to the program 
data file.

The final program data file contained 238 surveys records, but 
accounted for 314 indigent criminal defense programs since some 
respondents (55 of the 238) provided information for more than one 
type of program.

On 12 surveys, a juvenile or misdemeanor program was indicated but 
it could not be determined if these were separate programs or components 
of larger programs.  Due to the ambiguity, these programs were left in 
the program data file.

While the NSIDS program survey contained many data elements, program 
type, expenditures, public staffing, assigned counsel attorney 
appointments, number of contracts administered, and caseload were 
presented for this report.  

NORC was instructed that if a respondent refused to complete the 
entire survey they should at a minimum try to obtain data from 
respondents for these critical items.  Many program respondents only 
provided the critical items. Even with targeting these variables,  
there was still a substantial amount of missing data.  Since most of 
the critical items were interval level data NORC was able to impute 
these data through various techniques for missing responses.

Caseload data

The 4.2 million cases received by indigent criminal defense programs 
in the largest 100 counties is an underestimate of the total number of
indigent cases handled in these counties.  During the process of 
compiling the respondent list for the present study, many indigent 
defense programs that exclusively handled misdemeanor, juvenile-related, 
or appellate cases were identified but were deemed out of scope for 
the study.  

In addition no caseload data were obtained for the four most 
populous counties in Maryland and for assigned counsel programs in 19
counties.  If the specialized programs and these additional programs 
had been included, the estimate for the total number of cases received 
would have been higher.

Data imputation for critical items 
in program survey

If a program in the most populous 100 counties was known to be 
missing, NORC logically imputed as much critical  information as 
possible based on information gathered in follow-up telephone calls 
and questionnaires from related counties and programs. 

NORC used several different techniques to impute data for selected 
missing individual survey items (type of program, expenditures, 
staffing, and caseload).  Some items were imputed by hot deck methods 
in which a value is copied or adapted from a donor case having 
similar values of related variables.  Some items were imputed using 
a statistical model of relationships among variables.  The goal was 
to create a program data file with complete information on critical 
items, where the imputed values were plausible given the data 
relationships among the unimputed data.  An indicator variable was
added to the file for each critical item.  The values of these 
companion variables indicated whether the critical item was imputed, 
and if so, by what method.  A detailed memorandum describing the 
imputation process will be archived with the public use dataset.

Data allocation for surveys completed 
by state agencies and multi-jurisdiction 
programs

Some states operate a single indigent defense program covering most 
or all counties in the state.  If the State agency completed one single
program questionnaire for the entire State, NORC allocated the 
statewide data to the counties in that State by prorating the 
quantitative variables in proportion to 1990 census population.  
Multi-county programs for which a single program questionnaire was 
received were allocated to their respective counties in the same way.  
BJS staff deleted the State and multi-jurisdictional source surveys 
from the final program data file to avoid duplication of information.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

This BJS Bulletin presents findings from the National Survey 
of Indigent Defense Systems, 1999.

Carol J. DeFrances and Marika F.X. Litras wrote this report.  
At BJS Greg W.Steadman provided statistical review; Devon B. 
Adams, Todd D. Minton, and Donna D. Oliphant provided assistance 
in compiling the respondent lists; and Steven K. Smith provided 
overall guidance for the project.  

Data collection was performed by the National Opinion Research 
Center (NORC); Natalie Suter was the project director.  At NORC, 
project staff included Rachel Harter, Angela Herrmann, Irv Horwitz, 
Kymm Kochanek, Jayan Moolayil, Gloria Rauens, Joanna Small, Hee 
Choon Shin, Charles Taragon, and Crystal Williams. 

The National Legal Aid and Defender Association, (NLADA), as well 
as various State coordinators, assisted in the follow-up phase of 
the project.  The Project's Advisory Group provided review of the 
text.  H. Scott Wallace of NLADA provided review and compiled 
comments from the Project's Advisory Group members.

Ellen Goldberg produced and edited this report assisted by Rhonda 
Keith. Jayne Robinson administered final production.

November 2000, NCJ 184932

End of file
11/27/00 ih
Revised 12/4/00 pm
