Executive Summary: Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 1998

Revised April 20, 1999

U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement
National Center for Education Statistics

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

October 1998

Phillip Kaufman
Xianglei Chen
Susan P. Choy
MPR Associates, Inc.

Kathryn A. Chandler
Christopher D. Chapman
National Center for Education Statistics

Michael R. Rand
Cheryl Ringel
Bureau of Justice Statistics

U.S. Department of Education 
Richard W. Riley, Secretary

Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement
C. Kent McGuire, Assistant Secretary

National Center for Education Statistics
Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Commissioner

The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) is the
primary federal entity for collecting, analyzing, and reporting
data related to education in the United States and other
nations. It fulfills a congressional mandate to collect,
collate, analyze, and report full and complete statistics on the
condition of education in the United States; conduct and publish
reports and specialized analyses of the meaning and 
significance of such statistics; assist state and local
education agencies in improving their statistical 
systems; and report on education activities in foreign countries.

This publication can be downloaded 
from the World Wide Web at 
http://nces.ed.gov  

Single hard copies can be ordered through 
ED Pubs at 1-877-4EDPUBS 
(NCES 98-251) (TTY/TDD 1-877-576-7734), 

Contact at NCES:
Kathryn Chandler
(202) 2191767
(email) kathryn_chandler@ed.gov

*

U.S. Department of Justice
Janet Reno, Attorney General

Office of Justice Programs
Laurie O. Robinson
Assistant Attorney General

Bureau of Justice Statistics
Jan M. Chaiken, Director

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the 
primary federal entity for collecting, analyzing, 
publishing, and disseminating statistical information 
about crime, its perpetrators and victims, and
the operation of the justice system at all levels 
of government. These data are critical to federal, 
state, and local policymakers in combating crime and 
ensuring that justice is both efficient and evenhanded.

This publication can be downloaded 
from the World Wide Web at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs98.htm

Single hard copies can be ordered through 
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 
at 1-800-732-3277 (NCJ 172215). 

Contact at BJS:
Michael Rand
(202) 616-3494
(email) randm@ojp.usdoj.gov

October 1998

Suggested Citation

Kaufman, P., Chen, X., Choy, S. P., Chandler, K. A., Chapman, C.
D., Rand, M. R. and Ringel, C.  Indicators of School Crime and
Safety, 1998. U.S. Departments of Education and Justice. NCES
98-251/NCJ 172215. Washington, D.C.: 1998.

*

Foreword

The string of tragic violent incidents that occurred in 
school year 1997-1998 has refocused the American 
public's attention on school crime and safety. When 
the first events occurred, it became clear that there 
was no single source of information about crime and 
violence in the nation's schools, and President Clinton 
called on the Departments of Justice and Education 
to produce an annual report card on school violence. 
The Departments responded to that request by 
producing the Annual Report on School Safety: 1998 
to inform educators, parents and students about the 
current nature of crime in schools and about programs 
schools and school systems have instituted to work 
towards making schools safer.

At the same time, the statistical agencies of the two 
departments identified a broader range of indicators 
on school crime and safety to be reported annually. 
This report, Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 
1998, is a joint effort by the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics and the National Center for Education Statistics. 
It is meant to provide detailed statistical information 
supporting the Annual Report. This series will provide 
the President, Congress, and the public with an analysis 
of the latest and best national data on school crime 
and safety in the United States.

In addition to providing this new report on school safety 
and crime, the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the 
National Center for Education Statistics have initiated 
 data collection efforts that will provide even more timely
and accurate statistics on this issue in years to come. 
These efforts will include a more regularly conducted 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime 
Victimization Survey scheduled now for 1999 
and every two years thereafter, and a new biennial 
school-based survey starting in 2000 that will collect 
data on crime and discipline problems in our nation's schools.

We hope that this and subsequent reports will help inform 
the President, Congress, and the public on our nation's 
progress in providing our children with safe places to 
live and learn. 

Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Ph.D.
Commissioner of Education Statistics            

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director of the Bureau of Justice Statistics
               
*                       

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the heads of their 
respective agencies, Pat Forgione of the National 
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and Jan 
Chaiken of the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 
for supporting this report. We also wish to thank 
members of the Department of Education/ 
Department of Justice School Safety Report 
Working Group for guidance on content and 
constructive criticism on early drafts of the report. 

From BJS, we wish to thank Patsy Klaus, Craig 
Perkins, and Cathy Maston of Victimization 
Statistics Branch for their work in preparing 
and verifying data from the NCVS.

From NCES, we wish to thank Mary Frase, 
Dan Kasprzyk, Edie McArthur, and Marilyn 
McMillen, who served as reviewers. They 
each provided input that substantially improved 
the publication.

Outside of NCES and BJS, school crime experts who reviewed the
report were Bruce Taylor of the General Accounting Office,
Eileen Poe-Yamagata of the National Center for Juvenile 
Justice in Pittsburgh, and Joanne Wiggins of the Planning 
and Evaluation Service of the U.S. Department 
of Education. Their advice was gratefully 
accepted. We particularly appreciated their 
willingness to review the report under very 
strict time constraints.

Without the assistance of the following staff 
at MPR Associates this report could not have 
been produced: Barbara Kridl (overall production and
proofreading), Andrea Livingston (editing), 
Leslie Retallick (figure design and text layout), 
Francesca Tussing (table layout), and Karyn 
Madden (proofreading). They provided 
invaluable editorial, graphic, and production assistance.

Finally, the authors would like to thank 
Amanda Miller of the Education Statistics 
Services Institute and Marilyn Marbrook, Chief 
of Publication and Electronic Dissemination 
at BJS, assisted by Yvonne Boston and Jayne 
Robinson, for their assistance in preparing this 
document for publication and dissemination.

 
Highlights

Schools should be safe and secure places for all
students, teachers, and staff members. Without a
safe learning environment, teachers cannot teach
and students cannot learn. Recent efforts by
schools, local authorities, and the state and
federal governments have prompted the nation to
focus on improving the safety of American schools.
It is the hope that all children will be able to
go to and from school and be at school without
fearing for their safety or the safety of their
friends and teachers. Judging progress toward
providing safer schools requires establishing good
indicators on the current state of school crime
and safety and periodically monitoring and
updating these indicators.

This report, the first in a series of annual
reports on school crime and safety from the Bureau
of Justice Statistics and the National Center for
Education Statistics, presents the latest
available data on school crime and student safety.
The report provides a profile of school crime and
safety in the United States and describes the
characteristics of the victims of these crimes. It
is organized as a series of indicators, with each
indicator presenting data on different aspects of
school crime and safety. There are five sections
to the report: Nonfatal Student Victimization--
Student Reports; Violence and Crime at School--
Public School Principal/Disciplinarian Reports; 
Violent Deaths at School; Nonfatal Teacher
Victimization at School--Teacher Reports; and 
School Environment. Each section contains a set of
indicators that, taken as a whole, describe a
distinct aspect of school crime and safety.

The indicators rely on data collected by a variety
of federal departments and agencies including the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National Center
for Education Statistics, the National Center for
Health Statistics, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Because the report relies
on so many different data sets, the age groups and
the time periods analyzed can vary from indicator
to indicator. Readers should keep this in mind as
they compare data from different indicators.
Furthermore, while every effort has been made to
keep key definitions consistent across indicators,
different surveys sometimes use different
definitions, such as those for specific crimes and
"at school." (Readers should consult the glossary
of terms in appendix C for the specific
definitions used in each survey.) Therefore
caution should be used in making comparisons
between results from different data sets.
Descriptions of these data sets are located in
appendix B of this report. Some of the key
findings from the various sections of this report
are as follows. (All comparisons reported in this
report were statistically significant at the 0.05
level. See appendix B for details on the methods
used here.)

Nonfatal Student Victimization -- Student Reports

In 1996, students ages 12 through 18 were victims
of about 225,000 incidents of nonfatal serious
violent crime at school and about 671,000
incidents away from school. (This sentence revised
April 20, 1999) These numbers indicate
that when students were away from school they were
more likely to be victims of nonfatal serious
violent crime  including rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault -- than when they
were at school (Indicator 1).

* The percentages of 12th graders who have been
injured (with or without a weapon) at school have
not changed notably over the past 20 years,
although the percentages who have been threatened
with injury (with a weapon or without a weapon)
show a very slight overall upward trend (Indicator
3). 

* In 1996, 5 percent of all 12th graders reported
that they had been injured with a weapon such as a
knife, gun, or club during the past 12 months
while they were at school that is, inside or
outside the school building or on a school bus and
12 percent reported that they had been injured
on purpose without a weapon while at school
(Indicator 3). 

* Students were differentially affected by crime
according to where they lived. In 1996, 12-
through 18-year-old students living in urban areas
were more vulnerable to serious violent crime than
were students in suburban and rural areas both at
and away from school. However, student
vulnerability to theft in 1996 was similar in
urban, suburban, and rural areas both at and away
from school (Indicator 1).


Violence and Crime at School--Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports

In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime to the
police or a law enforcement representative.
Principals'reports of serious violent crimes
included murder, rape or other type of sexual
battery, suicide, physical attack or fight with a
weapon, or robbery. Another 47 percent of public
schools reported a less serious violent or
nonviolent crime (but not a serious violent one).
Crimes in this category include physical attack or
fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and
vandalism. The remaining 43 percent of public
schools did not report any of these crimes to
the police (Indicator 6).

* Elementary schools were much less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any type
of crime in 1996-97. They were much more likely to
report vandalism (31 percent) than any of the
other crimes (19 percent or less) (Indicator 7). 
     
* At the middle and high school levels, physical
attack or fight without a weapon was generally the
most commonly reported crime in 1996-97 (9 and 8
per 1,000 students, respectively). Theft or
larceny was more common at the high school than
the middle school level (6 versus 4 per 1,000
students) (Indicator 7).


Violent Deaths at School

Seventy-six students were murdered or committed
suicide at school during the combined 1992-93 and
1993-94 school years (the latest period for
which data are available). Nonstudent violent
deaths also occurred at school. During this
period, there were 105 violent deaths at school of
which 29 involved nonstudents (Indicator 8).

* Most murders and suicides among young people
occurred while they were away from school. In the
combined 1992 and 1993 calendar years, 7,357 young
people ages 5 through 19 were murdered, and 4,366
committed suicide in all locations (Indicator 8). 
     
* Students in urban schools had a higher level of
risk of violent death at school than their peers
in suburban or rural schools. The estimated rate
of school-associated violent death for students in
urban schools was nine times greater than the rate
for students in rural schools and two times     
greater than that for students in suburban schools
during the combined 1992-93 and 1993-94 school
years (Indicator 8). 
 

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School--Teacher
Reports

Over the 5-year period from 1992 to 1996, teachers
were victims of 1,581,000 nonfatal crimes at
school, including 962,000 thefts and 619,000
violent crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery,
and aggravated and simple assault) (Indicator 9).
This translates into about 316,000 nonfatal crimes
per year over this time period.

* In the period from 1992 to 1996, middle and
junior high school teachers were more likely to be
victims of violent crime (most of which were
simple assaults) than senior high school teachers,
who in turn were more likely to be victims of
violent crime than elementary school teachers
(Indicator 9).

* In the 1993-94 school year, 12 percent of all
elementary and secondary school teachers were
threatened with injury by a student, and 4 percent
were physically attacked by a student. This
represented about 341,000 teachers who were
victims of threats of injury by students and
120,000 teachers who were victims of attacks by
students that year (Indicator 10).
 

School Environment

Between 1989 and 1995, there were increases in the
percentages of students feeling unsafe while they
were at school and while they were going to
and from school. In 1989, 6 percent of students
ages 12 through 19 sometimes or most of the time
feared they were going to be attacked or harmed at
school. By 1995, this percentage had risen to 9
percent. During the same period, the percentage of
students fearing they would be attacked while
traveling to and from school rose from 4 percent
to 7 percent (Indicator 12).

* Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
students ages 12 through 19 who avoided one or
more places at school for fear of their own safety
increased, from 5 percent to 9 percent. In 1995,
this percentage represented 2.1 million students
(Indicator 13). 
     
* Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
students who reported that street gangs were
present at their schools increased. In 1989, 15
percent of students reported gangs being present
in their schools. By 1995, this percentage had
risen to 28 percent (Indicator 14). 

* There was a decline between 1993 and 1996 in the
percentage of male high school seniors who
reported carrying a weapon to school at least 1 
day within the 4 weeks before the survey the
percentage fell from 14 percent in 1993 to 9
percent in 1996. However, there was little change
in the percentage of female students who reported
doing so (from 2 to 3 percent) (Indicator 11). 
     
* Although 12th graders were less likely to use
alcohol at school than at home or at parties, in
1996 about 8 percent of 12th graders had
consumed alcohol at school in the past 12 months
(Indicator 16). 
     
* The percentage of 12th graders who had taken
various illegal drugs at school in the previous 12
months declined between 1976 and 1992. However,
since 1992, use of marijuana and stimulants at
school has increased (Indicator 17).

*                                

Contents  (full report)

Foreword    iii
Highlights    v  
Acknowledgments    ix
List of tables    xiii
List of figures   xix

Nonfatal Student Victimization Student Reports    1
  1. Victimization of students at school and away 
from school   2  
  2. Prevalence of students' being victimized 
at school    6 
  3. Prevalence of 12th graders' being injured
or threatened with injury at school    8  
  4. Prevalence of students' being bullied 
at school    10 
  5. Prevalence of 12th graders' having property
stolen or damaged at school    11 

Violence and Crime at School Public School-
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports     13
  6. Crimes reported to the police    14
  7. Specific crimes reported to the police    16

Violent Deaths at School    19
  8. Violent deaths at school and away from school    20

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School-
Teacher Reports    23
  9. Nonfatal teacher victimization at school    24
  10. Prevalence of teachers being threatened
with injury or attacked by students    26

School Environment    27
  11. Prevalence of students carrying weapons 
to school    28
  12. Students' perceptions of personal safety at school and
when traveling to and from school    30
  13. Students' reports of avoiding places at school    32
  14. Students' reports of gangs at school    34
  15. Public school principals' reports of discipline 
problems at school    36
  16. Prevalence of 12th graders using alcohol
at school and away from school    38
  17. Prevalence of 12th graders using other drugs 
at school and away from school    40

Tables         
Supplemental Tables    43
Standard Error Tables    83

Appendixes 
  A. School Practices and Policies Related to Safety 
and Discipline    121
  B. Technical Notes    135
  C. Glossary of Terms    155

*

Order form

Yes!  Send me 1 copy of "Indicators of School Crime and Safety,
1998" (161 pages), NCJ 172215

FAX your order to 410-792-4358, or fold, tape, and mail with
first-class stamp to--

Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse
P.O. Box 179, Dept. BJS
Annapolis Junction MD  20701-0179.

Name___________________________________

Address_________________________________

City, State, ZIP__________________________

Daytime phone number:  (______)____________ 

(end of file)

