U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2009

December 2009   NCJ 228478

------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1762

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=8

----------------------------------------------------------

Rachel Dinkes  
Education Statistics Services Institute - 
American Institutes for Research

Jana Kemp
Education Statistics Services Institute - 
American Institutes for Research

Katrina Baum
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Thomas D. Snyder
Project Officer
National Center for Education Statistics

NCES 2010-012
NCJ 228478

U.S. Department of Education
Arne Duncan
Secretary

Institute of Education Sciences
John Q. Easton
Director

National Center for Education Statistics
Stuart Kerachsky
Deputy Commissioner

U.S. Department of Justice
Eric Holder
Attorney General

Office of Justice Programs
Laurie O. Robinson
Assistant Attorney General

Bureau of Justice Statistics
Michael D. Sinclair  
Acting Director

The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) is the
primary federal entity for collecting, analyzing, and
reporting data related to education in the United States and
other nations. It fulfills a congressional mandate to
collect, collate, analyze, and report full and complete
statistics on the condition of education in the United
States; conduct and publish reports and specialized analyses
of the meaning and significance of such statistics; assist
state and local education agencies in improving their
statistical systems; and review and report on education
activities in other countries. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the primary federal
entity for collecting, analyzing, publishing, and
disseminating statistical information about crime, its
perpetrators and victims, and the operation of the justice
system at all levels of government. These data are critical
to federal, state, and local policymakers in combating crime
and ensuring that justice is both efficient and evenhanded. 

December 2009

Suggested Citation

Dinkes, R., Kemp, J., and Baum, K. (2009). Indicators of
School Crime and Safety: 2009 (NCES 2010-012/NCJ 228478).
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau
of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice Programs, U.S.
Department of Justice. Washington, DC. 

This publication can be downloaded from the World Wide Web at
http://nces.ed.gov or http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs. 
Single hard copies can be ordered through ED
Pubs at 1-877-4ED-PUBS (NCES 2010-012) (TTY/TDD
1-877-576-7734), and the Bureau of Justice Statistics
Clearinghouse at 1-800-851-3420 (NCJ 228478). 

Contact at NCES

Thomas Snyder
202-502-7452
tom.snyder@ed.gov

Contact at BJS

Katrina Baum
202-307-5889
katrina.baum@usdoj.gov
 
Executive Summary

Our nation's schools should be safe havens for teaching and
learning, free of crime and violence. Any instance of crime
or violence at school not only affects the individuals
involved, but also may disrupt the educational process and
affect bystanders, the school itself, and the surrounding
community (Henry 2000). 

Ensuring safer schools requires establishing good indicators
of the current state of school crime and safety across the
nation and regularly updating and monitoring these
indicators. This is the aim of Indicators of School Crime and
Safety. 

This report is the twelfth in a series of annual publications
produced jointly by the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), Institute of Education Sciences (IES), in
the U.S. Department of Education, and the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) in the U.S. Department of Justice. This
report presents the most recent data available on school
crime and student safety. The indicators in this report are
based on information drawn from a variety of data sources,
including national surveys of students, teachers, and
principals. Sources include results from a study of violent
deaths in schools, sponsored by the U.S. Department of
Education and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
the National Crime Victimization Survey and School Crime
Supplement to the survey, sponsored by the BJS and NCES,
respectively; the Youth Risk Behavior Survey, sponsored by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and the
Schools and Staffing Survey and School Survey on Crime and
Safety, both sponsored by NCES. The most recent data
collection for each indicator varied by survey, from 2006 to
2007-08. Each data source has an independent sample design,
data collection method, and questionnaire design, or is the
result of a universe data collection. All comparisons
described in this report are statistically significant at the
.05 level. Additional information about methodology and the
datasets analyzed in this report may be found in appendix A. 

This report covers topics such as victimization, teacher
injury, bullying, school conditions, fights, weapons,
availability and student use of drugs and alcohol, and
student perceptions of personal safety at school. Indicators
of crime and safety are compared across different population
subgroups and over time. Data on crimes that occur away from
school are offered as a point of comparison where available.

Key Findings

In the 2007-08 school year, an estimated 55.7 million
students were enrolled in prekindergarten through grade 12
(Snyder, Dillow, and Hoffman 2009). Preliminary data show
that among youth ages 5-18, there were 43 school-associated
violent deaths***Footnotes 1 School-associated violent death
is defined as "a homicide, suicide, legal intervention
(involving a law enforcement officer), or unintentional
firearm-related death in which the fatal injury occurred on
the campus of a functioning elementary or secondary school in
the United States." Victims of school-associated
violent***Footnote 2 See appendix B for a detailed definition
of "at school***. deaths included students, staff members,
and others who are not students .*** from July 1, 2007,
through June 30, 2008 (Indicator 1). In 2007, among students
ages 12-18, there were about 1.5 million victims of nonfatal
crimes at school,  including 826,800 thefts***Footnote 3
Theft includes purse snatching, pick pocketing, all
burglaries, attempted forcible entry, and all attempted and
completed thefts except motor vehicle thefts. Theft does not
include robbery in which threat or use of force is involved.
.*** and 684,100 violent crimes *** Footnote 4 Violent crimes
include serious violent incidents and simple assault.***
(simple assault and serious violent crime ***Footnote 5
Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery,
and aggravated assault.***) (Indicator 2). During the 2007-08
school year, 85 percent of public schools recorded that at
least one violent crime, theft, or other crime occurred at
their school (Indicator 6). The following section presents
key findings from each section of the report. 

Violent Deaths 

*From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2008, there were 21
homicides and 5 suicides of school-age youth (ages 5-18) at
school (Indicator 1), or about 1 homicide or suicide of a
school-age youth at school per 2.1 million students enrolled
during the 2007-08 school year.

Nonfatal Student and Teacher Victimization 

*In 2007, students ages 12-18 were victims of about 1.5
million nonfatal crimes (theft ***Footnote 3 Theft includes
purse snatching, pick pocketing, all burglaries, attempted
forcible entry, and all attempted and completed thefts except
motor vehicle thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which
threat or use of force is involved***.  plus violent crime
***Footnote 4 Violent crimes include serious violent
incidents and simple assault***. ) while they were at
school,***Footnote 6 At school" includes inside the school
building, on school property, or on the way to or from
school***.  compared to about 1.1 million nonfatal crimes
while they were away from school (Indicator 2).

*In 2007, the rates for theft ***Footnote 3 Theft includes
purse snatching, pick pocketing, all burglaries, attempted
forcible entry, and all attempted and completed thefts except
motor vehicle thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which
threat or use of force is involved.***   and violent crime
*** Footnote 4 Violent crimes include serious violent
incidents and simple assault.***  were higher at school than
away from school. In that year, students were victims of 31
thefts per 1,000 students at school, compared to 21 thefts
per 1,000 students away from school. At school there were 26
violent crimes per 1,000 students, compared to 20 violent
crimes per 1,000 students away from school (Indicator 2).

*Although there was an overall decline in the victimization
rates for students ages 12-18 at school between 1992 and
2007, there was no measurable difference in the rate of crime
at school between 2004 and 2007. Between 1992 and 2007 the
rate of crime for students away from school declined
(Indicator 2).

*In 2007, 4 percent of students ages 12-18 reported being
victimized at school during the previous 6 months: 3 percent
reported theft,***Footnote 3 Theft includes purse snatching,
pick pocketing, all burglaries, attempted forcible entry, and
all attempted and completed thefts except motor vehicle
thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which threat or use
of force is involved.***  and 2 percent reported violent
victimization***Footnote 4 Violent crimes include serious
violent incidents and simple assault.***  (Indicator 3). Less
than half of a percent of students reported serious violent
victimization.***Footnote 5 Serious violent crimes include
rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.***
Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery,
and aggravated assault.

*In 2007, 10 percent of male students in grades 9-12 reported
being threatened or injured with a weapon on school property
in the past year, compared to 5 percent of female students
(Indicator 4). 

*Higher percentages of Black students (10 percent) and
Hispanic students (9 percent) reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property than White students
(7 percent) and American Indian/Alaska Native students (6
percent) (Indicator 4).

*During the 2007-08 school year, a greater percentage of
teachers in city schools (10 percent) reported being
threatened with injury than teachers in town schools (7
percent) and suburban or rural schools (6 percent each)
(Indicator 5). A greater percentage of teachers in city
schools (5 percent) and suburban schools (4 percent) reported
being physically attacked, compared to teachers in rural
schools (3 percent).

*A greater percentage of secondary school teachers (8
percent) reported being threatened with injury by a student
than elementary school teachers (7 percent) (Indicator 5).
However, a greater percentage of elementary school teachers
(6 percent) reported being physically attacked than secondary
school teachers (2 percent). 

School Environment

*During the 2007-08 school year, 85 percent of public schools
recorded that one or more incidents of crime had taken place
at school,*** Footnote 2 See appendix B for a detailed
definition of "at school***. amounting to an estimated 2.0
million crimes (table 6.1). This figure translates to a rate
of 43 crimes per 1,000 public school students enrolled in
2007-08. During the same year, 62 percent of public schools
reported an incident of crime that occurred at school to the
police, amounting to about 704,000 crimes--or 15 crimes per
1,000 public school students enrolled (Indicator 6).

*In 2007-08, 75 percent of public schools recorded one or
more violent incidents of crime,***Footnote 4 Violent crimes
include serious violent incidents and simple assault***.  17
percent recorded one or more serious violent incidents,***
Footnote 5 Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.***  47 percent
recorded one or more thefts,***Footnote 3 Theft includes
purse snatching, pick pocketing, all burglaries, attempted
forcible entry, and all attempted and completed thefts except
motor vehicle thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which
threat or use of force is involved.*** and 67 percent
recorded one or more other incidents.***Footnote 7 Other
incidents include possession of a firearm or explosive
device; possession of a knife or sharp object; distribution,
possession, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol; and
vandalism.***  Thirty-eight percent of public schools
reported at least one violent incident to police, 13 percent
reported at least one serious violent incident to police, 31
percent reported at least one theft to police, and 49 percent
reported one or more other incidents to police (Indicator 6).

*During the 2007-08 school year, 25 percent of public schools
reported that bullying occurred among students on a daily or
weekly basis, and 11 percent reported that student acts of
disrespect for teachers other than verbal abuse took place on
a daily or weekly basis. With regard to other discipline
problems reported as occurring at least once a week, 6
percent of public schools reported student verbal abuse of
teachers, 4 percent reported widespread disorder in the
classroom, 4 percent reported student racial/ethnic tensions,
and 3 percent reported student sexual harassment of other
students (Indicator 7). 

*Twenty percent of public schools reported that gang
activities had happened at all during 2007-08 and 3 percent
reported that cult or extremist activities had happened at
all during that school year (Indicator 7).

*In 2007, 23 percent of students ages 12-18 reported that
there were gangs at their schools (Indicator 8). Overall, a
smaller percentage of White students (16 percent) and Asian
students (17 percent) reported a gang presence at school than
Black students (38 percent) and Hispanic students (36
percent). 

*In 2007, 22 percent of all students in grades 9-12 reported
that someone had offered, sold, or given them an illegal drug
on school property in the past 12 months (Indicator 9). 

*Ten percent of students ages 12-18 reported that someone at
school had used hate-related words against them, and more
than one-third (35 percent) reported seeing hate-related
graffiti at school in 2007 (Indicator 10). 

*In 2007, 32 percent of students ages 12-18 reported having
been bullied at school during the school year (Indicator 11).
Twenty-one percent of students said that they had experienced
bullying that consisted of being made fun of; 18 percent
reported being the subject of rumors; 11 percent said that
they were pushed, shoved, tripped, or spit on; 6 percent said
they were threatened with harm; 5 percent said they were
excluded from activities on purpose; and 4 percent of
students said they were tried to make do things they did not
want to do or that their property was destroyed on purpose. 

*In 2007-08, 34 percent of teachers agreed or strongly agreed
that student misbehavior interfered with their teaching, and
32 percent reported that student tardiness and class cutting
interfered with their teaching (Indicator 12). Seventy-two
percent of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that other
teachers at their school enforced the school rules, and 89
percent reported that the principal enforced the school
rules.

*A higher percentage of secondary school teachers than
elementary school teachers reported that student misbehavior
(39 vs. 33 percent) and student tardiness and class cutting
(45 vs. 26 percent) interfered with their teaching in 2007-08
(Indicator 12). During the same year, a lower percentage of
secondary school teachers than elementary school teachers
agreed that school rules were enforced by teachers (56 vs. 79
percent) and by the principal in their school (86 vs. 89
percent).

Fights, Weapons, and Illegal Substances

*In 2007, 36 percent of students in grades 9-12 reported they
had been in a fight *** Footnote 8 Such as a gun, knife, or
club.*** anywhere, and 12 percent said they had been in a
fight on school property during the preceding 12 months
(Indicator 13). In the same year, 44 percent of males said
they had been in a fight anywhere, compared to 27 percent of
females, and 16 percent of males said they had been in a
fight on school property, compared to 9 percent of females.
 
*Eighteen percent of students in grades 9-12 in 2007 reported
they had carried a weapon ***Footnote 8 Such as a gun,
knife, or club.***  anywhere, and 6 percent reported they had
carried a weapon on school property during the previous 30
days (Indicator 14). There were at least three times as many
males as females who reported carrying a weapon--either
anywhere or on school property--in all survey years. In 2007,
for example, 9 percent of males carried a weapon on school
property, compared to 3 percent of females, and 29 percent of
males carried a weapon anywhere, compared to 7 percent of
females. 

*In 2007, 45 percent of students in grades 9-12 reported
having consumed at least one drink of alcohol anywhere, and 4
percent reported having consumed at least one drink on school
property during the previous 30 days (Indicator 15). 

*Twenty percent of students in grades 9-12 in 2007 reported
using marijuana anywhere during the past 30 days, and 4
percent reported using marijuana on school property during
this period (Indicator 16). 

Fear and Avoidance

*In 2007, approximately 5 percent of students ages 12-18
reported that they were afraid of attack or harm at school,
and 3 percent reported that they were afraid of attack or
harm away from school (Indicator 17). In 2007, smaller
percentages of White students (4 percent) and Asian students
(2 percent) reported being afraid of attack or harm at school
than their Black (9 percent) and Hispanic (7 percent) peers.

*In 2007, 7 percent of students ages 12-18 reported that they
had avoided a school activity or one or more places in school
in the previous 6 months because of fear of attack or harm: 3
percent of students avoided a school activity, and 6 percent
avoided one or more places in school (Indicator 18). 

Discipline, Safety, and Security Measures

*Forty-six percent of public schools (approximately 38,500
schools) took at least one serious disciplinary action
against a student during the 2007-08 school year. Of the
767,900 serious disciplinary actions taken, 76 percent were
suspensions for 5 days or more, 19 percent were transfers to
specialized schools, and 5 percent were removals with no
services for the remainder of the school year (Indicator 19).
 
*Although the overall percentage of public schools
taking a serious disciplinary action declined between
1999-2000 (54 percent) and 2003-04 (46 percent), there has
been no measurable change since then. This same general
pattern of decline between the period of 1999-2000 and
2003-04 with no measurable change in more recent survey years
held both for the percentage of public schools that reported
taking serious disciplinary actions for the offense of
physical attacks or fights and for the offense of
insubordination (Indicator 19).

*Between the 1999-2000 and 2007-08 school years, there was an
increase in the percentage of public schools reporting the
use of the following safety and security measures: controlled
access to the building during school hours (from 75 to 90
percent); controlled access to school grounds during school
hours (from 34 to 43 percent); students required to wear
badges or picture IDs (from 4 to 8 percent); faculty required
to wear badges or picture IDs (from 25 to 58 percent); the
use of one or more security cameras to monitor school (from
19 to 55 percent); the provision of telephones in most
classrooms (from 45 to 72 percent); and the requirement that
students wear uniforms (from 12 to 18 percent) (Indicator
20). 

*Between the 2003-04 and 2007-08 school years, there was an
increase in the percentage of public schools reporting the
drug testing of student athletes (from 4 to 6 percent), as
well as an increase in the percentage of public schools
reporting the drug testing of students in other
extracurricular activities (from 3 to 4 percent) (Indicator
20).

*During the 2007-08 school year, 43 percent of public schools
reported that they had an electronic notification system for
a school-wide emergency, and 31 percent of public schools
reported that they had a structured, anonymous threat
reporting system (Indicator 20).

*The majority of students ages 12-18 reported that their
school had a student code of conduct (96 percent) and a
requirement that visitors sign in (94 percent) in 2007
(Indicator 21). Metal detectors were the least commonly
observed security measure. Ten percent of students reported
the use of metal detectors at their school.
 
Foreword

Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2009 provides the most
recent national indicators on school crime and safety. The
information presented in this report is intended to serve as
a reference for policymakers and practitioners so that they
can develop effective programs and policies aimed at violence
and school crime prevention. Accurate information about the
nature, extent, and scope of the problem being addressed is
essential for developing effective programs and policies. 

This is the twelfth edition of Indicators of School Crime and
Safety, a joint publication of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) and the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES). This report provides detailed statistics
to inform the nation about current aspects of crime and
safety in schools. 

The 2009 edition of Indicators of School Crime and Safety
includes the most recent available data, compiled from a
number of statistical data sources supported by the federal
government. Such sources include results from a study of
violent deaths in schools, sponsored by the U.S. Department
of Education and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; the National Crime Victimization Survey and
School Crime Supplement to the survey, sponsored by the BJS
and NCES, respectively; the Youth Risk Behavior Survey,
sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
and the Schools and Staffing Survey and School Survey on
Crime and Safety, both sponsored by NCES. 

The entire report is available on the Internet
(http://nces.ed.gov/programs/crimeindicators/crimeindicators2
009/). The Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National
Center for Education Statistics continue to work together in
order to provide timely and complete data on the issues of
school-related violence and safety. 

Stuart Kerachsky  
Deputy Commissioner
National Center for Education Statistics

Michael D. Sinclair
Acting Director
Bureau of Justice Statistics
 
Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the sponsoring agencies, the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), for supporting this
report. 

From BJS, we wish to thank Allen Beck, Doris James, Georgette
Walsh, and Michael Rand, who served as reviewers, and Patsy
Klaus, who verified data from the National Crime
Victimization Survey. Outside of NCES and BJS, Nancy Brener,
Mark Anderson, Jeffrey Hall, and Latasha Butler of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention generously
provided data and performed a review of data documentation.
We also value the review of this report and the continued
support provided by Bill Modzeleski and Deborah Rudy of the
Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools. 

Introduction

Our nation's schools should be safe havens for teaching and
learning free of crime and violence. Any instance of crime or
violence at school not only affects the individuals involved
but also may disrupt the educational process and affect
bystanders, the school itself, and the surrounding community
(Henry 2000). For both students and teachers, victimization
at school can have lasting effects. In addition to
experiencing loneliness, depression, and adjustment
difficulties (Crick and Bigbee 1998; Crick and Grotpeter
1996; Nansel et al. 2001; Prinstein, Boergers, and Vernberg
2001; Storch et al. 2003), victimized children are more prone
to truancy (Ringwalt, Ennett, and Johnson 2003), poor
academic performance (MacMillan and Hagan 2004; Wei and
Williams 2004), dropping out of school (Beauvais et al. 1996;
MacMillan and Hagan 2004), and violent behaviors (Nansel et
al. 2003). For teachers, incidents of victimization may lead
to professional disenchantment and even departure from the
profession altogether (Karcher 2002; Smith and Smith 2006).

For parents, school staff, and policymakers to effectively
address school crime, they need an accurate understanding of
the extent, nature, and context of the problem. However, it
is difficult to gauge the scope of crime and violence in
schools given the large amount of attention devoted to
isolated incidents of extreme school violence. Measuring
progress toward safer schools requires establishing good
indicators of the current state of school crime and safety
across the nation and regularly updating and monitoring these
indicators; this is the aim of Indicators of School Crime and
Safety. 

Purpose and Organization of This Report

Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2009 is the twelfth in
a series of reports produced since 1998 by the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) that present the most recent data
available on school crime and student safety. The report is
not intended to be an exhaustive compilation of school crime
and safety information, nor does it attempt to explore
reasons for crime and violence in schools. Rather, it is
designed to provide a brief summary of information from an
array of data sources and to make data on national school
crime and safety accessible to policymakers, educators,
parents, and the general public.

Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2009 is organized into
sections that delineate specific concerns to readers,
starting with a description of the most serious violent
crimes. The sections cover Violent Deaths; Nonfatal Student
and Teacher Victimization; School Environment; Fights,
Weapons, and Illegal Substances; Fear and Avoidance; and
Discipline, Safety, and Security Measures. Each section
contains a set of indicators that, taken together, aim to
describe a distinct aspect of school crime and safety. Where
available, data on crimes that occur outside of school
grounds are offered as a point of comparison.***Footnote 9
Data in this report are not adjusted to reflect the number of
hours that youths spend on school property versus the number
of hours they spend elsewhere.*** Supplemental tables for
each indicator provide more detailed breakouts and standard
errors for estimates. A glossary of terms and a reference
section appear at the end of the report. Standard errors for
the estimate tables are available online.

This year's report contains updated data for 8 indicators:
violent deaths (Indicator 1), nonfatal student victimization
(Indicator 2), teachers threatened with injury or physically
attacked by students (Indicator 5), violent and other crime
incidents at public schools and those reported to the police
(Indicator 6), discipline problems reported by public schools
(Indicator 7), teachers' reports on school conditions
(Indicator 12), serious disciplinary actions taken by public
schools (Indicator 19), and safety and security measures
taken by public schools (Indicator 20).

Also found in this year's report are references to recent
publications relevant to each indicator that the reader may
want to consult for additional information or analyses. These
references can be found in the "For more information"
sidebars at the bottom of each indicator. 

Data

The indicators in this report are based on information drawn
from a variety of independent data sources, including
national surveys of students, teachers, and principals and
universe data collections from federal departments and
agencies, including BJS, NCES, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Each data source has an independent sample
design, data collection method, and questionnaire design, or
is the result of a universe data collection. 

The combination of multiple, independent sources of data
provides a broad perspective on school crime and safety that
could not be achieved through any single source of
information. However, readers should be cautious when
comparing data from different sources. While every effort has
been made to keep key definitions consistent across
indicators, differences in sampling procedures, populations,
time periods, and question phrasing can all affect the
comparability of results. For example, both Indicators 20 and
21 report data on select security and safety measures used in
schools. Indicator 20 uses data collected from a survey of
public school principals about safety and security practices
used in their schools during the 2007-08 school year. The
schools range from primary through high schools. Indicator
21, however, uses data collected from 12- through 18-year-old
students residing in a sample of households. These students
were asked whether they observed selected safety and security
measures in their school in 2007, but they may not have known
whether, in fact, the security measure was present. In
addition, different indicators contain various approaches to
the analysis of school crime data and, therefore, will show
different perspectives on school crime. For example, both
Indicators 2 and 3 report data on theft and violent crime at
school based on the National Crime Victimization Survey and
the School Crime Supplement to that survey, respectively.
While Indicator 2 examines the number of incidents of crime,
Indicator 3 examines the percentage or prevalence of students
who reported victimization. Figure A provides a summary of
some of the variations in the design and coverage of sample
surveys used in this report.

Several indicators in this report are based on self-reported
survey data. Readers should note that limitations inherent to
self-reported data may affect estimates (Addington 2005;
Cantor and Lynch 2000). First, unless an interview is
"bounded" or a reference period is established, estimates may
include events that exceed the scope of the specified
reference period. This factor may artificially increase
reported incidents because respondents may recall events
outside of the given reference period. Second, many of the
surveys rely on the respondent to "self-determine" a
condition. This factor allows the respondent to define a
situation based upon his or her own interpretation of whether
the incident was a crime or not. On the other hand, the same
situation may not necessarily be interpreted in the same way
by a bystander or the perceived offender. Third, victim
surveys tend to emphasize crime events as incidents that take
place at one point in time. However, victims can often
experience a state of victimization in which they are
threatened or victimized regularly or repeatedly. Finally,
respondents may recall an event inaccurately. For instance,
people may forget the event entirely or recall the specifics
of the episode incorrectly. These and other factors may
affect the precision of the estimates based on these surveys.

Data trends are discussed in this report when possible. Where
trends are not discussed, either the data are not available
in earlier surveys or the wording of the survey question
changed from year to year, eliminating the ability to discuss
any trend. For example, in Indicator 11, which reports on
bullying using data from the School Crime Supplement survey,
the 2007 questionnaire was revised to include information on
cyber-bullying. Due to this change, the text of this
indicator is no longer presenting trend information. 

Where data from samples are reported, as is the case with
most of the indicators in this report, the standard error is
calculated for each estimate provided in order to determine
the "margin of error" for these estimates. The standard
errors of the estimates for different subpopulations in an
indicator can vary considerably and should be taken into
account when making comparisons. Throughout this report, in
cases where the standard error was at least 30 percent of the
associated estimate, the estimates were noted with a "!"
symbol (interpret data with caution). In cases where the
standard error was greater than 50 percent of the associated
estimate, the estimate was suppressed. See appendix A for
more information.

The comparisons in the text have been tested for statistical
significance to ensure that the differences are larger than
might be expected due to sampling variation. Unless otherwise
noted, all statements cited in the report are statistically
significant at the .05 level. Several test procedures were
used, depending upon the type of data being analyzed and the
nature of the statement being tested. The primary test
procedure used in this report was Student's t statistic,
which tests the difference between two sample estimates. The
t test formula was not adjusted for multiple comparisons.
Linear trend tests were used when differences among
percentages were examined relative to interval categories of
a variable, rather than the differences between two discrete
categories. This test allows one to examine whether, for
example, the percentage of students who reported using drugs
increased (or decreased) over time or whether the percentage
of students who reported being physically attacked in school
increased (or decreased) with age. When differences among
percentages were examined relative to a variable with ordinal
categories (such as grade), analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
used to test for a linear relationship between the two
variables.

Although percentages reported in the tables are generally
rounded to one decimal place (e.g., 76.5 percent),
percentages reported in the text and figures are generally
rounded from the original number to whole numbers (with any
value of 0.50 or above rounded to the next highest whole
number). While the data labels on the figures have been
rounded to whole numbers, the graphical presentation of these
data is based on the unrounded estimates shown in the
corresponding table.

Appendix A of this report contains descriptions of all the
datasets used in this report and a discussion of how standard
errors were calculated for each estimate.

Violent Deaths

Indicator 1 

Violent Deaths at School and Away From School

The percentage of youth homicides occurring at school
remained at less than 2 percent of the total number of youth
homicides over all available survey years even though the
absolute number of homicides of school-age youth at school
varied across the years.

Violent deaths at schools are rare but tragic events with
far-reaching effects on the school population and surrounding
community. From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2008, there
were 43 school-associated violent deaths in elementary and
secondary schools in the United States (figure 1.1 and tables
1.1 and 1.2). In this indicator, a school-associated violent
death is defined as "a homicide, suicide, legal intervention
(involving a law enforcement officer), or unintentional
firearm-related death in which the fatal injury occurred on
the campus of a functioning elementary or secondary school in
the United States." Victims of school-associated violent
deaths include students, staff members, and others who are
not students. School-associated violent deaths include those
that occurred while the victim was on the way to or returning
from regular sessions at school or while the victim was
attending or traveling to or from an official
school-sponsored event. Of the 43 student, staff, and
nonstudent school-associated violent deaths occurring between
July 1, 2007, and June 30, 2008, 36 were homicides, 6 were
suicides, and 1 was a legal intervention (table 1.2). Data
for school-associated violent deaths for the 2007-08 school
year are preliminary. ***Footnote 10 Data from School
Associated Violent Deaths Surveillance Study (SAVD) from
1999-2000 onward are considered preliminary. For more
information on this survey, please see appendix A.***

At-school and away-from-school homicide and suicide data were
drawn from a number of sources. The most recent data
available for total suicides of youth ages 5-18 are for the
2006 calendar year; the most recent data available for total
homicides of youth ages 5-18 are for the 2006-07 school
year.***Footnote 11 Data on total suicides are available
only by calendar year, whereas data on suicides and homicides
at school and data on total homicides are available by school
year. Due to these differences in reference periods, please
use caution when comparing violent deaths at school to total
violent deaths. Data for total suicides 2007 and total
homicides 2007-08 are not yet available.***  During 2006-07,
there were 1,748 homicides of youth ages 5-18 (figure 1.2 and
table 1.1). During the 2006 calendar year, there were 1,296
suicides of youth ages 5-18. From July 1, 2007, through June
30, 2008, there were 21 homicides and 5 suicides of
school-age youth (ages 5-18) at school (figure 1.1 and table
1.1). In each year during the period 1992-93 to 2006-07,
there were at least 50 times as many homicides of youth away
from school than at school and generally at least 150 times
as many suicides of youth away from school than at school.
During the 2007-08 school year, there was approximately one
homicide or suicide of a school-age youth at school per 2.1
million students enrolled.***Footnote 12 The total number of
students enrolled in prekindergarten through 12th grade
during the 2007-08 school year was 55,579,330 (Snyder,
Dillow, and Hoffman 2009).***

The percentage of youth homicides occurring at school
remained at less than 2 percent of the total number of youth
homicides over all available survey years, even though the
absolute number of homicides of school-age youth at school
varied to some degree across the years (figure 1.1 and table
1.1). Between the 1992-93 and 2007-08 school years, from 1 to
9 school-age youth committed suicide at school each year,
with no consistent pattern of increase or decrease in the
number of suicides. The percentage of youth suicides
occurring at school remained at less than 1 percent of the
total number of youth suicides over all available survey
years.

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 1.1 and 1.2 and Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2008a),
(www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5702a1.htm). 

Nonfatal Student and Teacher

Victimization

Indicator 2 

Incidence of Victimization at School and Away From School

For the first time since 1992, in 2007 the rate for violent
crime at school was higher than the rate experienced away
from school. The 2007 victimization rates for serious violent
crime at school and the rates away from school were not
measurably different.

Theft and violence at school and en route to and from school
can affect the overall health and well-being of adolescents,
interfere with educational goals, and stall normal healthy
development (Fredland 2008). Such victimization can also lead
to higher than average rates of teacher turnover, student
dropouts and transfers, and early retirement for principals
and teachers (Crews, Crews, and Turner 2008). 

In 2007, data from the National Crime Victimization Survey
***Footnote 13 Although Indicators 2 and 3 present
information on similar topics, the survey sources for these
two indicators differ with respect to time coverage and
administration. For more information on these two surveys,
please see appendix A.*** showed that students ages 12-18
were victims of about 1.5 million nonfatal crimes (theft
***Footnote 14 Theft includes purse snatching, pick
pocketing, all burglaries, attempted forcible entry, and all
attempted and completed thefts except motor vehicle thefts.
Theft does not include robbery in which threat or use of
force is involved.*** and violent crime***Footnote 15 Violent
crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.***
) while they were at school, ***Footnote 16 "At school"
includes inside the school building, on school property, or
on the way to or from school.*** compared to about 1.1
million nonfatal crimes while they were away from school
(table 2.1). *** Footnote 17 "Students" refers to youth ages
12-18 whose educational attainment did not exceed grade 12 at
the time of the survey. An uncertain percentage of these
persons may not have attended school during the survey
reference period. These data do not take into account the
number of hours that students spend at school or away from
school.*** These figures represent total crime victimization
rates of 57 crimes per 1,000 students at school and 41 crimes
per 1,000 students away from school. Although there was an
overall decline in the victimization rates for students ages
12-18 at school between 1992 and 2007, there was no
measurable difference in the rate of crime at school between
2004 and 2007. This pattern describes the total crime rate as
well as its three components: thefts, violent crimes, and
serious violent crimes (figure 2.1). Between 1992 and 2007
the rates of total crime, thefts, violent crimes, and serious
violent crimes for students away from school declined.

The 2007 survey estimates may indicate some trend changes.
For the first time, rates of violent crime victimization at
school were higher than rates of violent crime victimization
away from school. In 2007, there were 26 violent crimes per
1,000 students at school, compared to 20 violent crimes per
1,000 students away from school. 

In each survey year between 1992 and 2005, ***Footnote 18 There
were changes in the sample design and survey methodology in
the 2006 National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) that
impacted survey estimates. Due to this redesign, 2006 data
are not presented in this indicator. Data from 2007 are
comparable to earlier years. For more information, please see
appendix A.*** the rate of serious violent crime-rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault-per 1,000 students
was lower at school than away from school. In 2007, however,
there was no measurable difference between the rate of
serious violent crimes ***Footnote 19 Serious violent crimes
include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated
assault.*** per 1,000 students at school and the rate per
1,000 students away from school. In that year, students ages
12-18 were victims of 4 serious violent crimes per 1,000
students at school and 6 serious violent crimes per 1,000
students away from school.

Not all of the trends showed change. A greater percentage of
students report experiencing theft at school than the other
measured crimes. In 2007 the rate of thefts per 1,000
students was higher at school than away from school, which
has generally held true for each survey year since 1992
(except 1997, 2000, and 2004) (figure 2.1). In 2007 there
were 31 thefts per 1,000 students at school and 21 thefts per
1,000 students away from school.

In 2007, the victimization rates for students ages 12-18
varied according to student characteristics. The rate of
violent crimes at school per 1,000 students was lower for
older students (ages 15-18) than for younger students (ages
12-14), but the reverse was true for the rate of violent
crimes away from school (figure 2.2 and tables 2.2 and 2.3).
Females had lower rates than males for violent crime and
total crime victimization occurring away from school, and
they had lower rates of serious violent victimization than
males both at school and away from school.

This indicator has been updated to include 2007 data. For
more information: Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3; Fredland (2008);
and Crews, Crews, and Turner (2008).

Indicator 3

Prevalence of Victimization at School

In 2007, 4 percent of students ages 12-18 reported being
victimized at school during the previous 6 months. About 3
percent of students reported theft, 2 percent reported
violent victimization, and less than half of a percent
reported serious violent victimization.

Theft is the most frequent type of nonfatal victimization in
the United States (U.S. Department of Justice 2007). Data
from the School Crime Supplement ***Footnote 20 Although
Indicators 2 and 3 present information on similar topics, the
survey sources for these two indicators differ with respect
to time coverage and administration. For more information on
these two surveys, please see appendix A.***  show the
percentage of students ages 12-18 who reported criminal
victimization at school ***Footnote 21 "At school" includes
the school building, on school property, on a school bus,
and, from 2001 onward, going to and from school.
*** during the previous 6 months. In 2007, 4 percent of
students ages 12-18 reported being victimized at school
during the previous 6 months. About 3 percent of students
reported theft, ***Footnote 22 Theft includes purse
snatching, pick pocketing, all burglaries, attempted forcible
entry, and all attempted and completed thefts except motor
vehicle thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which
threat or use of force is involved.***  2 percent reported
violent victimization ***Footnote 23 Violent victimization
includes serious violent crimes and simple assault. ***
(figure 3.1 and table 3.1), and less than half of a percent
reported serious violent victimization. ***Footnote 24
Serious violent victimization includes rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault***

In 2007, the prevalence of victimization varied somewhat
according to student characteristics. For all types of
victimization, no measurable differences were detected by sex
in the likelihood of reporting victimization. The percentage
of students reporting victimization was higher for students
in the 7th or 9th grade than for students in the 12th grade;
however, no other measurable differences in the percentages
reporting victimization were found across grades. In 2007, no
measurable differences were detected in the percentages of
White, Black, or Hispanic students who reported
victimization, theft, or violent victimization. However, a
higher percentage of students of other races/ethnicities than
Hispanic students reported victimization, and a higher
percentage of students of other races/ethnicities than White
or Hispanic students reported violent victimization. 

Some differences were also seen by school sector in the
prevalence of victimization reported in 2007. A higher
percentage of students in public schools reported
victimization (5 percent) and theft (3 percent) than students
in private schools (1 percent each).

Overall, the percentage of students ages 12-18 who were
victimized at school decreased between 1995 and 2005 from 10
to 4 percent. For each type of victimization, the percentage
of students reporting victimization decreased between 1995
and 2005. Between the most recent survey years (2005 and
2007), there were no measurable changes in the percentage of
students reporting any type of victimization.

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 3.1 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

Indicator 4

Threats and Injuries With Weapons on School Property

The percentage of students who were threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property has fluctuated between 7 and
9 percent in all survey years from 1993 through 2007. 

Every year, some students are threatened or injured with a
weapon while they are on school property.***Footnote 25 "On
school property" was not defined for survey respondents.***
The percentage of students victimized in this way provides an
important measure of how safe our schools are, and how school
safety has changed over time. In the Youth Risk Behavior
Survey, students in grades 9-12 were asked whether they had
been threatened or injured with a weapon on school property
during the 12 months preceding the survey. In 2007, 8 percent
of students reported being threatened or injured with a
weapon, such as a gun, knife, or club, on school property
(table 4.1). From 1993 through 2007, the percentage of
students who were threatened or injured with a weapon
fluctuated between 7 and 9 percent.

The likelihood of being threatened or injured with a weapon
on school property varied by student characteristics,
including sex and grade level. In each survey year, a higher
percentage of males than females reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property (figure 4.1 and
table 4.1). In 2007, the percentage of male students who
reported being threatened or injured in the past year was
nearly twice as high as the percentage of female students (10
vs. 5 percent). Generally, the percentages of 9th- and
10th-graders who reported being threatened or injured with a
weapon on school property were higher than the percentages of 
11th- and 12th-graders (figure 4.2 and table 4.1). For
example, in 2007, 9 percent of 9th-graders and 8 percent of
10th-graders reported that they were threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property, compared with 7 percent of
11th-graders and 6 percent of 12th-graders. 

The percentage of students who reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property varied by
race/ethnicity in 2007. Higher percentages of students of
more than one race (13 percent), Black students (10 percent),
and Hispanic students (9 percent) reported being threatened
or injured with a weapon on school property than White
students (7 percent). Higher percentages of all of these
groups, except for White students, also reported being
threatened or injured with a weapon on school property than
did American Indian/Alaska Native students (6 percent).
However, no other measurable differences were found by
race/ethnicity in the percentages of students who reported
being threatened or injured in this way. 

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 4.1 and 4.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).

Indicator 5

Teachers Threatened With Injury or Physically Attacked by
Students

A greater percentage of teachers in city schools than
teachers in suburban, town, or rural schools reported being
threatened with injury during the 2007-08 school year.

Students are not the only victims of intimidation or violence
in schools. Teachers are also subject to threats and physical
attacks, and students from their schools sometimes commit
these offenses. In the Schools and Staffing Survey, teachers
were asked whether they had been threatened with injury or
physically attacked by a student from their school in the
previous 12 months. During the 2007-08 school year, a smaller
percentage of teachers, 7 percent, were threatened with
injury by a student from their school than in 1993-94 (12
percent) and 1999-2000 (9 percent), though this percentage
was not measurably different from the percentage in 2003-04
(7 percent) (figure 5.1 and table 5.1). The percentage of
teachers reporting that they had been physically attacked by
a student from their school, 4 percent, was not measurably
different in 2007-08 than in any previous survey year (table
5.2).

A greater percentage of teachers in city schools than
teachers in suburban, town, or rural schools reported being
threatened with injury during the 2007-08 school year (figure
5.2 and table 5.1). Ten percent of teachers in city schools
were threatened with injury by students, compared to 7
percent of teachers in town schools and 6 percent each of
teachers in suburban and rural schools. A greater percentage
of teachers in city schools (5 percent) and suburban schools
(4 percent) than teachers in rural schools (3 percent)
reported being physically attacked (table 5.2).

During 2007-08, teachers' reports of being threatened or
physically attacked by students varied according to the
instructional level of their school. A greater percentage of
secondary school teachers (8 percent) than elementary school
teachers (7 percent) reported being threatened with injury by
a student, and this pattern held for teachers in suburban
schools as well as for teachers in rural schools (table 5.1
and figure 5.2). The apparent difference in the percentage of
elementary and secondary teachers in city schools who
reported being threatened with injury was not statistically
significant. However, a greater percentage of elementary
school teachers (6 percent) reported having been physically
attacked than secondary school teachers (2 percent), and this
pattern held true for teachers in city, suburban, town, and
rural schools (table 5.2). 

A greater percentage of public than private school teachers
reported being threatened with injury (8 vs. 3 percent) or
physically attacked (4 vs. 2 percent) by students during
2007-08 (tables 5.1 and 5.2). Among teachers in city schools,
there were at least five times as many public school teachers
as private school teachers who reported being threatened with
injury (12 vs. 2 percent) and at least four times as many
public school teachers as private school teachers who
reported being physically attacked (6 vs. 1 percent).

In all survey years, a greater percentage of male teachers
reported having been threatened with injury than female
teachers (table 5.1). For example, in 2007-08, 9 percent of
male teachers reported that they were threatened with injury
by students, compared to 7 percent of female teachers; this
pattern held true for teachers in city and suburban schools
in 2007-08, as well. 

Public school teachers' reports of being threatened with
injury or physically attacked varied among the states and the
District of Columbia. During 2007-08, the percentage of
public school teachers who reported being threatened with
injury during the previous 12 months ranged from 3 percent in
North Dakota to 17 percent in the District of Columbia (table
5.3), and the percentage who reported being physically
attacked ranged from 2 percent in New Hampshire, New Jersey,
North Dakota, and Ohio to 8 percent in Maryland (table 5.4).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4, appendix B
for definitions of school levels and urbanicity codes, and
Coopersmith (2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009324).
 
School Environment

Indicator 6
 
Violent and Other Crime Incidents at Public Schools and Those
Reported to the Police

In 2007-08, 75 percent of public schools recorded one or more
violent incidents of crime, 17 percent recorded one or more
serious violent incidents, and 47 percent recorded one or
more thefts.

In the School Survey on Crime and Safety, public school
principals were asked to provide the number of violent
incidents, ***Footnote 26 Violent incidents include serious
violent incidents; physical attack or fight without a weapon;
and threat of physical attack without a weapon.*** serious
violent incidents, ***Footnote 27 Serious violent incidents
include rape or attempted rape; sexual battery other than
rape; physical attack or fight with a weapon; threat of
physical attack with a weapon; and robbery with or without a
weapon.***  thefts of items valued at $10 or greater without
personal confrontation, and other incidents ***Footnote 28
Other incidents include possession of a firearm or explosive
device; possession of a knife or sharp object; distribution,
possession, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol; and
vandalism.*** that occurred at their school; ***Footnote 29
"At school" was defined for respondents to include activities
that happen in school buildings, on school grounds, on school
buses, and at places that hold school-sponsored events or
activities. Respondents were instructed to include incidents
that occurred before, during, or after normal school hours or
when school activities or events were in session.*** public
school principals were also asked to provide the number of
incidents reported to the police. This indicator presents the
percentage of public schools that recorded one or more of
these specified crimes, the total number of these crimes
recorded, and the rate of crimes per 1,000 students. These
data are also presented for crimes that were reported to the
police. During the 2007-08 school year, 85 percent of public
schools recorded that one or more of these incidents of
violence, theft, or other crimes, had taken place, amounting
to an estimated 2.0 million crimes (figure 6.1 and table
6.1). This figure translates to a rate of 43 crimes per 1,000
students enrolled in 2007-08. During the same year, 62
percent of schools reported one of the specified crimes to
the police, amounting to about 704,000 crimes-or 15 crimes
per 1,000 students enrolled.

In 2007-08, a greater percentage of schools recorded an
incident of crime than reported an incident of crime to the
police. This pattern held true for violent crimes, serious
violent crimes, thefts, and other crimes. Similarly, the rate
of recorded incidents per 1,000 students was higher than the
rate of incidents reported to the police per 1,000 students;
this held true for violent crime, serious violent crime,
theft, and other crime. In 2007-08, 75 percent of schools
recorded one or more violent incidents of crime, 17 percent
recorded one or more serious violent incidents, 47 percent
recorded one or more thefts, and 67 percent recorded one or
more other incidents. In comparison, 38 percent of public
schools reported at least one violent incident to police, 13
percent reported at least one serious violent incident to
police, 31 percent reported at least one theft to police, and
49 percent reported one or more other incidents to police.

The percentage of schools that recorded incidents of violent
crime varied by school characteristics. For example, a
smaller percentage of primary schools (65 percent) than
middle schools or high schools (94 percent each) recorded
violent incidents of crime (table 6.2). However, the rate of
recorded violent crimes per 1,000 students was larger for
middle schools (41 incidents per 1,000 students) than for
primary schools (26 incidents per 1,000 students) or high
schools (22 incidents per 1,000 students). With regard to
public schools that reported incidents of violent crime to
the police, a greater percentage of high schools (75 percent)
reported violent crimes to the police than middle schools (64
percent) or primary schools (20 percent) (table 6.3). There
was no measurable difference between the rate per 1,000
students of reported violent incidents at high schools and
middle schools (11 percent each).

There was a range in the number of crimes recorded and
reported by schools in 2007-08. One-quarter of schools
recorded zero violent crimes, and 24 percent of schools
recorded 20 or more violent crimes (figure 6.2 and table
6.4). Sixty-two percent of schools did not report a violent
crime to the police, compared to 5 percent of schools that
reported 20 or more violent crimes to the police. In regard
to serious violent crimes, 83 percent of schools did not
record a serious violent crime, compared to 1 percent of
schools that recorded 10 or more such crimes (table 6.5). 

The range in the number of crimes recorded by schools varied
by school characteristics. For example, a larger percentage
of city schools recorded 20 or more violent incidents in
2007-08 than suburban schools, town schools, or rural schools
(table 6.4). In 2007-08, 36 percent of city schools recorded
20 or more violent incidents, compared to 24 percent of
suburban schools, 21 percent of town schools, and 14 percent
of rural schools.

The percentages of public schools recording incidents of
crime or reporting incidents of crime to the police in
2007-08 were not measurably different from the percentages of
schools doing so in 1999-2000 (figure 6.3 and table 6.1).
While this pattern held true for the percentage of public
schools reporting violent incidents, as well as the
percentage of schools recording and reporting serious violent
incidents and thefts, there was an increase in the percentage
of schools recording violent incidents over this period (from
71 to 75 percent) and a decrease in the percentage of schools
recording other incidents during this period (from 73 to 67
percent).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5, and
Neiman and DeVoe (2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009326).

Indicator 7 

Discipline Problems Reported by Public Schools

During the 2007-08 school year, 25 percent of public schools
reported that bullying occurred among students on a daily or
weekly basis, 11 percent reported that student acts of
disrespect for teachers other than verbal abuse took place on
a daily or weekly basis, and 6 percent reported that student
verbal abuse of teachers occurred on a daily or weekly basis.

In the School Survey on Crime and Safety, public school
principals were asked how often certain disciplinary problems
happen in their schools. ***Footnote 30 "At school" was defined
for respondents to include activities that happen in school
buildings, on school grounds, on school buses, and at places
that hold school-sponsored events or activities. Respondents
were instructed to include incidents that occurred before,
during, or after normal school hours or when school
activities or events were in session.*** This indicator
examines the daily or weekly occurrence of student
racial/ethnic tensions, bullying, sexual harassment of other
students, verbal abuse of teachers, acts of disrespect for
teachers other than verbal abuse, and widespread disorder in
the classroom. It also looks at occurrences of gang and cult
or extremist group activities, and, due to the severe nature
of these incidents, presents any reports of gang and cult or
extremist group activities that occurred during the school
year.

During the 2007-08 school year, 25 percent of public schools
reported that bullying occurred among students on a daily or
weekly basis and 11 percent reported that student acts of
disrespect for teachers other than verbal abuse took place on
a daily or weekly basis (table 7.1). With regard to other
discipline problems reported as occurring at least once a
week, 6 percent of schools reported student verbal abuse of
teachers, 4 percent reported widespread disorder in the
classroom, 4 percent reported student racial/ethnic tensions,
and 3 percent reported student sexual harassment of other
students. Twenty percent of public schools reported that gang
activities had happened at all during 2007-08 and 3 percent
reported that cult or extremist activities had happened at
all during this period. 

Discipline problems reported by public schools varied by
school characteristics. In 2007-08, a higher percentage of
middle schools than primary schools reported various types of
discipline problems (figure 7.1). For example, 44 percent of
middle schools compared to 21 percent of primary schools
reported that student bullying occurred at least once a week.
Also, a higher percentage of middle schools than high schools
reported daily or weekly occurrences of student bullying. A
greater percentage of high schools than middle schools
reported any occurrence of gang activities or cult or
extremist group activities during the school year.

In 2007-08, the percentage of schools reporting discipline
problems was generally smaller for schools where 25 percent
or less of the students were eligible for free or
reduced-price lunch than for schools where 76 percent or more
of the students were eligible. For example, 13 percent of
schools where 76 percent or more of the students were
eligible for free or reduced-price lunch reported the daily
or weekly occurrence of student verbal abuse of teachers
compared to 3 percent of schools where 25 percent or less of
the students were eligible. The percentage of students
eligible for free or reduced-price lunch programs is a proxy
measure of school poverty.

In 2007-08, a greater percentage of city schools than
suburban schools, town schools, or rural schools reported
student verbal abuse of teachers, student acts of disrespect
for teachers other than verbal abuse, widespread disorder in
the classroom, and gang activities. For example, 8 percent of
city schools compared to 2 to 3 percent of suburban, town, or
rural schools reported widespread disorder in the classroom.
During the same school year, in general, the percentage of
schools reporting discipline problems was higher in larger
schools than in smaller schools. For example, 52 percent of
schools with 1,000 or more students reported that gang
activities occurred during the school year compared to 10 to
22 percent of schools with less than 1,000 students who
reported this discipline problem. 

The percentage of schools reporting that student verbal abuse
of teachers occurred at least once a week was 6 percent in
2007-08, lower than the percentage in 1999-2000 (13 percent).
There were some measurable changes in the percentage of
public schools reporting selected discipline problems between
the two most recent data collections, 2005-06 and 2007-08. A
smaller percentage of public schools reported cult or
extremist activities in 2007-08 (3 percent) than in 2005-06
(4 percent). However, a larger percentage of public schools
reported widespread disorder in the classroom in 2007-08 than
in 2005-06 (4 vs. 2 percent), and a larger percentage
reported gang activities in 2007-08 than in 2005-06 (20 vs.
17 percent).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 7.1 and 7.2, and Neiman and DeVoe
(2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009326).

Indicator 8

Students' Reports of Gangs at School

In 2007, about 23 percent of students reported that gangs
were present at their school. 

Gangs are organized groups often involved in drugs, weapons
trafficking, and violence. Gangs at school can be disruptive
to the school environment because their presence may incite
fear among students and increase the level of school violence
(Laub and Lauritsen 1998). In the School Crime Supplement to
the National Crime Victimization Survey, students ages 12-18
were asked if gangs were present at their school. ***Footnote 
31 "At school" includes the school building, onschool property, 
on a school bus, or going to and from school.*** 

In 2007, 23 percent of students reported that there were
gangs at their schools during the school year (figure 8.1 and
table 8.1). During the same year, a greater percentage of
male students (25 percent) than female students (21 percent)
reported a gang presence at their schools. Overall, a smaller
percentage of White students (16 percent) and Asian students
(17 percent) reported a gang presence at school than Black
students (38 percent) and Hispanic students (36 percent) in
2007. 

Generally, a smaller percentage of 6th-, 7th-, and
8th-graders reported a gang presence at their school than
9th-, 10th-, 11th-, and 12th-graders. In 2007, between 15 and
21 percent of 6th-, 7th-, and 8th-graders reported a gang
presence at school compared to 24 to 28 percent of students
in the higher grades. In 2007, a higher percentage of
students attending public schools (25 percent) reported a
gang presence at school than students attending private
schools (5 percent). 

The total percentage of students who reported the presence of
gangs at school was higher in 2005 (24 percent) than in 2003
(21 percent); however there was no measurable change in the
percentage of students who reported the presence of gangs at
school between the two most recent survey years (2005 and
2007) (figure 8.2 and table 8.1).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Table 8.1 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

Indicator 9

Students' Reports of Drug Availability on School Property

A smaller percentage of students reported that drugs were
offered, sold, or given to them at school in 2007 (22
percent) than in 2005 (25 percent).

The availability of drugs on school property has a disruptive
and corrupting influence on the school environment (Nolin et
al. 1997). In the Youth Risk Behavior Survey, students in
grades 9-12 were asked whether someone had offered, sold, or
given them an illegal drug on school property in the 12
months before the survey. ***Footnote 32 "On school property"
was not defined for survey respondents.*** The percentage of
students in grades 9-12 who reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property increased from 1993 to
1995 (from 24 to 32 percent), but subsequently decreased (to
25 percent in 2005 and 22 percent in 2007) (table 9.1 and
figure 9.1). The percentage of students in grades 9-12 who
reported that drugs were made available to them on school
property was lower in 2007 than it was in 2005 (22 vs. 25
percent).

Reports of the availability of drugs on school property
varied by student characteristics. A higher percentage of
males than females reported that drugs were offered, sold, or
given to them on school property in each survey year from
1993 to 2007 (figure 9.1 and table 9.1). For example, in
2007, 26 percent of males reported that drugs were available,
compared with 19 percent of females. Some differences in the
percentages of students reporting that drugs were offered,
sold, or given to them on school property also appeared by
grade. In 2007, the percentage of 10th-grade students (25
percent) who reported that drugs were made available to them
was higher than the percentage for either 9th- or 12th-grade
students (21 and 20 percent, respectively), but not
measurably different from that of 11th-grade students.
 
The percentages of students who reported having illegal drugs
offered, sold, or given to them on school property differed
across racial/ethnic groups (figure 9.2 and table 9.1).
Specifically, in 2007, higher percentages of Hispanic and
Pacific Islander/Native Hawaiian students than Black, White,
and Asian students reported that drugs were made available to
them (29 and 38 percent vs. 19-21 percent). Although it
appears that a higher percentage of Pacific Islander/Native
Hawaiian students than Hispanic students reported that drugs
were made available to them, the difference was not found to
be statistically significant.

In 2007, student reports of the availability of drugs on
school property varied among the 39 states and the District
of Columbia for which data were available. Among these states
and the District of Columbia, the percentage of students
reporting that drugs were offered, sold, or given to them on
school property ranged from 10 percent in Iowa to 37 percent
in Arizona (table 9.2).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 9.1 and 9.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).

Indicator 10

Students' Reports of Being Called Hate-Related Words and
Seeing Hate-Related Graffiti

In 2007, 10 percent of students ages 12-18 reported that
someone at school had used hate-related words against them,
and 35 percent had seen hate-related graffiti at school. 

In the 2007 School Crime Supplement to the National Crime
Victimization Survey, students ages 12-18 were asked if
someone at school had called them a derogatory word having to
do with their race, ethnicity, religion, disability, gender,
or sexual orientation at school. ***Footnote 33 "At school"
includes the school building, on school property, on a school
bus, and, from 2001 onward, going to and from school.***Students 
were also asked if they had seen hate-related graffiti at their 
school-that is, hate-related words or symbols written in 
classrooms, bathrooms, hallways, or on the outside of the school 
building. With regard to hate-related words, students were asked 
to specify the characteristic to which the word was directed.
***Footnote 34 Hate-related refers to derogatory terms used by 
others in reference to students personal characteristics.*** 
In 2007, 10 percent of students ages 12-18 reported that someone 
at school had used hate-related words against them during the 
school year(figure 10.1 and table 10.1). Thirty-five percent 
of studentsreported seeing hate-related graffiti at school 
during the school year. 

In 2007, students' experiences of being called specific types
of hate-related words and seeing hate-related graffiti
differed according to student and school characteristics. For
example, a smaller percentage of 12th-graders (6 percent)
reported being targets of a hate-related word than
6th-graders (12 percent); 7th-graders, 8th-graders, and
9th-graders (11 percent each); and 10th-graders (9 percent).
A higher percentage of public school students than private
school students reported being called a hate-related word (10
vs. 6 percent) and seeing hate-related graffiti (36 vs. 19
percent). In 2007, 10 percent of public school students
reported being called a hate-related word and 36 percent
reported seeing hate-related graffiti compared to 6 percent
of private school students who reported being called a
hate-related word and 19 percent who reported seeing
hate-related graffiti. A higher percentage of White students
and students of other races/ethnicities than Asian students
reported seeing hate-related graffiti. However, no other
measurable differences were found by race/ethnicity or by sex
in the percentages of students who reported being called
hate-related words or seeing hate-related graffiti.

Between 2001 and 2007, the percentage of students who
reported being the target of a hate-related word decreased
from 12 to 10 percent. Between the two most recent survey
years, 2005 and 2007, the percentage of students who reported
being the target of a hate-related word was lower in 2007 (10
percent) than in 2005 (11 percent). There was no pattern of
increase or decrease in the percentage of students who
reported seeing hate-related graffiti between 1999 and 2007.
However, the percentage of students who reported seeing
hate-related graffiti was smaller in 2007 (35 percent) than
in 2005 (38 percent).

With regard to the specific characteristic to which the
hate-related word was directed, in 2007, 5 percent of
students reported hate-related words concerning their race, 3
percent reported words related to their ethnicity, 2 percent
each reported words concerning their religion or gender, and
1 percent each reported words related to their disability or
sexual orientation (figure 10.2 and table 10.2).

Students' experiences of being targets of specific types of
hate-related words in 2007 differed according to their sex
and race/ethnicity (table 10.2). A greater percentage of
female students than male students (3 vs. 1 percent) reported
being called a gender-related hate word. However, a greater
percentage of male students than female students reported
being called hate-related words relating to race and
ethnicity. Five percent of male students compared to 4
percent of female students reported being targets of a
hate-related word regarding race and 4 percent of male
students compared to 2 percent of female students reported
being targets of a hate-related word regarding ethnicity. A
smaller percentage of White students (3 percent) reported
being called race-related hate words than Black students (7
percent), Hispanic students (6 percent), Asian students (11
percent), and students from other race/ethnicities (8
percent). Smaller percentages of both White students and
Black students (2 percent each) reported hate-related words
regarding their ethnicity than Hispanic and Asian students (7
percent each).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 10.1 and 10.2 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

Indicator 11

Bullying at School and Cyber-Bullying Anywhere

In 2007, about 32 percent of 12- to 18-year-old students
reported having been bullied at school during the school year
and 4 percent reported having been cyber-bullied. 

Both bullying and being bullied at school are associated with
key violence-related behaviors, including carrying weapons,
fighting, and sustaining injuries from fighting (Nansel et
al. 2003). In the 2007 School Crime Supplement to the
National Crime Victimization Survey, students ages 12-18 were
asked if they had been bullied at school during the school
year.***Footnote 35 "At school" includes the school
building, on school property, on a school bus, or going to
and from school.***
  
In 2007, about 32 percent of students reported having been
bullied at school during the school year (figure 11.1 and
table 11.1).***Footnote 36 Bullying includes being made fun
of; being the subject of rumors; being threatened with harm;
being pushed, shoved, tripped, or spit on; being pressured
into doing things did not want to do; excluded; and having
property destroyed on purpose.*** Twenty-one percent of
students said that they had experienced bullying that
consisted of being made fun of; 18 percent reported being the
subject of rumors; 11 percent said that they were pushed,
shoved, tripped, or spit on; 6 percent said they were
threatened with harm; 5 percent said they were excluded from
activities on purpose; and 4 percent  each said that someone
tried to make them do things they did not want to do and that
their property was destroyed on purpose (figure 11.2 and
table 11.1). 

Of those students in 2007 who reported being bullied during
the school year, 79 percent said that they were bullied
inside the school, 23 percent said that they were bullied
outside on school grounds, 8 percent said they were bullied
on the school bus, and 4 percent said they were bullied
somewhere else (figure 11.3 and table 11.2). Nine percent of
all students reported that they had suffered injuries as a
result of being pushed, shoved, tripped, or spit on. Of these
students who had been bullied, 63 percent said that they had
been bullied once or twice during the school year, 21 percent
had experienced bullying once or twice a month, 10 percent
reported being bullied once or twice a week, and 7 percent
said that they had been bullied almost daily (figure 11.4 and
table 11.3). Thirty-six percent of students who were bullied
notified a teacher or another adult at school about the
event(s).

In 2007, about 4 percent of students reported having been
cyber-bullied ***Footenote 37 Cyber-bullying includes
students who responded that another student posted hurtful
information about the respondent on the Internet; made
unwanted contact by threatening or insulting the respondent
via instant messaging; or made unwanted contact by
threatening or insulting the respondent via text (SMS)
messaging. The latter category did not meet statistical
standards to be reported separately.*** anywhere (on or off
school property) during the school year (figure 11.1 and
table 11.1). Two percent of students said that they had
experienced cyber-bullying that consisted of another student
posting hurtful information about them on the Internet; and 2
percent of students reported unwanted contact, including
being threatened or insulted, via instant messaging by
another student during the school year (figure 11.2 and table
11.1).

Of the students in 2007 who reported cyber-bullying during
the school year, 73 percent said it had occurred once or
twice during that period, 21 percent said it had occurred
once or twice a month, and 5 percent said it had occurred
once or twice a week (figure 11.4 and table 11.3). Thirty
percent of students who were cyber-bullied notified a teacher
or another adult at school about the event(s).

Student reports of bullying and cyber-bullying varied by
student characteristics. A greater percentage of female than
male students reported being bullied at school and
cyber-bullied anywhere during the school year (figure 11.1
and table 11.1). In 2007, 33 percent of female students
reported being bullied at school compared to 30 percent of
male students. Five percent of female students reported being
cyber-bullied anywhere compared to 2 percent of male
students. A higher percentage of White students (34 percent)
reported being bullied at school in 2007 than Hispanic
students (27 percent). In addition, a higher percentage of
White students (34 percent) reported being bullied at school
than Asian students (18 percent). 

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 11.1, 11.2, and 11.3 and DeVoe and Kaffenberger 
(2005), (http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2005/2005310.pdf).
                                        
Indicator 12

Teachers' Reports on School Conditions

In 2007-08, a greater percentage of public school teachers
than private school teachers reported that student
misbehavior, student tardiness, and class cutting interfered
with their teaching. 

Classroom disruptions are associated with lower student
achievement for the offending student, as well as for that
student's classmates (Lannie and McCurdy 2007). In the
Schools and Staffing Survey, public and private school
teachers were asked if student misbehavior, student
tardiness, and class cutting interfered with their teaching.
During the 2007-08 school year, 34 percent of teachers agreed
or strongly agreed that student misbehavior interfered with
their teaching, and 32 percent reported that student
tardiness and class cutting interfered with their teaching
(figure 12.1 and table 12.1). Teachers were also asked
whether school rules were enforced by other teachers at their
school, even for students not in their classes, and whether
they were enforced by the principal. In 2007-08, 72 percent
of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that other teachers at
their school enforced the school rules, and 89 percent
reported that the principal enforced the school rules (figure
12.2 and table 12.2).

The percentage of teachers who reported that student
misbehavior, class cutting, and tardiness interfered with
their teaching varied by teacher and school characteristics
during 2007-08 (table 12.1). For example, a greater
percentage of public school teachers than private school
teachers reported that student misbehavior (36 vs. 21
percent) and student tardiness and class cutting (33 vs. 18
percent) interfered with their teaching. And a higher
percentage of secondary school teachers than elementary
school teachers reported that student misbehavior (39 vs. 33
percent) and student tardiness and class cutting (45 vs. 26
percent) interfered with their teaching.

A greater percentage of teachers in city schools compared to
teachers in suburban, town, or rural schools reported that
student misbehavior, tardiness, and class cutting interfered
with their teaching in 2007-08 (figure 12.1). Forty percent
of teachers in city schools, compared to 32 percent of
teachers in suburban schools, 34 percent of teachers in town
schools, and 31 percent of teachers in rural schools reported
that student misbehavior interfered with their teaching.
Thirty-eight percent of teachers in city schools reported
that student tardiness and class cutting interfered with
their teaching, compared to 29 percent of teachers in
suburban schools, 32 percent of teachers in town schools, and
27 percent of teachers in rural schools who reported that
these occurrences interfered with their teaching.

The percentage of teachers who reported that student
misbehavior interfered with their teaching fluctuated between
1987-88 and 1993-94; however, between 1993-94 and 2007-08
this percentage decreased (from 41 to 34 percent). The
percentage of teachers reporting that student tardiness and
class cutting interfered with their teaching decreased
between 1987-88 and 1993-94 (from 33 to 25 percent), but
increased between 1993-94 and 2007-08 (from 25 to 32
percent). There were no measurable differences in the
percentage of teachers reporting that student misbehavior or
tardiness and class cutting interfered with their teaching
between the two most recent survey years, 2003-04 and
2007-08.

The percentage of teachers who agreed that school rules were
enforced by other teachers and by the principal varied by
teacher and school characteristics. In every survey year, a
higher percentage of elementary school teachers than
secondary school teachers agreed that school rules were
enforced by teachers and by the principal in their school
(table 12.2). In 2007-08, 79 percent of elementary teachers,
compared to 56 percent of secondary teachers reported that
school rules were enforced by other teachers, and 89 percent
of elementary school teachers, compared to 86 percent of
secondary teachers, reported that school rules were enforced
by the principal.
 
Between 1987-88 and 2007-08, the percentage of teachers who
agreed that school rules were enforced by other teachers
fluctuated between 65 and 72 percent, and the percentage
agreeing that rules were enforced by the principal varied
between 84 and 89 percent, showing no consistent trends.
There were no measurable differences in the percentage of
teachers reporting that school rules were enforced by other
teachers or by the principal between the two most recent
survey years, 2003-04 and 2007-08. 

In 2007-08, the percentage of public school teachers who
agreed or strongly agreed that student misbehavior and
student tardiness and class cutting interfered with their
teaching and that school rules are enforced by other teachers
and by the principal, varied among the 50 states and the
District of Columbia. For example, among these states and the
District of Columbia, the percentage of teachers who reported
that student misbehavior interfered with their teaching
ranged from 59 percent of teachers in the District of
Columbia to 29 percent of teachers in Pennsylvania (table
12.3).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 12.1 and 12.2, appendix B for
definitions of school levels and urbanicity codes, and
Coopersmith (2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009324).

Fights, Weapons, and Illegal Substances

Indicator 13 

Physical Fights on School Property and Anywhere

The percentage of students in grades 9-12 who reported being
in a physical fight on school property decreased from 16
percent in 1993 to 12 percent in 2007.

Schools where physical fights occur frequently may not be
able to maintain a focused learning environment for students.
Also, students who participate in fights on school property
may have difficulty succeeding in their studies (Payne,
Gottfredson, and Gottfredson 2003). In the Youth Risk
Behavior Survey, students in grades 9-12 were asked about
their general involvement in physical fights (referred to as
"anywhere" in this indicator) during the preceding 12 months,
as well as about their involvement in physical fights on
school property. ***Footnote 38 "On school property" was not
defined for survey respondents.*** Fights occurring anywhere
are included as a point of comparison with fights occurring
on school property. In 2007, 36 percent of students in grades
9-12 reported having been in a fight anywhere, and 12 percent
said they had been in a fight on school property (figure 13.1
and table 13.1). The percentage of students who reported
having been in a fight anywhere decreased from 1993 to 2003
(from 42 to 33 percent). From 2003 to 2005, this percentage
rose to 36 percent, but no measurable change was seen between
2005 and 2007. The percentage of students who reported having
been in a fight on school property declined from 16 percent
in 1993 to 12 percent in 2007.

In all survey years, a higher percentage of males than
females reported having been in a fight both anywhere and on
school property (figure 13.1 and table 13.1). In 2007, 44
percent of males said they had been in a fight anywhere,
compared with 27 percent of females. In the same year, 16
percent of males said they had been in a fight on school
property, compared with 9 percent of females. From 1993
through 2003, the percentage of both males and females who
reported they had been in a fight anywhere decreased. The
percentage of males reporting they had been in a fight on
school property decreased from 1993 to 2007 (24 vs. 16
percent); however, there was no measurable change in the
percentage of females who reported fighting on school
property (9 percent).

Generally, a higher percentage of students in 9th grade
reported having been in fights than students in 11th and 12th
grades, both anywhere and on school property (figure 13.2 and
table 13.1). For example, in 2007, 41 percent of 9th-graders
compared with 35 percent of 11th-graders, and 28 percent of
12th-graders reported having been in a fight anywhere.
Similarly, 17 percent of 9th-graders compared with 11 percent
of 11th-graders, and 9 percent of 12th-graders reported being
in a fight on school property in 2007.

The percentage of students engaging in fights varied
according to their race/ethnicity in 2007. A smaller
percentage of Asian students than students from all other
racial/ethnic groups reported having been in a fight
anywhere. Twenty-four percent of Asian students reported
being in a fight, compared with 32 to 48 percent of students
from other racial/ethnic groups. In addition, a higher
percentage of Black students and students of more than one
race reported having been in a fight anywhere than their
White, Hispanic, or American Indian/Alaska Native peers. A
lower percentage of Asian and White students reported having
been in a fight on school property in 2007 than Black
students, Hispanic students, American Indian/Alaska Native
students, or students of more than one race (8 and 10 percent
vs. 15 to 20 percent).

In 2007, the percentage of students who reported having been
in a fight anywhere (38 states and the District of Columbia)
and on school property (39 states and the District of
Columbia) varied among the states and the District of
Columbia for which data were available. Among these states
and the District of Columbia, the percentage of students
reporting being in a fight anywhere ranged from 24 percent in
Iowa to 43 percent in the District of Columbia, while the
percentage of students reporting being in a fight on school
property ranged from 7 percent in Hawaii to 20 percent in the
District of Columbia (table 13.2).
 
This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 13.1 and 13.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).

Indicator 14 

Students Carrying Weapons on School Property and Anywhere

In 2007, 18 percent of students in grades 9-12 reported they
had carried a weapon anywhere in the past 30 days, while 6
percent reported they had carried a weapon on school
property.

The presence of weapons at school may interfere with teaching
and learning by creating an intimidating and threatening
atmosphere (Aspy et al. 2004). In the Youth Risk Behavior
Survey, students were asked if they had carried a weapon such
as a gun, knife, or club (referred to as "anywhere" in this
indicator) in the past 30 days as well as if they had carried
one of these weapons on school property.***Footnote 39 "On
school property" was not defined for survey respondents.*** 
Weapon carrying anywhere is included as a point of comparison
with weapon carrying on school property. In 2007, 18 percent
of students in grades 9-12 reported they had carried a weapon
anywhere, and 6 percent reported they had carried a weapon on
school property (figure 14.1 and table 14.1). 

The percentage of students who reported carrying a weapon
anywhere declined from 22 to 17 percent between 1993 and
2003. Subsequently, however, from 2003 to 2007 there was no
measurable change in the percentage of students who reported
carrying a weapon anywhere. Between 1993 and 2007, the
percentage of students who reported carrying a weapon on
school property declined from 12 to 6 percent; generally,
however, the decline was gradual as no differences were
detected survey year to survey year.

In every survey year, generally, there were at least three
times as many males as females who reported carrying a
weapon---either anywhere or on school property (figure 14.1 and
table 14.1). In 2007, for example, 9 percent of males carried
a weapon on school property, compared to 3 percent of
females, and 29 percent of males carried a weapon anywhere,
compared to 7 percent of females. 

In 2007, few differences were detected based on students'
race/ethnicity in the percentage of students who reported
carrying weapons anywhere and on school property. A smaller
percentage of Asian students (8 percent) than students from
other racial/ethnic groups reported carrying a weapon
anywhere, but no measurable differences were detected among
Black students (17 percent), White students (18 percent), and
Hispanic students (19 percent). A larger percentage of
Hispanic students (7 percent) than White students (5 percent)
and Asian students (4 percent) reported carrying a weapon
during the previous 30 days on school property in 2007, but
no other differences were detected by race/ethnicity.

In 2007, 20 percent of 9th-graders reported carrying a weapon
anywhere compared to 15 percent of 12th-graders (figure 14.2
and table 14.1). However, no differences were detected in the
percentage of students who reported carrying a weapon on
school property by grade level.

In 2007, the percentage of students who reported carrying a
weapon anywhere (36 states and the District of Columbia) and
on school property (39 states and the District of Columbia)
varied among the states and the District of Columbia for
which data were available. Among these states and the
District of Columbia, the percentage of students reporting
carrying a weapon anywhere ranged from 13 percent in Iowa to
27 percent in New Mexico, while the percentage of students
reporting carrying a weapon on school property ranged from 4
percent in Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Ohio and Wisconsin to 11
percent in Wyoming (table 14.2).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 14.1 and 14.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).

Indicator 15

Students' Use of Alcohol on School Property and Anywhere

In 2007, 45 percent of students in grades 9-12 reported
having at least one drink of alcohol anywhere in the past 30
days, while 4 percent had at least one drink on school
property.

Students' illegal consumption of alcohol on school property
may lead to additional crimes and misbehavior (Kodjo,
Auinger, and Ryan 2003). It may also foster a school
environment that is harmful to students, teachers, and other
staff (Fagan and Wilkinson 1998). In the Youth Risk Behavior
Survey, students in grades 9-12 were asked whether they had
consumed alcohol at all (referred to as "anywhere" in this
indicator) in the past 30 days and if they had consumed
alcohol on school property.***Footnote 40 "On school
property" was not defined for survey respondents.***  Alcohol
consumption anywhere is included as a point of comparison
with alcohol consumption on school property. In 2007, 45
percent of students consumed at least one drink of alcohol
anywhere, and 4 percent consumed at least one drink on school
property (figure 15.1 and table 15.1). 

The percentage of students who reported drinking alcohol
anywhere was higher in 1995 (52 percent) than in 1993 (48
percent), and declined from 1995 to 2007 to 45 percent.
Generally, the percentage of students who reported consuming
alcohol on school property declined from 6 percent in 1995 to
4 percent in 2007.

The percentage of students who reported drinking alcohol
anywhere or on school property varied by student
characteristics such as sex, grade level, and race/ethnicity.
In every survey year, a greater percentage of males than
females reported using alcohol on school property. For
example, in 2007, 5 percent of males compared to 4 percent of
females reported using alcohol on school property. However,
since 2003, there has been no measurable difference in the
percentage of males and females who reported using alcohol
anywhere. In 2007, 45 percent of both males and females
reported using alcohol anywhere.

A larger percentage of students in higher grades than in
lower grades reported drinking alcohol anywhere in 2007. For
example, 55 percent of 12th-graders reported using alcohol,
compared to 36 percent of 9th-graders, 42 percent of
10th-graders, and 49 percent of 11th-graders (figure 15.2 and
table 15.1). A higher percentage of 12th-graders (5 percent)
than 9th-graders (3 percent) reported drinking on school
property; however, no measurable differences were found among
other grade levels. 

In 2007, a larger percentage of White and Hispanic students
reported drinking alcohol anywhere than their Black, Asian,
or American Indian/Alaska Native peers, and a smaller
percentage of Asian students reported drinking alcohol
anywhere than students from other race/ethnicities.
Forty-seven percent of White students and 48 percent of
Hispanic students reported drinking alcohol anywhere compared
to 35 percent of American Indian/Alaska Native students, 34
percent of Black students, and 25 percent of Asian students.
A greater percentage of Hispanic students (7 percent)
reported using alcohol on school property in 2007 than White
students (3 percent), Black students (3 percent), Asian
students (4 percent), or American Indian/Alaska Native
students (5 percent). 

In 2007, the percentage of students who reported drinking
alcohol anywhere (39 states and the District of Columbia) and
on school property (38 states and the District of Columbia)
varied among the states and the District of Columbia for
which data were available. Among these states and the
District of Columbia, the percentage of students who reported
drinking alcohol anywhere ranged from 17 percent in Utah to
49 percent in Wisconsin, while the percentage of students who
reported drinking on school property ranged from 3 percent in
Iowa, Missouri, and Ohio to 9 percent in New Mexico (table
15.2). 

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 15.1 and 15.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).


Indicator 16

Students' Use of Marijuana on School Property and Anywhere

In 2007, 20 percent of students in grades 9-12 reported using
marijuana anywhere in the past 30 days, while 4 percent
reported using marijuana on school property.

In the Youth Risk Behavior Survey, students in grades 9-12
were asked whether they had used marijuana at all (referred
to as "anywhere" in this indicator) in the past 30 days as
well as whether they had used marijuana on school
property.***Footnote 41"On school property" was not defined
for survey respondents.*** In 2007, 20 percent of students
in grades 9-12 reported using marijuana anywhere in the past
30 days, while 4 percent reported using marijuana on school
property (figure 16.1 and table 16.1).
 
The percentage of students who reported using marijuana
anywhere was higher in 1995 (25 percent) than in 1993 (18
percent). During the second half of the 1990s, there was no
measurable change in the percentage of students who reported
using marijuana anywhere (it ranged from 25 to 27 percent).
Between 1999 and 2007, the percentage of students who
reported using marijuana anywhere had declined to 20 percent.
However, there was no measurable change in the percentage of
students who reported using marijuana anywhere between 2005
and 2007.

With regard to marijuana use on school property, the
percentage of students who reported using marijuana was
higher in 1995 (9 percent) than the percentage who reported
doing so in 1993 (6 percent). Between 1995 and 2007, the
percentage of students who reported using marijuana on school
property declined from 9 to 4 percent. The percentage of
students who reported using marijuana on school property in
2007 was not measurably different from the percentage of
students who reported doing so in 1993.

Marijuana use anywhere and on school property varied by
students' sex and grade level. In every survey year, a
greater percentage of males than females reported using
marijuana in the past 30 days, both anywhere and on school
property. For example, in 2007, 22 percent of males reported
using marijuana anywhere in the past 30 days compared to 17
percent of females, and 6 percent of males reported using
marijuana on school property compared to 3 percent of
females.

In 2007, a smaller percentage of 9th-grade students than
students in higher grades reported using marijuana anywhere.
In 2007, 15 percent of 9th-grade students reported using
marijuana anywhere compared to 19 percent of 10th-graders, 21
percent of 11th-graders, and 25 percent of 12th-graders
(figure 16.2 and table 16.1). There were no measurable
differences in student reports of marijuana use on school
property by grade level in 2007. 

In 2007, a smaller percentage of Asian students (9 percent)
than students from other racial/ethnic groups (ranging from
18 to 29 percent) reported using marijuana anywhere. A larger
percentage of American Indian/Alaska Native students (27
percent) than White students (20 percent), Hispanic students
(18 percent), and Asian students (9 percent) also reported
using marijuana anywhere. At school, there were generally few
differences in the percentage of students who reported using
marijuana by race/ethnicity in 2007. 

In 2007, the percentage of students who reported using
marijuana anywhere (39 states and the District of Columbia)
and on school property (38 states and the District of
Columbia) varied among the states and the District of
Columbia for which data were available. Among these states
and the District of Columbia, the percentage of students who
reported using marijuana anywhere ranged from 9 percent in
Utah to 25 percent in Delaware, Massachusetts, and New
Mexico, while the percentage of students who reported using
marijuana on school property ranged from 2 percent in Iowa to
8 percent in New Mexico (table 16.2).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 16.1 and 16.2 and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (2008b),
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5704.pdf).
 

Fear and Avoidance

Indicator 17 

Students' Perceptions of Personal Safety at School and Away 
From School

In 2007, approximately 5 percent of students ages 12-18
reported that they were afraid of attack or harm at school,
compared to 3 percent of students who reported that they were
afraid of attack or harm away from school.

School violence can make students fearful and affect their
readiness and ability to learn, and concerns about
vulnerability to attacks detract from a positive school
environment (Scheckner et al. 2002). In the School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey,
students ages 12-18 were asked how often***Footnote 42
Students were asked if they "never," "almost never,"
"sometimes," or "most of the time" feared attack or harm at
school or away from school. Students responding "sometimes"
or "most of the time" were considered fearful.*** they had
been afraid of attack or harm "at school or on the way to and
from school" and "away from school." ***Footnote 43 "At
school" includes the school building, on school property, on
a school bus.*** In 2007, a greater percentage of students
ages 12-18 reported that they were afraid of attack or harm
at school (5 percent) than away from school (3 percent)
during the school year (figure 17.1 and table 17.1). 

Students' reports on their fears about their safety varied by
location and race/ethnicity. For example, in 2007, smaller
percentages of White students (4 percent) and Asian students
(2 percent) reported being afraid of attack or harm at school
than their Black (9 percent) and Hispanic (7 percent) peers.
Away from school, a smaller percentage of White students (3
percent) than Black students (5 percent) and Hispanic
students (6 percent) reported being afraid of attack or harm. 

Other differences in students' reports on their safety were
detected by student and school characteristics in 2007. For
example, a higher percentage of 6th-graders (10 percent)
reported being afraid of attack or harm at school than
7th-graders (7 percent), 8th-graders (5 percent), 9th-graders
(6 percent), 10th-graders (5 percent), and 11th- and
12th-graders (3 percent each). Away from school, a larger
percentage of 6th-graders (6 percent) were afraid of attack
or harm than students in the 10th, 11th, or 12th grades (2 to
3 percent).

A greater percentage of female students (6 percent) feared
for their safety at school than male students (5 percent) in
2007. The same was true away from school: 5 percent of
females feared for their safety compared to 2 percent of
males.
 
School sector was also related to students' fear of attack or
harm. A greater percentage of students in public schools (6
percent) reported being afraid of being attacked or harmed at
school than students attending private schools (2 percent).
There was no significant difference in the percentage of
public and private school students who reported being afraid
of attack or harm away from school.

Between 1995 and 2007, the percentage of students who feared
attack or harm at school decreased from 12 to 5 percent.
Between the two most recent survey years, 2005 and 2007, the
percentage of students who feared attack or harm at school
was lower in 2007 (5 percent) than in 2005 (6 percent). Away
from school, there was no pattern of increase or decrease in
the percentage of students who feared attack or harm between
1999 and 2007. However, the percentage of students who feared
attack or harm away from school was smaller in 2007 (3
percent) than in 2005 (5 percent).

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Table 17.1 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

Indicator 18 

Students' Reports of Avoiding School Activities or Specific
Places in School

In 2007, 7 percent of students ages 12-18 reported that they
avoided school activities or one or more places in school
because they thought someone might attack or harm them. 

School crime may lead students to perceive school as unsafe,
and in trying to ensure their own safety, students may begin
to skip school activities or avoid certain places in school
(Schreck and Miller 2003). The percentage of students who
avoid school activities and certain areas in school is a
measure of their perception of school safety. In the School
Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey,
students ages 12-18 were asked whether they had avoided
school activities or one or more places in school because
they were fearful that someone might attack or harm them.
***Footnote 44 For the 2001 survey, the wording was changed 
from"attack or harm" to "attack or threat of attack." See
appendix A for more information.***  In 2007, 7 percent of
students reported that they had avoided a school activity or
one or more places in school during the previous school year
because of fear of attack or harm. About 3 percent of
students avoided a school activity, and 6 percent avoided one
or more places in school ***Footnote 45 "Avoided school
activities" includes avoiding any (extra-curricular)
activities, skipping class, or staying home from school. In
2007, the survey wording was changed from "any
extracurricular activities" to "any activities." Please use
caution when comparing changes in this item over time.
Avoiding one or more places in school includes the entrance,
any hallways or stairs, parts of the cafeteria, restrooms,
and other places inside the school building.*** (figure 18.1
and table 18.1). 

While there was no overall pattern of increase or decrease
between 1999 and 2007 in the percentage of students who
reported that they had avoided a school activity or one or
more places in school because they were fearful that someone
might attack or harm them, the percentage of students who
reported avoiding an activity or place because of fear of
attack or harm was higher in 2007 (7 percent) than in 2005 (6
percent).

In 2007, 2 percent of students reported that they had avoided
any activity, 1 percent of students reported that they had
avoided a class, and 1 percent of students reported that they
had stayed home from school because they were fearful someone
might attack or harm them. One percent of students reported
that they had avoided the entrance to the school, 3 percent
that they had avoided the stairs or hallways, 2 percent that
they had avoided parts of the school cafeteria, 3 percent
that they had avoided any school restrooms, and 1 percent
that they had avoided other places inside the school building
because of fear of attack or harm in 2007.

Students' reports of avoiding one or more places in school
because of fear of attack or harm varied by student and
school characteristics. A higher percentage of 7th-graders (7
percent), 8th-graders (6 percent), 9th-graders (7 percent),
and 10th-graders (5 percent) reported avoiding one or more
places inside school than 12th-graders (3 percent) (figure
18.2). Additionally, a higher percentage of 6th-graders (8
percent), 7th-graders (7 percent), and 9th-graders (7
percent) than 11th-graders (4 percent) reported avoiding one
or more places in school because of fear of attack or harm.
No measurable difference was detected in the extent to which
females and males avoided one or more places in school in
2007 (5 and 6 percent, respectively).  

A larger percentage of public school students (6 percent)
than private school students (1 percent) reported avoiding
one or more places inside school because of fear of attack or
harm.

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Tables 18.1 and 18.2 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

Discipline, Safety, and Security Measures

Indicator 19 

Serious Disciplinary Actions Taken by Public Schools

Forty-six percent of public schools (approximately 38,500
schools) took a serious disciplinary action against a student
for specific offenses during the 2007-08 school year.
Approximately 767,900 serious disciplinary actions were taken
by public schools during that period. 

In the School Survey on Crime and Safety, public school
principals were asked to report the number of disciplinary
actions their schools took against students for specific
offenses. The offenses included physical attacks or fights;
insubordination; distribution, possession, or use of alcohol;
distribution, possession, or use of illegal drugs; use or
possession of a firearm or explosive device; and use or
possession of a weapon other than a firearm or explosive
device.

Forty-six percent of public schools (approximately 38,500
schools) took at least one serious disciplinary action
against a student-including suspensions lasting 5 days or
more, removals with no services (i.e., expulsions), and
transfers to specialized schools-for specific offenses during
the 2007-08 school year (table 19.1). 

The largest percentage of schools that reported taking a
disciplinary action in 2007-08 did so in response to a
physical attack or fight: 31 percent of schools took a
serious disciplinary action for physical attacks or fights
(figure 19.1 and table 19.1). In response to other offenses,
21 percent of all schools took serious disciplinary action
for insubordination; 19 percent for distribution, possession,
or use of illegal drugs; 15 percent took action as a result
of use or possession of a weapon other than a firearm or
explosive device; 10 percent did so for distribution,
possession, or use of alcohol; and 3 percent did so for use
or possession of a firearm or explosive device.

A total of 767,900 serious disciplinary actions were taken
during the 2007-08 school year. The largest number of
disciplinary actions were taken for insubordination (327,100
actions) and physical attacks or fights (271,800). A smaller
number of disciplinary actions were taken in response to the
use or possession of a firearm or explosive device (5,200
actions) than for other offenses covered in the survey.

Of the 767,900 serious disciplinary actions taken during the
2007-08 school year, 76 percent were suspensions for 5 days
or more, 19 percent were transfers to specialized schools,
and 5 percent were removals with no services for the
remainder of the school year (figure 19.2). Although the most
common disciplinary action taken was suspensions lasting 5
days or more, differences in serious disciplinary actions
taken varied by the type of offense. Generally, greater
percentages of out-of-school suspensions lasting 5 days or
more were in response to insubordination (82 percent);
physical attacks or fights (79 percent); and the
distribution, possession, or use of alcohol (74 percent) than
were in response to the other offenses covered in the survey
(ranging from 53 to 60 percent). Greater percentages of
removals with no services for the remainder of the school
year were in response to the use or possession of a firearm
or explosive device (18 percent); distribution, possession,
or use of illegal drugs (9 percent); and use or possession of
a weapon other than a firearm or explosive device (8 percent)
than were in response to the other offenses covered in the
survey (ranging from 4 to 5 percent). Greater percentages of
transfers to specialized schools were in response to the
distribution, possession, or use of illegal drugs (36
percent); the use or possession of a weapon other than a
firearm or explosive device (32 percent); and the use or
possession of firearm or explosive device (29 percent) than
were in response to the other offenses covered in the survey
(ranging from 13 to 22 percent).

Although the overall percentage of schools taking a serious
disciplinary action was lower in 2003-04 (46 percent) than in
1999-2000 (54 percent), there has been no measurable change
since 2003-04 (figure 19.3 and table 19.2). This same general
pattern held both for the percentage of schools taking
serious disciplinary actions for the offense of physical
attacks or fights and for the offense of insubordination.

Between the two most recent survey years (2005-06 and
2007-08), there was no measurable difference in the
percentage of schools that took a serious disciplinary action
in response to the distribution, possession, or use of
alcohol or illegal drugs. A smaller percentage of schools
reported taking a serious disciplinary action for the use or
possession of a weapon other than a firearm or explosive
device in 2007-08 (15 percent) than in 2005-06 (19 percent).
Similarly, a smaller percentage of schools reported taking a
serious disciplinary action for the use or possession of a
firearm or explosive device in 2007-08 (3 percent) than in
2005-06 (5 percent).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 19.1 and 19.2, and Neiman and DeVoe
(2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009326).

Indicator 20 

Safety and Security Measures Taken by Public Schools

During the 2007-08 school year, 43 percent of public schools
reported that they had an electronic notification system for
a school-wide emergency and 31 percent of public schools
reported that they had a structured, anonymous threat
reporting system.

Public schools use a variety of practices and procedures
intended to promote the safety of students and staff. In the
School Survey on Crime and Safety, public school principals
were asked about their school's use of safety and security
measures and procedures. Certain practices, such as locked or
monitored doors or gates, are intended to limit or control
access to school campuses, while others, such as metal
detectors, security cameras, and drug sweeps, are intended to
monitor or restrict students' and visitors' behavior on
campus.

In the 2007-08 school year, nearly all public schools
required visitors to sign in or check in (99 percent) (table
20.1). Other frequently reported safety and security measures
included prohibiting all tobacco use on school grounds (91
percent of public schools) and controlling access to school
buildings by locking or monitoring doors during school hours
(90 percent of public schools) (figure 20.1 and table 20.1).
Forty-three percent of public schools reported that they had
an electronic notification system for a school-wide emergency
and 31 percent of public schools reported that they had a
structured, anonymous threat reporting system. One percent of
public schools required students to pass through metal
detectors daily. 

The use of safety and security measures varied by school
level during the 2007-08 school year. In general, a greater
percentage of high schools than middle schools and primary
schools, and a greater percentage of middle schools than
primary schools, reported using the following safety and
security measures: drug testing for athletes; drug testing
for students in extracurricular activities;***Footnote 46
Students in extracurricular activities other than
athletics.***  requiring students to wear badges or picture
ID's; daily metal detector checks on students;***Footnote 47
One or more check, sweep, or camera.*** random dog sniffs to
check for drugs;***Footnote 38 "On school property" was not
defined for survey respondents.***random sweeps for
contraband;***Footnote 38, and security cameras to monitor
school ***Footnote 48 For example, drugs or weapons. Does not
include dog sniffs.***"On school property" was not defined
for survey respondents.***(table 20.2). For example, 19
percent of high schools, 14 percent of middle schools, and 3
percent of primary schools reported that students were
required to wear badges or picture IDs. However, a smaller
percentage of high schools than middle or primary schools
reported controlling access to buildings during school hours
and requiring students to wear uniforms. A greater percentage
of middle schools reported having an electronic notification
system for a school-wide emergency (49 percent) than primary
schools (43 percent) or high schools (44 percent). 

In general, a higher percentage of schools with 1,000 or more
students than schools with fewer students reported the use of
each safety and security measure (the exceptions were
controlling access to the building during school hours, drug
testing for students in extracurricular activities, and
requiring students to wear uniforms). For example, 56 percent
of schools with 1,000 or more students had an electronic
notification system for a school wide emergency, compared to
49 percent of schools with 500-999 students, 41 percent of
schools with 300-499 students, and 31 percent of schools with
less than 300 students.

The percentage of schools using various security measures has
changed over time. Between the 1999-2000 and 2007-08 school
years, there was an increase in the percentage of public
schools reporting the use of the following safety and
security measures: controlled access to the building during
school hours (from 75 to 90 percent); controlled access to
school grounds during school hours (from 34 to 43 percent);
students required to wear badges or picture IDs (from 4 to 8
percent); faculty required to wear badges or picture IDs
(from 25 to 58 percent); the use of one or more security
cameras to monitor school (from 19 to 55 percent); the
provision of telephones in most classrooms (from 45 to 72
percent); and the requirement that students wear uniforms
(from 12 to 18 percent) (figure 20.2 and table 20.1). Between
the 2003-04 and 2007-08 school years, there was an increase
in the percentage of schools reporting the drug testing of
student athletes (from 4 to 6 percent) as well as an increase
in the percentage of schools reporting the drug testing of
students in other extracurricular activities (from 3 to 4
percent).

This indicator has been updated to include 2007-08 data. For
more information: Tables 20.1 and 20.2, and Neiman and DeVoe
(2009),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009326).

Indicator 21

Students' Reports of Safety and Security Measures Observed at
School

Sixty-six percent of students reported observing the use of
one or more security cameras at their school in 2007 compared
to 58 percent of students in 2005.

Schools use a variety of measures to promote the safety of
students, ranging from codes of student conduct to metal
detectors. In the School Crime Supplement ***Footnote 49 In
2005 and 2007, the unit response rate for this survey did not
meet NCES statistical standards; therefore, interpret the
data with caution. For more information, please see appendix
A.***  to the National Crime Victimization Survey, students
ages 12-18 were asked whether their school used certain
security measures.***Footnote 50 Readers should note that
this indicator relies on student reports of security measures
and provides estimates based on students' awareness of the
measure rather than on documented practice. See Indicator 20
for a summary of the use of various security measures as
reported by schools.***  Security measures include metal
detectors, locker checks, security cameras, security guards
or police officers, adult supervision in hallways, badges or
picture identification for students, a code of student
conduct, locked entrance or exit doors during the day, and a
requirement that visitors sign in. In 2007, nearly all
students ages 12-18 observed the use of at least one of the
selected security measures at their school (figure 21.1 and
table 21.1). 

In 2007, the majority of students ages 12-18 reported that
their school had a code of student conduct (96 percent) and a
requirement that visitors sign in (94 percent). Ninety
percent of students reported the presence of school staff or
other adult supervision in the hallway, and 69 percent
reported the presence of security guards and/or assigned
police officers. Fifty-four percent of students reported
locker checks, 61 percent reported locked entrance or exit
doors during the day, and 66 percent reported the use of
security cameras at their schools. Twenty-four percent of
students reported that badges or picture identification were
required. Metal detectors were the least observed of the
selected safety and security measures: 10 percent of students
reported the use of metal detectors at their school. 

The percentage of students reporting the presence of some of
the selected security measures increased between the two most
recent survey years as well as over longer time periods. For
example, a greater percentage of students reported observing
the use of one or more security cameras at their school in
2007 (66 percent) than in 2005 (58 percent). Over the longer
time period of 2001 through 2007, the percentage of students
who reported observing the use of one or more security
cameras at their school increased from 39 to 66 percent.
Similarly, a greater percentage of students reported locked
entrance or exit doors during the day in 2007 (61 percent)
than in 2005 (54 percent). Over the longer time period of
1999 through 2007, the percentage of students who reported
locked entrance or exit doors during the day increased from
38 to 61 percent. 

In 2007, about 94 percent of students reported that their
school had a requirement that visitors sign in compared to 93
percent of students in 2005. Between 1999 and 2007, the
percentage of students who reported a visitor sign-in
requirement increased from 87 to 94 percent. No significant
differences were detected in the percentage of students who
reported metal detectors, locker checks, the presence of
security guards and/or assigned police officers, requirements
that students wear badges or picture identification, or a
code of student conduct in their schools across all survey
years. 

This indicator repeats information from the 2008 Indicators
of School Crime and Safety report. For more information:
Table 21.1 and Bauer et al. (2008),
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009306.pdf).

References

Addington, L. (2005). Disentangling the Effects of Bounding
and Mobility on Reports of Criminal Victimization. Journal of
Quantitative Criminology, 21(3): 1573-7799.

Anderson, M., Kaufman, J., Simon, T., Barrios, L., Paulozzi,
L., Ryan, G., Hammond, R., Modzeleski, W., Feucht, T.,
Potter, L., and the School-Associated Violent Deaths Study
Group. (2001). School-Associated Violent Deaths in the United
States, 1994-1999. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 286: 2695-2702.

Aspy, C.B., Oman, R.F., Vesely, S.K., McLeroy, K., Rodine,
S., and Marshall, L. (2004). Adolescent Violence: The
Protective Effects of Youth Assets. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 82: 269-277.

Bauer, L., Guerino, P., Nolle, K.L., and Tang, S. (2008).
Student Victimization in U.S. Schools: Results From the 2005
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCES 2009-306). National Center for Education
Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
of Education. Washington, DC.

Beauvais, F., Chavez, E., Oetting, E., Deffenbacher, J., and
Cornell, G. (1996). Drug Use, Violence, and Victimization
Among White American, Mexican American, and American Indian
Dropouts, Students With Academic Problems, and Students in
Good Academic Standing. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43:
292-299.

Brener, N.D., Kann, L., Kinchen, S.A., Grunbaum, J.A.,
Whalen, L., Eaton, D., Hawkins, J., and Ross, J.G. (2004).
Methodology of the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2004, 53 (No. RR-12):
1-13.

Brener, N.D., Kann, L., and McManus, T. (2003). A Comparison
of Two Survey Questions on Race and Ethnicity Among High
School Students. Public Opinion Quarterly, 67: 227-236.

Cantor, D., and Lynch, J.P. (2000). Self-Report Surveys as
Measures of Crime and Criminal Victimization. In D. Duffee
(Ed.), Measurement and Analysis of Crime and Justice (pp.
85-138). Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2001). Temporal
Variations in School-Associated Student Homicide and Suicide
Events-United States, 1992-1999. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 50(31): 657-660.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2004). Suicide
Attempts and Physical Fighting Among High School
Students-United States, 2001. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 53(22): 474-476.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008a).
School-Associated Student Homicides-United States, 1992-2006.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2008, 57(02): 33-36.
Retrieved July 15, 2008, from
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5702a1.htm.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008b). Youth
Risk Behavior Surveillance-United States, 2007. Surveillance
Summaries. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2008, 57(No.
SS-4). 

Committee on School Health. (1990). The Potentially Suicidal
Student in the School Setting. Pediatrics, 86(3): 481-483.

Coopersmith, J. (2009). Characteristics of Public, Private,
and Bureau of Indian Education Elementary and Secondary
School Teachers in the United States: Results From the
2007-08 Schools and Staffing Survey (NCES 2009-324). National
Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC.

Crews, K., Crews, J., and Turner, F. (2008). School Violence
Is Not Going Away So Proactive Steps Are Needed. College
Teaching Methods & Styles Journal, 4(1): 25-28.

Crick, N.R., and Bigbee, M.A. (1998). Relational and Overt
Forms of Peer Victimization: A Multi-informant Approach.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66: 337-347.

Crick, N.R., and Grotpeter, J.K. (1996). Children's Treatment
by Peers: Victims of Relational and Overt Aggression.
Development and Psychopathology, 8: 367-380.

DeVoe, J.F., and Kaffenberger, S. (2005). Student Reports of
Bullying: Results From the 2001 School Crime Supplement to
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCES 2005-310).
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau
of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice Programs, U.S.
Department of Justice. Washington, DC.

Eaton, D., Brener, D., Kann, L., and Pittman, V. (2007). High
School Student Responses to Different Question Formats
Assessing Race/ethnicity. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41:
488-494.

Elliott, D.S., Hamburg, B.A., and Williams, K.R. (1998).
Violence in American Schools: An Overview. In D.S. Elliott,
B.A. Hamburg, and K.R. Williams (Eds.), Violence in American
Schools (pp. 3-18). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fagan, J., and Wilkinson, D.L. (1998). Social Contexts and
Functions of Adolescent Violence. In D.S. Elliott, B.A.
Hamburg, and K.R. Williams (Eds.), Violence in American
Schools (pp. 55-93). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fredland, Nina M. (2008). Nurturing Hostile Environments: The
Problem of School Violence. Family & Community Health, 31(1):
S32-S41.

Henry, S. (2000). What Is School Violence? An Integrated
Definition. Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 567: 16-29. 

Kachur, S.P., Stennies, G.M., Powell, K.E., Modzeleski, W.,
Stephens, R., Murphy, R., Kresnow, M., Sleet, D., and Lowry,
R. (1996). School-Associated Violent Deaths in the United
States, 1992 to 1994. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 275: 1729-1733.

Karcher, M. (2002). The Cycle of Violence and Disconnection
Among Rural Middle School Students: Teacher Disconnection as
a Consequence of Violence. Journal of School Violence, 1:
35-51.

Kauffman, J., Modzeleski, W., Feucht, T., Simon, T.R.,
Anderson, M., Shaw, K., Arias, I., and Barrios, L. (2004).
School-Associated Suicides-United States, 1994-1999.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 53(22): 476-478.

Kodjo, C.M., Auinger, P., and Ryan, S.A. (2003). Demographic,
Intrinsic, and Extrinsic Factors Associated With Weapon
Carrying at School. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
Medicine, 157(1): 96-103.

Lannie, A.L., and McCurdy, B.L. (2007). Preventing Disruptive
Behavior in the Urban Classroom: Effects of the Good Behavior
Game on Student and Teacher Behavior. Education and Treatment
of Children, 30(1): 85-98.

Laub, J.H., and Lauritsen, J.L. (1998). The Interdependence
of School Violence With Neighborhood and Family Conditions.
In D.S. Elliott, B.A. Hamburg, and K.R. Williams (Eds.),
Violence in American Schools (pp. 127-155). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

MacMillan, R., and Hagan, J. (2004). Violence in the
Transition to Adulthood: Adolescent Victimization, Education,
and Socioeconomic Attainment in Later Life. Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 1(2): 127-158.

Nansel, T.R., Overpeck, M.D., Haynie, D.L., Ruan, W.J., and
Scheidt, P.C. (2003). Relationships Between Bullying and
Violence Among U.S. Youth. Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, 157(4): 348-353.

Nansel, T.R., Overpeck, M., Pilla, R., Ruan, W.,
Simons-Morton, B., and Scheidt, P. (2001). Bullying Behaviors
Among U.S. Youth: Prevalence and Association With
Psychosocial Adjustment. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 285: 2094-2100.

Neiman, S., and DeVoe, J.F. (2009). Crime, Violence,
Discipline, and Safety in U.S. Public Schools: Findings From
the School Survey on Crime and Safety: 2007-08 (NCES
2009-326). National Center for Education Statistics,
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC.

Nolin, M.J., Vaden-Kiernan, N., Feibus, M.L., and Chandler,
K.A. (1997). Student Reports of Availability, Peer Approval,
and Use of Alcohol, Marijuana, and Other Drugs at School:
1993 (NCES 97-279). National Center for Education Statistics,
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC.

Nolle, K.L., Guerino, P., and Dinkes, R. (2007). Crime,
Violence, Discipline, and Safety in U.S. Public Schools:
Findings From the School Survey on Crime and Safety: 2005-06
(NCES 2007-361). National Center for Education Statistics,
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC. 

Payne, A.A., Gottfredson, D.C., and Gottfredson, G.D. (2003).
Schools as Communities: The Relationship Between Communal
School Organization, Student Bonding, and School Disorder.
Criminology, 41: 749-778.

Prinstein, M.J., Boergers, J., and Vernberg, E.M. (2001).
Overt and Relational Aggression in Adolescents:
Social-Psychological Adjustment of Aggressors and Victims.
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 30: 479-491.

Reza, A., Modzeleski, W., Feucht, T., Anderson, M., Simon,
T.R., and Barrios, L. (2003). Source of Firearms Used by
Students in School-Associated Violent Deaths-United States,
1992-1999. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 52(9):
169-172.

Ringwalt, C.L., Ennett, S., and Johnson, R. (2003). Factors
Associated With Fidelity to Substance Use Prevention
Curriculum Guides in the Nation's Middle Schools. Health
Education & Behavior, 30: 375-391.

Scheckner, S., Rollins, S.A., Kaiser-Ulrey, C., and Wagner,
R. (2002). School Violence in Children and Adolescents: A
Meta-Analysis of Effectiveness. Journal of School Violence,
1: 5-34.

Schreck, C.J., and Miller, J.M. (2003). Sources of Fear of
Crime at School: What Is the Relative Contribution of
Disorder, Individual Characteristics, and School Security?
Journal of School Violence, 2(4): 57-79. 

Small, M., and Dressler-Tetrick, K. (2001). School Violence:
An Overview. Juvenile Justice VIII (I): 3-12. U.S. Department
of Justice. Washington, DC: Office of Justice Programs,
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.

Smith, D.L., and Smith, B.J. (2006). Perceptions of Violence:
The Views of Teachers Who Left Urban Schools. The High School
Journal, 89(3): 34-42.

Snyder, T.D., Dillow, S.A., and Hoffman, C.M. (2009). Digest
of Education Statistics 2008 (NCES 2009-020). National Center
for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC.

Storch, E.A., Nock, M.K., Masia-Warner, C., and Barlas, M.E.
(2003). Peer Victimization and Social-Psychological
Adjustment in Hispanic and African-American Children. Journal
of Child & Family Studies, 12: 439-455. 

Strizek, G.A., Pittsonberger, J.L., Riordan, K.E., Lyter,
D.M., and Orlofsky, G.F. (2006). Characteristics of Schools,
Districts, Teachers, Principals, and School Libraries in the
United States: 2003-04 Schools and Staffing Survey (NCES
2006-313 Revised). National Center for Education Statistics,
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC.

U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(2007). Crime in the United States 2006. Retrieved June 20,
2008, from
http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2006/data/table_01.html.

U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education
Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics. (2008).
Digest of Education Statistics, 2007 (NCES 2008-022).
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wei, H., and Williams, J.H. (2004). Relationship Between Peer
Victimization and School Adjustment in Sixth-Grade Students:
Investigating Mediation Effects. Violence and Victims, 19:
557-571.
 
Appendix A: Technical Notes

General Information

The indicators in this report are based on information drawn
from a variety of independent data sources, including
national surveys of students, teachers, and principals, and
data collections from federal departments and agencies,
including the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National
Center for Education Statistics, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Each data source has an independent sample
design, data collection method, and questionnaire design or
is the result of a universe data collection. Universe data
collections include a census of all known entities in a
specific universe (e.g., all deaths occurring on school
property). Readers should be cautious when comparing data
from different sources. Differences in sampling procedures,
populations, time periods, and question phrasing can all
affect the comparability of results. For example, some
questions from different surveys may appear the same, but
were asked of different populations of students (e.g.,
students ages 12-18 or students in grades 9-12); in different
years; about experiences that occurred within different
periods of time (e.g., in the past 30 days or during the past
12 months); or at different locations (e.g., in school or
anywhere). 

All comparisons described in this report are statistically
significant at the .05 level. The primary test procedure used
in this report was Student's t statistic, which tests the
difference between two sample estimates. The t test formula
was not adjusted for multiple comparisons. Estimates
displayed in the text, figures, and tables are rounded from
original estimates, not from a series of rounding. 

The following is a description of data sources, accuracy of
estimates, and statistical procedures used in this report.

Sources of Data

This section briefly describes each of the datasets used in
this report: the School-Associated Violent Deaths
Surveillance Study, the Supplementary Homicide Reports, the
Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System Fatal,
the National Crime Victimization Survey, the School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, the
Youth Risk Behavior Survey, the Schools and Staffing Survey,
and the School Survey on Crime and Safety. Directions for
obtaining more information are provided at the end of each
description. 

School-Associated Violent Deaths Surveillance Study (SAVD) 

The School-Associated Violent Deaths Surveillance Study SAVD)
is an epidemiological study developed by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention in conjunction with the U.S.
Department of Education and the U.S. Department of Justice.
SAVD seeks to describe the epidemiology of school-associated
violent deaths, identify common features of these deaths,
estimate the rate of school-associated violent death in the
United States, and identify potential risk factors for these
deaths. The surveillance system includes descriptive data on
all school-associated violent deaths in the United States,
including all homicides, suicides, and unintentional
firearm-related deaths where the fatal injury occurred on the
campus of a functioning elementary or secondary school, while
the victim was on the way to or from regular sessions at such
a school, or while attending or on the way to or from an
official school-sponsored event. Victims of such events
include nonstudents as well as students and staff members.
SAVD includes descriptive information about the school,
event, victim(s), and offender(s). The SAVD Surveillance
System has collected data from July 1, 1992, through the
present. 

SAVD uses a four-step process to identify and collect data on
school-associated violent deaths. Cases are initially
identified through a search of the Lexis/Nexis newspaper and
media database. Then police officials are contacted to
confirm the details of the case and to determine if the event
meets the case definition. Once a case is confirmed, a police
official and a school official are interviewed regarding
details about the school, event, victim(s), and offender(s).
A copy of the full police report is also sought for each
case. The information obtained on schools includes school
demographics, attendance/absentee rates,
suspension/expulsions and mobility, school history of
weapon-carrying incidents, security measures, violence
prevention activities, school response to the event, and
school policies about weapon carrying. Event information
includes the location of injury, the context of injury (while
classes were being held, during break, etc.), motives for
injury, method of injury, and school and community events
happening around the time period. Information obtained on
victim(s) and offender(s) includes demographics,
circumstances of the event (date/time, alcohol or drug use,
number of persons involved), types and origins of weapons,
criminal history, psychological risk factors, school-related
problems, extracurricular activities, and family history,
including structure and stressors. 

One hundred and five school-associated violent deaths were
identified from July 1, 1992 to June 30, 1994 (Kachur et al.
1996). A more recent report from this data collection
identified 253 school-associated violent deaths between July
1, 1994 and June 30, 1999 (Anderson et al. 2001). Other
publications from this study have described how the number of
events changes during the school year (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2001), the source of the firearms used
in these events (Reza et al. 2003), and suicides that were
associated with schools (Kauffman et al. 2004). The
interviews conducted on cases between July 1, 1994, and June
30, 1999, achieved a response rate of 97 percent for police
officials and 78 percent for school officials. For several
reasons, all data for years from 1999 to the present are
flagged as preliminary. For some recent data, the interviews
with school and law enforcement officials to verify case
details have not been completed. The details learned during
the interviews can occasionally change the classification of
a case. Also, new cases may be identified because of the
expansion of the scope of the media files used for case
identification. Sometimes other cases not identified during
earlier data years using the independent case finding efforts
(which focus on non-media sources of information) will be
discovered. Also, other cases may occasionally be identified
while the police and school interviews are being conducted to
verify known cases. For additional information about SAVD,
contact: 

Jeff Hall
Division of Violence Prevention 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Mailstop K60 
4770 Buford Highway NE 
Atlanta, GA 30341 
Telephone: (770) 488-4648 
E-mail: jhall2@cdc.gov

Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) 

The Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), which are a part of
the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program, provide
incident-level information on criminal homicides, including
situation (number of victims to number of offenders); the
age, sex, and race of victims and offenders; types of weapons
used; circumstances of the incident; and the relationship of
the victim to the offender. The data are provided monthly to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) by local law
enforcement agencies participating in the FBI's UCR program.
The data include murders and nonnegligent manslaughters in
the United States from January 1976 to December 2005; that
is, negligent manslaughters and justifiable homicides have
been eliminated from the data. Based on law enforcement
agency reports, the FBI estimates that 594,277 murders
(including non-negligent manslaughters) were committed from
1976 to 2005. Agencies provided detailed information on
538,210 victims and 597,359 offenders. 

About 91 percent of homicides are included in the SHR.
However, adjustments can be made to the weights to correct
for missing reports. Estimates from the SHR used in this
report were generated by the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) using a weight developed by BJS that reconciles the
counts of SHR homicide victims with those in the UCR for the
1992 through 2005 data years. The weight is the same for all
cases for a given year. The weight represents the ratio of
the number of homicides reported in the UCR to the number
reported in the SHR. For additional information about SHR,
contact: 

Communications Unit 
Criminal Justice Information Services Division
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Module D3 
1000 Custer Hollow Road 
Clarksburg, WV 26306 
Telephone: (304) 625-4995 
E-mail: cjis_comm@leo.gov

Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System Fatal
(WISQARS  Fatal) 

WISQARS Fatal provides mortality data related to injury. The
mortality data reported in WISQARS Fatal come from death
certificate data reported to the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS), Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Data include causes of death reported by
attending physicians, medical examiners, and coroners. It
also includes demographic information about decedents
reported by funeral directors, who obtain that information
from family members and other informants. NCHS collects,
compiles, verifies, and prepares these data for release to
the public. The data provide information about what types of
injuries are leading causes of deaths, how common they are,
and who they affect. These data are intended for a broad
audience-the public, the media, public health practitioners
and researchers, and public health officials-to increase
their knowledge of injury. 

WISQARS Fatal mortality reports provide tables of the total
numbers of injury-related deaths and the death rates per
100,000 U.S. population. The reports list deaths according to
cause (mechanism) and intent (manner) of injury by state,
race, Hispanic origin, sex, and age groupings. For more
information on WISQARS Fatal, contact: 

National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
Mailstop K59 
4770 Buford Highway NE 
Atlanta, GA 30341-3724 
Telephone: (770) 488-1506 
E-mail: ohcinfo@cdc.gov 
Internet: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/wisqars

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
 
The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), administered
for the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics by the U.S. Census
Bureau, is the nation's primary source of information on
crime and the victims of crime. Initiated in 1972 and
redesigned in 1992, the NCVS collects detailed information
annually on the frequency and nature of the crimes of rape,
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault,
theft, household burglary, and motor vehicle theft
experienced by Americans and their households each year. The
survey measures both crimes reported to police and crimes not
reported to the police. 

Readers should note that in 2003, in accordance with changes
to the Office of Management and Budget's standards for the
classification of federal data on race and ethnicity, the
NCVS item on race/ethnicity was modified. A question on
Hispanic origin is followed by a question on race. The new
question about race allows the respondent to choose more than
one race and delineates Asian as a separate category from
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. Analysis conducted
by the Demographic Surveys Division at the U.S. Census Bureau
showed that the new question had very little impact on the
aggregate racial distribution of the NCVS respondents, with
one exception. There was a 1.6 percentage point decrease in
the percentage of respondents who reported themselves as
White. Due to changes in race/ethnicity categories,
comparisons of race/ethnicity across years should be made
with caution. 

There were changes in the sample design and survey
methodology in the 2006 National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS) that impacted survey estimates. Due to this redesign,
2006 data are not presented in this indicator. Data from 2007
are comparable to earlier years. Analysis of the 2007
estimates indicate that the program changes made in 2007 had
relatively small effects on NCVS changes. As discussed in
Criminal Victimization, 2006 the substantial increases in
victimization rates from 2005 to 2006 do not appear to be due
to actual changes in crime during that period. The increases
were attributed to the impact of methodological changes in
the survey. For more information on the 2006 NCVS data, see
Criminal Victimization, 2006 at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cv06.pdf and the
technical notes at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/
cv06tn.pdf. For more information on 2007 data see
http://www.ojb.usdoj.gov/bjs/publ/pdf/cv07tn.pdf. The number
of NCVS eligible households in sample in 2007 was about
45,900. They were selected using a stratified, multistage
cluster design. In the first stage, the primary sampling
units (PSUs), consisting of counties or groups of counties,
were selected. In the second stage, smaller areas, called
Enumeration Districts (EDs), were selected from each sampled
PSU. Finally, from selected EDs, clusters of four households,
called segments, were selected for interview. At each stage,
the selection was done proportionate to population size in
order to create a self-weighting sample. The final sample was
augmented to account for households constructed after the
decennial Census. Within each sampled household, U.S. Census
Bureau personnel interviewed all household members age 12 and
older to determine whether they had been victimized by the
measured crimes during the 6 months preceding the interview. 

The first NCVS interview with a housing unit is conducted in
person. Subsequent interviews are conducted by telephone, if
possible. About 74,000 persons age 12 and older are
interviewed each 6 months. Households remain in the sample
for 3 years and are interviewed seven times at 6-month
intervals. Since the survey's inception, the initial
interview at each sample unit has been used only to bound
future interviews to establish a time frame to avoid
duplication of crimes uncovered in these subsequent
interviews. Beginning in 2006, data from the initial
interview have been adjusted to account for the effects of
bounding and included in the survey estimates. After their
seventh interview, households are replaced by new sample
households. The NCVS has consistently obtained a response
rate of over 90 percent at the household level. The
completion rates for persons within households in 2007 were
about 86 percent. Weights were developed to permit estimates
for the total U.S. population 12 years and older. For more
information about the NCVS, contact:

Katrina Baum 
Victimization Statistics Branch 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 
U.S. Department of Justice 
810 7th Street NW 
Washington, DC 20531 
Telephone: (202) 307-5889 
E-mail: katrina.baum@usdoj.gov 
Internet: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs

School Crime Supplement (SCS)
 
Created as a supplement to the NCVS and codesigned by the
National Center for Education Statistics and Bureau of
Justice Statistics, the School Crime Supplement (SCS) survey
was conducted in 1989, 1995, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007
to collect additional information about school-related
victimizations on a national level. This report includes data
from the 1995, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007 collections.
The 1989 data are not included in this report as a result of
methodological changes to the NCVS and SCS. The survey was
designed to assist policymakers as well as academic
researchers and practitioners at the federal, state, and
local levels so that they can make informed decisions
concerning crime in schools. The SCS asks students a number
of key questions about their experiences with and perceptions
of crime and violence that occurred inside their school, on
school grounds, on a school bus, or on the way to or from
school. Additional questions not included in the NCVS were
also added to the SCS, such as those concerning preventive
measures used by the school, students' participation in after
school activities, students' perceptions of school rules, the
presence of weapons and gangs in school, the presence of
hate-related words and graffiti in school, student reports of
bullying and reports of rejection at school, and the
availability of drugs and alcohol in school, as well as
attitudinal questions relating to fear of victimization and
avoidance behavior at school.
 
In all SCS survey years through 2005, the SCS was conducted
for a 6-month period from January to June in all households
selected for the NCVS (see discussion above for information
about the NCVS sampling design and changes to the
race/ethnicity item made for 2003 onward). It should be noted
that the initial NCVS interview has always been included in
the SCS data collection. Within these households, the
eligible respondents for the SCS were those household members
who had attended school at any time during the 6 months
preceding the interview, were enrolled in grades 6-12, and
were not home schooled. In 2007, the questionnaire was
changed and household members who attended school any time
during the school year were included. The age range of
students covered in this report is 12-18 years of age.
Eligible respondents were asked the supplemental questions in
the SCS only after completing their entire NCVS interview.
 
The prevalence of victimization for 1995, 1999, 2001, 2003,
2005, and 2007 was calculated by using NCVS incident
variables appended to the 1995, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, and
2007 SCS data ?les. The NCVS type of crime variable was used
to classify victimizations of students in the SCS as serious
violent, violent, or theft. The NCVS variables asking where
the incident happened and what the victim was doing when it
happened were used to ascertain whether the incident happened
at school. For prevalence of victimization, the NCVS
definition of "at school" includes in the school building, on
school property, or on the way to or from school. Only
incidents that occurred inside the United States are
included. 

In 2001, the SCS survey instrument was modified from previous
collections. First, in 1995 and 1999, "at school" was defined
for respondents as in the school building, on the school
grounds, or on a school bus. In 2001, the definition for "at
school" was changed to mean in the school building, on school
property, on a school bus, or going to and from school. This
change was made to the 2001 questionnaire in order to be
consistent with the definition of "at school" as it is
constructed in the NCVS and was also used as the definition
in 2003, 2005, and 2007. Cognitive interviews conducted by
the U.S. Census Bureau on the 1999 SCS suggested that
modifications to the definition of "at school" would not have
a substantial impact on the estimates. 

A total of 9,700 students participated in the 1995 SCS, 8,400
in 1999, 8,400 in 2001, 7,200 in 2003, 6,300 in 2005, and
5,600 in 2007. In the 2007 SCS, the household completion rate
was 90 percent. In the 1995, 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005 SCS,
the household completion rates were 95 percent, 94 percent,
93 percent, 92 percent, and 91 percent, respectively, and the
student completion rates were 78 percent, 78 percent, 77
percent, 70 percent, and 62 percent respectively. For the
2007 SCS, the student completion rate was 58 percent. 

Thus, the overall unweighted SCS response rate (calculated by
multiplying the household completion rate by the student
completion rate) was 74 percent in 1995, 73 percent in 1999,
72 percent in 2001, 64 percent in 2003, 56 percent in 2005,
and 53 percent in 2007. Response rates for most survey items
were high-typically over 95 percent of all eligible
respondents. The weights were developed to compensate for
differential probabilities of selection and nonresponse. The
weighted data permit inferences about the eligible student
population who were enrolled in schools in 1995, 1999, 2001,
2003, 2005, and 2007. 

Due to the low unit response rate in 2005 and 2007, a unit
nonresponse bias analysis was done. There are two types of
nonresponse: unit and item nonresponse. Unit response rates
indicate how many sampled units have completed interviews.
Because interviews with students could only be completed
after households had responded to the NCVS, the unit
completion rate for the SCS reflects both the household
interview completion rate and the student interview
completion rate. Nonresponse can greatly affect the strength
and application of survey data by leading to an increase in
variance as a result of a reduction in the actual size of the
sample and can produce bias if the nonrespondents have
characteristics of interest that are different from the
respondents. Furthermore, imputation, a common recourse to
nonresponse, can lead to the risk of underestimating the
sampling error if imputed data are treated as though they
were observed data. 

In order for response bias to occur, respondents must have
different response rates and responses to particular survey
variables. The magnitude of unit nonresponse bias is
determined by the response rate and the differences between
respondents and nonrespondents on key survey variables.
Although the bias analysis cannot measure response bias since
the SCS is a sample survey and it is not known how the
population would have responded, the SCS sampling frame has
four key student or school characteristic variables for which
data is known for respondents and nonrespondents: sex,
race/ethnicity, household income, and urbanicity, all of
which are associated with student victimization. To the
extent that there are differential responses by respondents
in these groups, nonresponse bias is a concern. 

In 2005, the analysis of unit nonresponse bias found evidence
of bias for the race, household income, and urbanicity
variables. White (non-Hispanic) and Other (non-Hispanic)
respondents had higher response rates than Black
(non-Hispanic) and Hispanic respondents. Respondents from
households with an income of $35,000-$49,999 and $50,000 or
more had higher response rates than those from households
with incomes of less than $7,500, $7,500-$14,999,$15,000-$24,999 
and $25,000-$34,999. Respondents who live in urban areas had l
ower response rates than those who live inrural or suburban areas. 
Although the extent of nonresponsebias cannot be determined, 
weighting adjustments, whichcorrected for differential response
rates, should havereduced the problem. 

In 2007, the analysis of unit nonresponse bias found evidence
of bias by the race/ethnicity and household income variables.
Hispanic respondents had lower response rates than other
race/ethnicities. Respondents from households with an income
of $25,000 or more had higher response rates than those from
households with incomes of less than $25,000. However, when
responding students are compared to the eligible NCVS sample,
there were no measurable differences between the responding
students and the eligible students, suggesting the
nonresponse bias has little impact on the overall estimates.

For more information about SCS, contact: 

Kathryn A. Chandler 
National Center for Education Statistics 
1990 K Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Telephone: (202) 502-7486 
E-mail: kathryn.chandler@ed.gov 
Internet: http://nces.ed.gov/programs/crime

Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS)
 
The National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS)
is one component of the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance
System (YRBSS), an epidemiological surveillance system
developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) to monitor the prevalence of youth behaviors that most
influence health.*** Footnote 51 For more information on the
YRBSS methodology, see Brener et al. (2004).***  The YRBS
focuses on priority health-risk behaviors established during
youth that result in the most significant mortality,
morbidity, disability, and social problems during both youth
and adulthood. This report uses 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2001,
2003, 2005, and 2007 YRBS data.
 
The YRBS uses a three-stage cluster sampling design to
produce a nationally representative sample of students in
grades 9-12 in the United States. The target population
consisted of all public and private school students in grades
9-12 in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The
first-stage sampling frame included selecting primary
sampling units (PSUs) from strata formed on the basis of
urbanization and the relative percentage of Black and
Hispanic students in the PSU. These PSUs are either counties,
subareas of large counties, or groups of smaller, adjacent
counties. At the second stage, schools were selected with
probability proportional to school enrollment size. 

The final stage of sampling consisted of randomly selecting,
in each chosen school and in each of grades 9-12, one or two
classrooms from either a required subject, such as English or
social studies, or a required period, such as homeroom or
second period. All students in selected classes were eligible
to participate. Three strategies were used to oversample
Black and Hispanic students: (1) larger sampling rates were
used to select PSUs that are in high-Black and high-Hispanic
strata; (2) a modified measure of size was used that
increased the probability of selecting schools with a
disproportionately high percentage of combined Black,
Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, or American Indian/Alaska
Native enrollment; and (3) two classes per grade, rather than
one, were selected in schools with a high percentage of
combined Black, Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, or American
Indian/ Alaska Native enrollment. Approximately 16,300,
10,900, 16,300, 15,300, 13,600, 15,200, 13,900, and 14,000
students participated in the 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2001,
2003, 2005, and 2007 surveys, respectively. 

The overall response rate was 70 percent for the 1993 survey,
60 percent for the 1995 survey, 69 percent for the 1997
survey, 66 percent for the 1999 survey, 63 percent for the
2001 survey, 67 percent for the 2003 survey, 67 percent for
the 2005 survey, and 68 percent for the 2007 survey. NCES
standards call for response rates of 85 percent or better for
cross-sectional surveys, and bias analyses are required by
NCES when that percentage is not achieved. For YRBS data, a
full nonresponse bias analysis has not been done because the
data necessary to do the analysis are not available. The
weights were developed to adjust for nonresponse and the
oversampling of Black and Hispanic students in the sample.
The final weights were constructed so that only weighted
proportions of students (not weighted counts of students) in
each grade matched national population projections.
 
State level data were downloaded from the Youth Online:
Comprehensive Results web page(http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/yrbss/). 
Each state and localschool-based YRBS employs a two-stage, 
cluster sample designto produce representative samples of 
students in grades 9-12 in their jurisdiction. All except a 
few state and local samples include only public schools, 
and each local sample includes only schools in the funded 
school district (e.g., San Diego Unified School District) 
rather than in the entire city (e.g., greater San Diego area). 

In the first sampling stage in all except a few states and
districts, schools are selected with probability proportional
to school enrollment size. In the second sampling stage,
intact classes of a required subject or intact classes during
a required period (e.g., second period) are selected
randomly. All students in sampled classes are eligible to
participate. Certain states and districts modify these
procedures to meet their individual needs. For example, in a
given state or district, all schools, rather than a sample of
schools, might be selected to participate. State and local
surveys that have a scientifically selected sample,
appropriate documentation, and an overall response rate
greater than or equal to 60 percent are weighted. The overall
response rate reflects the school response rate multiplied by
the student response rate. These three criteria are used to
ensure that the data from those surveys can be considered
representative of students in grades 9-12 in that
jurisdiction. A weight is applied to each record to adjust
for student nonresponse and the distribution of students by
grade, sex, and race/ethnicity in each jurisdiction.
Therefore, weighted estimates are representative of all
students in grades 9-12 attending schools in each
jurisdiction. Surveys that do not have an overall response
rate of greater than or equal to 60 percent and do not have
appropriate documentation are not weighted and are not
included in this report. 

In 2007, a total of 39 states and 22 districts had weighted
data. In sites with weighted data, the student sample sizes
for the state and local YRBS ranged from 1,100 to 13,400.
School response rates ranged from 69 to 100 percent, student
response rates ranged from 60 to 92 percent, and overall
response rates ranged from 60 to 90 percent. 

Readers should note that reports of these data published by
the CDC do not include percentages where the denominator
includes less than 100 unweighted cases. However, NCES
publications do not include percentages where the denominator
includes less than 30 unweighted cases. Therefore, estimates
presented here may not appear in CDC publications of YRBS
estimates and are considered unstable by CDC standards. 

In 1999, in accordance with changes to the Office of
Management and Budget's standards for the classification of
federal data on race and ethnicity, the YRBS item on
race/ethnicity was modified. The version of the race and
ethnicity question used in 1993, 1995, and 1997 was:
 
How do you describe yourself? 
A. White-not Hispanic 
B. Black-not Hispanic 
C. Hispanic or Latino 
D. Asian or Pacific Islander 
E. American Indian or Alaskan Native 
F. Other 

The version used in 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, and in the 2007
state and local surveys was: 

How do you describe yourself? (Select one or more responses.) 
A. American Indian or Alaska Native 
B. Asian 
C. Black or African American 
D. Hispanic or Latino 
E. Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 
F. White 

In the 2005 national survey and all 2007 surveys,
race/ethnicity was computed from two questions: (1) "Are you
Hispanic or Latino?" (response options were "yes" and "no"),
and (2) "What is your race?" (response options were "American
Indian or Alaska Native," "Asian," "Black or African
American," "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander," or
"White"). For the second question, students could select more
than one response option. For this report, students were
classified as "Hispanic" if they answered "yes" to the first
question, regardless of how they answered the second
question. Students who answered "no" to the first question
and selected more than one race/ethnicity in the second
category were classified as "More than one race." Students
who answered "no" to the first question and selected only one
race/ethnicity were classified as that race/ethnicity.
Race/ethnicity was classified as missing for students who did
not answer the first question and for students who answered
"no" to the first question but did not answer the second
question. 

CDC has conducted two studies to understand the effect of
changing the race/ethnicity item on the YRBS. Brener, Kann,
and McManus (2003) found that allowing students to select
more than one response to a single race/ethnicity question on
the YRBS had only a minimal effect on reported race/ethnicity
among high school students. Eaton, Brener, Kann, and Pittman
(2007) found that self-reported race/ethnicity was similar
regardless of whether the single-question or a two-question
format was used.
 
For additional information about the YRBS, contact: 

Laura Kann 
Division of Adolescent and School Health 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Mailstop K-33 
4770 Buford Highway NE 
Atlanta, GA 30341-3717 
Telephone: (770) 488-6181 
E-mail: lkk1@cdc.gov 
Internet: http://www.cdc.gov/yrbs

Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS) 

This report draws upon data on teacher victimization from the
Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS), which provides national-
and state-level data on public schools and national- and
affiliation-level data on private schools. The 1993-94,
1999-2000, 2003-04, and 2007-08 SASS were collected by the
U.S. Census Bureau and sponsored by the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES). The 1993-94, 1999-2000, and
2003-04 administrations of SASS consisted of four sets of
linked surveys, including surveys of schools, the principals
of each selected school, a subsample of teachers within each
school, and public school districts. The 2007-08
administration of SASS consisted of five types of
questionnaires: district questionnaires, principal
questionnaires, school questionnaires, teacher
questionnaires, and school library media center
questionnaires. In 1993-94, there were two sets of teacher
surveys, public and private school teachers. In 1999-2000,
there were four sets of teacher surveys, public, private,
public charter, and Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) school
teachers. In 2003-04 and 2007-08, there were three sets of
teacher surveys, public (including public charter), private,
and BIE. For this report, BIE and public charter schools are
included with public schools. 

The public school sampling frames for the 1993-94, 1999-2000,
2003-04, and 2007-08 SASS were created using the 1991-92,
1997-98, 2001-02, and 2005-06 NCES Common Core of Data (CCD)
Public School Universe Files, respectively. In SASS, a school
was defined as an institution or part of an institution that
provides classroom instruction to students; has one or more
teachers to provide instruction; serves students in one or
more of grades 1-12 or the ungraded equivalent and is located
in one or more buildings apart from a private home. It was
possible for two or more schools to share the same building;
in this case they were treated as different schools if they
had different administrations (i.e., principals or school
head). Since CCD and SASS differ in scope and their
definition of a school, some records were deleted, added, or
modified in order to provide better coverage and a more
efficient sample design for SASS. Data were collected by
multistage sampling, which began with the selection of
schools. 

This report uses 1993-94, 1999-2000, 2003-04, and 2007-08
SASS data. Approximately 10,000 public schools and 3,300
private schools were selected to participate in the 1993-94
SASS, 11,100 public schools (9,900 public schools, 100
BIE-funded schools, and 1,100 charter schools) and 3,600
private schools were selected to participate in the 1999-2000
SASS, 10,400 public schools (10,200 public schools and 200
BIE-funded schools) and 3,600 private schools were selected
to participate in the 2003-04 SASS, and 9,980 public schools
(9,800 public schools and 180 BIE-funded schools) and 2,940
private schools were selected to participate in the 2007-08
SASS. Within each school, teachers selected were further
stratified into one of five teacher types in the following
hierarchy: (1) Asian or Pacific Islander; (2) American
Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; (3) teachers who teach classes
designed for students with limited English proficiency; (4)
teachers in their first, second, or third year of teaching;
and (5) teachers not classified in any of the other groups.
Within each teacher stratum, teachers were selected
systematically with equal probability. In 1993-94,
approximately 57,000 public school teachers and 11,500
private school teachers were sampled. In 1999- 2000, 56,300
public school teachers, 500 BIE teachers, 4,400 public
charter school teachers, and 10,800 private school teachers
were sampled. In 2003-04, 52,500 public school teachers, 700
BIE teachers, and 10,000 private school teachers were
sampled. In 2007-08, 47,440 public school teachers, 750 BIE
teachers, and 8,180 private school teachers were sampled.

This report focuses on responses from teachers. The overall
weighted response rate for public school teachers in 1993-94
was 88 percent. In 1999-2000, the overall weighted response
rates were 77 percent for public school teachers, and 86 and
72 percent for BIE and public charter school teachers,
respectively (which are included with public school teachers
for this report). In 2003-04, the overall weighted response
rates were 76 percent for public school teachers and 86
percent for BIE-funded school teachers (who are included with
public school teachers). In 2007-08, the overall weighted
response rates were 72 percent for public school teachers and
71 percent for BIE-funded school teachers (who are included
with public school teachers). For private school teachers,
the overall weighted response rates were 80 percent in
1993-94, 67 percent in 1999-2000, 70 percent in 2003-04, and
66 percent in 2007-08. Values were imputed for questionnaire
items that should have been answered but were not. For
additional information about SASS, contact: 

Kerry Gruber 
National Center for Education Statistics 
1990 K Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Telephone: (202) 502-7349 
E-mail: kerry.gruber@ed.gov 
Internet: http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/sass

School Survey on Crime and Safety (SSOCS) 

The School Survey on Crime and Safety (SSOCS) is managed by
the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) on behalf
of the U.S. Department of Education. SSOCS collects extensive
crime and safety data from principals and school
administrators of U.S. public schools. Data from this
collection can be used to examine the relationship between
school characteristics and violent and serious violent crimes
in primary schools, middle schools, high schools, and
combined schools. In addition, data from SSOCS can be used to
assess what crime prevention programs, practices, and
policies are used by schools. SSOCS has been conducted in
school years 1999-2000, 2003-04, 2005-06, and 2007-08. A
fifth collection is planned for school year 2009-10. 

SSOCS was developed by NCES and is funded by the Office of
Safe and Drug-Free Schools of the U.S. Department of
Education. The 2007-08 SSOCS (SSOCS:2008) was conducted by
the U.S. Census Bureau. Data collection began on February 25,
2008, when questionnaire packets were mailed to sampled
schools, and continued through June 18, 2008. A total of
2,560 public schools submitted usable questionnaires: 618
primary schools, 897 middle schools, 936 high schools, and
109 combined schools.

The sampling frame for SSOCS:2008 was constructed from the
public school universe file created for the 2007-08 Schools
and Staffing Survey (SASS). The SASS frame was derived from
the 2005-06 Common Core of Data (CCD) Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe data file. Certain types
of schools were excluded from the CCD file in order to meet
the sampling needs of SASS: those in U.S. outlying areas***
Footnote 52 "U.S. outlying areas" include the following:
America Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.***  and Puerto Rico,
overseas Department of Defense schools, newly closed schools,
home schools, and schools with a high grade of kindergarten
or lower. Additional schools were then excluded from the SASS
frame to meet the sampling needs of SSOCS: special education
schools, vocational schools, alternative schools (e.g., adult
continuing education schools and remedial schools), ungraded
schools, schools sponsored by the Bureau of Indian Education,
and other "nonregular" schools.*** Footnote 53 "Nonregular"
schools includes cases of schools-within-schools, which were
found in Minnesota and Georgia. ***  Charter schools were not
excluded. The use of the modified SASS sampling frame for
SSOCS:2008 is consistent with the 1999-2000 SSOCS
(SSOCS:2000) and the 2003-04 SSOCS (SSOCS:2004). The 2005-06
SSOCS (SSOCS:2006) deviated from this by using the CCD
directly as a sampling frame. This deviation was necessary
because SSOCS:2006 occurred between SASS collections.

A total of 3,484 schools were selected for the 2008 study. In
February 2008, questionnaires were mailed to school
principals, who were asked to complete the survey or to have
it completed by the person most knowledgeable about
discipline issues at the school. A total of 2,560 schools
completed the survey. The weighted overall response rate was
77.2 percent. A nonresponse bias analysis was conducted on
the 13 items with weighted item nonresponse rates below 85
percent. The detected bias was not deemed problematic enough
to suppress any items from the data file. Weights were
developed to adjust for the variable probabilities of
selection and differential nonresponse and can be used to
produce national estimates for regular public schools in the
2007-08 school year. For information on the 1999-2000,
2003-04, 2005-06, and 2007-08 iterations, see Neiman and
DeVoe (2009). For more information about the School Survey on
Crime and Safety, contact: 

Kathryn A. Chandler 
National Center for Education Statistics 
1990 K Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Telephone: (202) 502-7486 
E-mail: kathryn.chandler@ed.gov 
Internet: http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/ssoc

Accuracy of Estimates

The accuracy of any statistic is determined by the joint
effects of nonsampling and sampling errors. Both types of
error affect the estimates presented in this report. Several
sources can contribute to nonsampling errors. For example,
members of the population of interest are inadvertently
excluded from the sampling frame; sampled members refuse to
answer some of the survey questions (item nonresponse) or all
of the survey questions (questionnaire nonresponse); mistakes
are made during data editing, coding, or entry; the responses
that respondents provide differ from the "true" responses; or
measurement instruments such as tests or questionnaires fail
to measure the characteristics they are intended to measure.
Although nonsampling errors due to questionnaire and item
nonresponse can be reduced somewhat by the adjustment of
sample weights and imputation procedures, correcting
nonsampling errors or gauging the effects of these errors is
usually difficult. 

Sampling errors occur because observations are made on
samples rather than on entire populations. Surveys of
population universes are not subject to sampling errors.
Estimates based on a sample will differ somewhat from those
that would have been obtained by a complete census of the
relevant population using the same survey instruments,
instructions, and procedures. The standard error of a
statistic is a measure of the variation due to sampling; it
indicates the precision of the statistic obtained in a
particular sample. In addition, the standard errors for two
sample statistics can be used to estimate the precision of
the difference between the two statistics and to help
determine whether the difference based on the sample is large
enough so that it represents the population difference. 

Most of the data used in this report were obtained from
complex sampling designs rather than a simple random design.
The features of complex sampling require different techniques
to calculate standard errors than are used for data collected
using a simple random sampling. Therefore, calculation of
standard errors requires procedures that are markedly
different from the ones used when the data are from a simple
random sample. The Taylor series approximation technique or
the balanced repeated replication (BRR) method was used to
estimate most of the statistics and their standard errors in
this report.
 
Standard error calculation for data from the School Crime
Supplement was based on the Taylor series approximation
method using PSU and strata variables available from each
dataset. For statistics based on all years of NCVS data,
standard errors were derived from a formula developed by the
U.S. Census Bureau, which consists of three generalized
variance function (gvf) constant parameters that represent
the curve fitted to the individual standard errors calculated
using the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. 

The coefficient of variation (CV) represents the ratio of the
standard error to the mean. As an attribute of a
distribution, the CV is an important measure of the
reliability and accuracy of an estimate. In this report, the
CV was calculated for all estimates, and in cases where the
CV was at least 30 percent the estimates were noted with a !
symbol (interpret data with caution). In cases where the CV
was greater than 50 percent, the estimate was determined not
to meet reporting standards and was suppressed.

Statistical Procedures 

The comparisons in the text have been tested for statistical
significance to ensure that the differences are larger than
might be expected due to sampling variation. Unless otherwise
noted, all statements cited in the report are statistically
significant at the .05 level. Several test procedures were
used, depending upon the type of data being analyzed and the
nature of the statement being tested. The primary test
procedure used in this report was Student's t statistic,
which tests the difference between two sample estimates. The
t test formula was not adjusted for multiple comparisons. The
formula used to compute the t statistic is as follows:
 
(1)where E1 and E2 are the estimates to be compared and se1
and se2 are their corresponding standard errors. Note that
this formula is valid only for independent estimates. When
the estimates are not independent (for example, when
comparing a total percentage with that for a subgroup
included in the total), a covariance term (i.e., 2 * r * se1
* se2) must be subtracted from the denominator of the
formula: 
 
(2)where r is the correlation coefficient. Once the t value
was computed, it was compared with the published tables of
values at certain critical levels, called alpha levels. For
this report, an alpha value of .05 was used, which has a t
value of 1.96. If the t value was larger than 1.96, then the
difference between the two estimates is statistically
significant at the 95 percent level. 

A linear trend test was used when differences among
percentages were examined relative to ordered categories of a
variable, rather than the differences between two discrete
categories. This test allows one to examine whether, for
example, the percentage of students using drugs increased (or
decreased) over time or whether the percentage of students
who reported being physically attacked in school increased
(or decreased) with their age. Based on a regression with,
for example, student's age as the independent variable and
whether a student was physically attacked as the dependent
variable, the test involves computing the regression
coefficient (b) and its corresponding standard error (se).
The ratio of these two (b/se) is the test statistic t. If t
is greater than 1.96, the critical value for one comparison
at the .05 alpha level, the hypothesis that there is a linear
relationship between student's age and being physically
attacked is not rejected. 

Some comparisons among categories of an ordered variable with
three or more levels involved a test for a linear trend
across all categories, rather than a series of tests between
pairs of categories. In this report, when differences among
percentages were examined relative to a variable with ordered
categories, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test for
a linear relationship between the two variables. To do this,
ANOVA models included orthogonal linear contrasts
corresponding to successive levels of the independent
variable. The squares of the Taylorized standard errors (that
is, standard errors that were calculated by the Taylor series
method), the variance between the means, and the unweighted
sample sizes were used to partition the total sum of squares
into within- and between-group sums of squares. These were
used to create mean squares for the within- and between-group
variance components and their corresponding F statistics,
which were then compared with published values of F for a
significance level of .05. Significant values of both the
overall F and the F associated with the linear contrast term
were required as evidence of a linear relationship between
the two variables.

Appendix B: Glossary of Terms

General Terms

Crime -- Any violation of a statute or regulation or any act
that the government has determined is injurious to the
public, including felonies and misdemeanors. Such violation
may or may not involve violence, and it may affect
individuals or property. 

Incident -- A specific criminal act or offense involving one
or more victims and one or more offenders. 

Multistage sampling -- A survey sampling technique in which
there is more than one wave of sampling. That is, one sample
of units is drawn, and then another sample is drawn within
that sample. For example, at the first stage, a number of
Census blocks may be sampled out of all the Census blocks in
the United States. At the second stage, households are
sampled within the previously sampled Census blocks.
 
Prevalence -- The percentage of the population directly
affected by crime in a given period. This rate is based upon
specific information elicited directly from the respondent
regarding crimes committed against his or her person, against
his or her property, or against an individual bearing a
unique relationship to him or her. It is not based upon
perceptions and beliefs about, or reactions to, criminal
acts. 

School -- An education institution consisting of one or more
of grades K through 12. 

School crime -- Any criminal activity that is committed on
school property. 

School year -- The 12-month period of time denoting the
beginning and ending dates for school accounting purposes,
usually from July 1 through June 30. 

Stratification -- A survey sampling technique in which the
target population is divided into mutually exclusive groups
or strata based on some variable or variables (e.g.,
metropolitan area) and sampling of units occurs separately
within each stratum. 

Unequal probabilities -- A survey sampling technique in which
sampled units do not have the same probability of selection
into the sample. For example, the investigator may oversample
rural students in order to increase the sample sizes of rural
students. Rural students would then be more likely than other
students to be sampled.

Specific Terms Used in Various Surveys

School-Associated Violent Deaths Surveillance Study 

Homicide -- An act involving a killing of one person by
another resulting from interpersonal violence. 

School-associated violent death -- A homicide or suicide in
which the fatal injury occurred on the campus of a
functioning elementary or secondary school in the United
States, while the victim was on the way to or from regular
sessions at such a school, or while the victim was attending
or traveling to or from an official school-sponsored event.
Victims included nonstudents as well as students and staff
members. 

Suicide -- An act of taking one's own life voluntarily and
intentionally.

National Crime Victimization Survey 

Aggravated assault -- Attack or attempted attack with a
weapon, regardless of whether or not an injury occurs, and
attack without a weapon when serious injury results. 

At school (students)-- Inside the school building, on school
property (school parking area, play area, school bus, etc.),
or on the way to or from school.
 
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs)-- Geographic entities
defined by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for
use by federal statistical agencies in collecting,
tabulating, and publishing federal statistics.

Rape -- Forced sexual intercourse including both
psychological coercion as well as physical force. Forced
sexual intercourse means vaginal, anal, or oral penetration
by the offender(s). Includes attempts and verbal threats of
rape. This category also includes incidents where the
penetration is from a foreign object, such as a bottle.
 
Robbery -- Completed or attempted theft, directly from a
person, of property or cash by force or threat of force, with
or without a weapon, and with or without injury. 

Rural -- A place not located inside the Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA). This category includes a variety of
localities, ranging from sparsely populated rural areas to
cities with populations of less than 50,000.
 
Serious violent crime -- Rape, sexual assault, robbery, or
aggravated assault. 

Sexual assault -- A wide range of victimizations, separate
from rape or attempted rape. These crimes include attacks or
attempted attacks generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between the victim and offender. Sexual assault may or may
not involve force and includes such things as grabbing or
fondling. Sexual assault also includes verbal threats. 

Simple assault -- Attack without a weapon resulting either in
no injury, minor injury, or an undetermined injury requiring
less than 2 days of hospitalization. Also includes attempted
assault without a weapon. 

Suburban -- A county or counties containing a central city,
plus any contiguous counties that are linked socially and
economically to the central city. On the data tables,
suburban areas are categorized as those portions of
metropolitan areas situated "outside central cities." 

Theft -- Completed or attempted theft of property or cash
without personal contact. 

Urban -- The largest city (or grouping of cities) in an MSA. 

Victimization -- A crime as it affects one individual person or
household. For personal crimes, the number of victimizations
is equal to the number of victims involved. The number of
victimizations may be greater than the number of incidents
because more than one person may be victimized during an
incident. 

Victimization rate -- A measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specific population group.
 
Violent crime -- Rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated
assault, or simple assault.
 
School Crime Supplement 

At school -- In the school building, on school property, on a
school bus, or going to or from school. 

Gang -- Street gangs, fighting gangs, crews, or something
else. Gangs may use common names, signs, symbols, or colors.
All gangs, whether or not they are involved in violent or
illegal activity, are included. 

Serious violent crime -- Rape, sexual assault, robbery, or
aggravated assault. 

Total victimization -- Combination of violent victimization
and theft. If a student reported an incident of either type,
he or she is counted as having experienced any victimization.
If the student reported having experienced both, he or she is
counted once under "total victimization."

Violent crime -- Rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated
assault, or simple assault. 

Youth Risk Behavior Survey 

Illegal drugs -- Examples of illegal drugs were marijuana,
cocaine, inhalants, steroids, or prescription drugs without a
doctor's permission, heroin, and methamphetamines.
 
On school property -- On school property is included in the
question wording, but was not defined for respondents. 

Rural school -- A school located outside a Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA). 

Suburban school -- A school located inside an MSA, but
outside the "central city." 

Urban school -- A school located inside an MSA and inside the
"central city." 

Weapon -- Examples of weapons appearing in the questionnaire
include guns, knives, and clubs.
 
Schools and Staffing Survey 

City -- A territory inside an urbanized area (defined as
densely settled "cores" with populations of 50,000 or more of
Census-defined blocks with adjacent densely settled
surrounding areas) and inside a principal city (defined as a
city that contains the primary population and economic center
of a metropolitan statistical area, which, in turn, is
defined as one or more contiguous counties that have a "core"
area with a large population nucleus and adjacent communities
that are highly integrated economically or socially with the
core). 

Elementary school -- A school in which the lowest grade is
less than or equal to grade 6 and the highest grade is less
than or equal to grade 8. 

Elementary school teachers -- An elementary school teacher is
one who, when asked for the grades taught, checked: (1) only
"ungraded" and was designated as an elementary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; (2) 6th grade or
lower or "ungraded," and no grade higher than 6th; (3) 6th
grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, and reported a
primary assignment of prekindergarten, kindergarten, or
general elementary; (4) 7th and 8th grades only, and reported
a primary assignment of prekindergarten, kindergarten, or
general elementary; (5) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or
higher, and reported a primary assignment of special
education and was designated as an elementary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; or (6) 7th and 8th
grades only, and reported a primary assignment of special
education and was designated as an elementary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school. A teacher at a
school that has grade 6 or lower or one that is "ungraded"
with no grade higher than the 8th. 

Instructional level -- Instructional levels divide teachers
into elementary or secondary based on a combination of the
grades taught, main teaching assignment, and the structure of
the teacher's class(es). Those with only ungraded classes are
categorized as elementary level teachers if their main
assignment is early childhood/prekindergarten or elementary,
or they teach either special education in a self-contained
classroom or an elementary enrichment class. All other
teachers with ungraded classes are classified as secondary
level. Among teachers with regularly graded classes, in
general, elementary level teachers teach any of grades
prekindergarten through 5th; report an early
childhood/prekindergarten, elementary, self-contained special
education, or elementary enrichment main assignment; or are
those whose preponderance of grades taught are kindergarten
through 6th. In general, secondary-level teachers instruct
any of grades 7 through 12 but usually no grade lower than
5th. They also teach more of grades 7 through 12 than lower
level grades. 

Rural -- A territory outside any urbanized area (defined as
densely settled "cores" with populations of 50,000 or more of
Census-defined blocks with adjacent densely settled
surrounding areas) or urban cluster (defined as densely
settled "cores" with populations between 25,000 and 50,000 of
Census-defined blocks with adjacent densely settled
surrounding areas). 

Secondary school -- A school in which the lowest grade is
greater than or equal to grade 7 and the highest grade is
less than or equal to grade 12. 

Secondary school teachers -- A secondary school teacher is
one who, when asked for the grades taught, checked: (1)
"ungraded" and was designated as a secondary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; (2) 6th grade or
lower and 7th grade or higher, and reported a primary
assignment other than prekindergarten, kindergarten, or
general elementary; (3) 9th grade or higher, or 9th grade or
higher and "ungraded"; (4) 7th and 8th grades only, and
reported a primary assignment other than prekindergarten,
kindergarten, general elementary, or special education; (5)
7th and 8th grades only, and reported a primary assignment of
special education and was designated as a secondary teacher
on the list of teachers provided by the school; or (6) 6th
grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, or 7th and 8th grades
only, and was not categorized above as either elementary or
secondary. 

Suburban   A territory outside a principal city (defined as a
city that contains the primary population and economic center
of a metropolitan statistical area, which, in turn, is
defined as one or more contiguous counties that have a "core"
area with a large population nucleus and adjacent communities
that are highly integrated economically or socially with the
core) and inside an urbanized area (defined as densely
settled "cores" with populations of 50,000 or more of
Census-defined blocks with adjacent densely settled
surrounding areas). 

Town -- A territory inside an urban cluster (defined as
densely settled "cores" with populations between 25,000 and
50,000 of Census-defined blocks with adjacent densely settled
surrounding areas). 

School Survey on Crime and Safety 

At school/at your school --I ncludes activities that happened
in school buildings, on school grounds, on school buses, and
at places that held school-sponsored events or activities.
Unless otherwise specified, respondents were instructed to
report on activities that occurred during normal school hours
or when school activities/events were in session.
 
Combined schools -- Schools that include all combinations of
grades, including K-12 schools, other than primary, middle,
and high schools (see definitions for these school levels
later in this section).
 
Cult or extremist group -- A group that espouses radical
beliefs and practices, which may include a religious
component, that are widely seen as threatening the basic
values and cultural norms of society at large. 

Firearm/explosive device -- Any weapon that is designed to
(or may readily be converted to) expel a projectile by the
action of an explosive. This includes guns, bombs, grenades,
mines, rockets, missiles, pipe bombs, or similar devices
designed to explode and capable of causing bodily harm or
property damage. 

Gang -- An ongoing loosely organized association of three or
more persons, whether formal or informal, that has a common
name, signs, symbols, or colors, whose members engage, either
individually or collectively, in violent or other forms of
illegal behavior.
 
High school--  A school in which the lowest grade is not lower
than grade 9 and the highest grade is not higher than grade
12. 

Hate crime -- A criminal offense or threat against a person,
property, or society that is motivated, in whole or in part,
by the offender's bias against a race, color, national
origin, ethnicity, gender, religion, disability, or sexual
orientation. 

Insubordination -- A deliberate and inexcusable defiance of
or refusal to obey a school rule, authority, or a reasonable
order. It includes but is not limited to direct defiance of
school authority, failure to attend assigned detention or
on-campus supervision, failure to respond to a call slip, and
physical or verbal intimidation/abuse. 

Intimidation -- To frighten, compel, or deter by actual or
implied threats. It includes bullying and sexual harassment.
(Intimidation was not defined in the front of the
questionnaire in 2005-06.)
 
Middle school -- A school in which the lowest grade is not
lower than grade 4 and the highest grade is not higher than
grade 9. 

Physical attack or fight -- An actual and intentional
touching or striking of another person against his or her
will, or the intentional causing of bodily harm to an
individual. 

Primary school -- A school in which the lowest grade is not
higher than grade 3 and the highest grade is not higher than
grade 8. 

Rape -- Forced sexual intercourse (vaginal, anal, or oral
penetration). Includes penetration from a foreign object. 

Robbery -- The taking or attempting to take anything of value
that is owned by another person or organization, under
confrontational circumstances by force or threat of force or
violence and/or by putting the victim in fear. A key
difference between robbery and theft/larceny is that a threat
or battery is involved in robbery. 

Serious violent incidents -- Include rape, sexual battery
other than rape, physical attacks or fights with a weapon,
threats of physical attack with a weapon, and robbery with or
without a weapon. 

Sexual battery-- An incident that includes threatened rape,
fondling, indecent liberties, child molestation, or sodomy.
Principals were instructed that classification of these
incidents should take into consideration the age and
developmentally appropriate behavior of the offenders. 

Sexual harassment -- Unsolicited, offensive behavior that
inappropriately asserts sexuality over another person. The
behavior may be verbal or nonverbal. 

Specialized school -- A school that is specifically for
students who were referred for disciplinary reasons. The
school may also have students who were referred for other
reasons. The school may be at the same location as the
respondent's school. 

Theft/larceny -- Taking things valued at over $10 without
personal confrontation. Specifically, the unlawful taking of
another person's property without personal confrontation,
threat, violence, or bodily harm. Included are pocket
picking, stealing purse or backpack (if left unattended or no
force was used to take it from owner), theft from a building,
theft from a motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts or
accessories, theft of bicycles, theft from vending machines,
and all other types of thefts. 

City -- As collected by the Common Core of Data and appended
to the SSOCS data ?le, city includes territories inside an
urbanized area and inside a principal city and includes large
cities (populations of 250,000 or more), midsize cities
(population less than 250,000 and greater than or equal to
100,000) and small cities (population less than 100,000).

Suburb -- As collected by the Common Core of Data and appended
to the SSOCS data file, suburb includes territories outside a
principal city and inside an urbanized area and includes
large suburbs (populations of 250,000 or more), midsize
suburbs (population less than 250,000 and greater than or
equal to 100,000) and small suburbs (population less than
100,000).

Town -- As collected by the Common Core of Data and appended
to the SSOCS data file, town includes fringe towns
(territories inside an urban cluster that is less than or
equal to 10 miles from an urbanized area), distant towns
(territories inside an urban cluster that is more than 10
miles and less than or equal to 35 miles from an urbanized
area), and remote towns (territories which are inside an
urban cluster that is more than 35 miles from an urbanized
area).

Rural -- As collected by the Common Core of Data and appended
to the SSOCS data file, rural includes fringe rural areas
(Census-defined rural territory that is less than or equal to
5 miles from an urbanized area, as well as rural territory
that is less than or equal to 2.5 miles from an urban
cluster), distant rural areas (Census-defined rural territory
that is more than 5 miles but less than or equal to 25 miles
from an urbanized area, as well as rural territory that is
more than 2.5 miles but less than 10 miles from an urban
cluster), and remote rural areas (Census-defined rural
territory that is more than 25 miles from an urbanized area,
as well as rural territory that is more than 10 miles from an
urban cluster).

Vandalism -- The willful damage or destruction of school
property, including bombing, arson, graffiti, and other acts
that cause property damage. Includes damage caused by
computer hacking.
 
Violent incidents -- Include rape, sexual battery other than
rape, physical attacks or fights with or without a weapon,
threats of physical attack with or without a weapon, and
robbery with or without a weapon. 

Weapon -- Any instrument or object used with the intent to
threaten, injure, or kill. Includes look-alikes if they are
used to threaten others.


12/7/2009 JER 12:31pm




