U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Justice Expenditure and Employment in the United
States, 2001


May 2004, NCJ 202792



---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jeeus01.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#jee
---------------------------------------------------------------
                                     
Lynn Bauer
BJS Statistician
                                     
Steven D. Owens
Chief, Public Finance Analysis Branch
U.S. Census Bureau
                                     
In 2001 the United States spent a record $167 billion for 
police protection, corrections, and judicial and legal
activities. The Nation's expenditure for operations and 
outlays for the justice system increased 366% from almost
$36 billion in 1982 (a 165% increase in constant dollars).     
                                     
Local governments funded nearly half of all direct justice 
system expenses.  Another 35% of direct justice funding
came from the States. Criminal and civil justice expenditures 
comprised approximately 7% of all State and local public 
expenditures in 2001.***Footnote 1: For definitions of terms,
see page 8.*** Compared to justice expenditures, State and 
local governments in the United States spent almost 4 times 
as much on education, almost twice as much on public welfare,
and a roughly equal amount on hospitals and healthcare.
                                     
In March of 2001 the Nation's justice system employed nearly 
2.3 million persons, with a total March payroll of $8.1 billion. 
More than half of all justice employees worked at the local 
level (63% of whom worked in police protection). A third were 
State employees (64% in corrections). The remaining 9% were 
Federal employees, of whom more than half worked in police
protection.

Data presented in this report are derived from the Justice 
Expenditure and Employment Extracts, compiled from the U.S. 
Census Bureau's Annual Government Finance Survey and Annual
Survey of Public Employment.  The extracts present public 
expenditure and employment data pertaining to justice
activities in the United States, including police, judicial 
and legal services, and correctional activities.
                                     
Trends in spending, by level of
government

Since 1982 total justice expenditures more than quadrupled 
from nearly $36 billion to over $167 billion, a 366% 
increase. The average annual increase for all levels of 
government between 1982 and 2001 was 8%. 

Between 1982 and 2001, per capita expenditure, including 
Federal, State, and local governments across justice
functions, increased from $158 to $586, approximately 271%. 
During the same time period, corrections had the largest 
increase from $39 to $200 (over 400%) per U.S. resident. Per 
capita expenditure for judicial and legal services increased 
from $34 to $132 (288%) followed by police protection, $84
to $254 or 202%.

The total justice expenditure reflected the Federal Government's 
expanded role as it had a larger average annual increase in
justice spending from 1982 to 2001 (11%) than the State and 
local governments (9% and 7%, respectively). 

Federal intergovernmental spending on justice activities rose 
from $189 million in 1982 to more than $5.2 billion in 2001. 
This increase was due to the creation of several large grant 
programs in the 1980's and 1990's. (Sources of additional 
information about the grant programs are listed on page 10.) 

Between 1982 and 2001 the Federal Government increased its 
expenditures on police protection by 494%, judicial and legal
services by 636%, and corrections by 861%. The State and local 
governments had smaller percent increases in all functions.

The average annual increase was highest for corrections, ranging 
from a 9% increase by the local governments to a 13% increase by
the Federal Government.  

Police protection experienced the lowest annual increase. Among 
State and local governments the average annual increase for
police protection was about 7%. The Federal Government 
expenditure for police protection increased about 10% annually.

-----------------------------------------
Accounting for inflation

The Consumer Price Index (CPI), reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, is a commonly used measure of inflation.*** Footnote 
1: For more information about the CPI see the Bureau of Labor
Statistics website: <http://www.bls.gov/>, Consumer Price Index
for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) table.*** According to the CPI, 
the average price level for all urban consumers increased 177.1% 
between the base years 1982-84 and 2001; the annual average 
increase was 3%.

To maintain consistency in reporting, the expenditure data 
discussed in this Bulletin are not adjusted for inflation.
However, expenditure on all justice functions and among all 
levels of government increased at a rate greater than 
inflation. For example, if increases in total justice 
expenditure were limited to the rate of inflation (177.1%) 
after 1982, expenditure in 2001 would have been approximately 
$63.5 billion ($35.8B x 177.1%), as opposed to the actual 
$167.1 billion.  

Justice expenditure relative to the Gross Domestic Product(GDP)

A common way to express the size and growth of government 
functions is the ratio of expenditure to the GDP or "percent 
GDP."***Footnote 2: For more information about the GDP see the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis website: <http://www.bea.gov/>.*** 
In 2001 the ratio of justice expenditure to GDP was $167.1
billion/ $10,082.2 billion (1.66%). In 1982 the percent GDP 
was 1.10%.
-------------------------------------------

Distribution of direct expenditure by level
of government and activity

Within each category of justice activity, the distribution 
of expenditure by level of government reflects the different
responsibilities of each level:

*  Overall, local police spending represented 30% of the 
Nation's total justice expenditure, and State corrections
accounted for the second largest portion, 23%.
*  Police protection is primarily a local responsibility; 
accordingly, local governments spent 70% of the total 
police protection expenditure in the country in 2001.
*  Corrections is primarily a State responsibility, and 
the State governments accounted for 63% of the Nation's 
corrections expenditure.
*  Judicial and legal services in the United States were 
funded primarily by local (42%)and State (36%) governments.

The Federal Government spent the most on intergovernmental 
grants-in-aid, shared revenues, and amounts paid to other 
governments for services performed. About half of the Federal
intergovernmental expenditure was for police protection, much
of which were law enforcement grants. About half of the State 
and local intergovernmental expenditures were for corrections. 

--------------------------------------
The justice share of State and local expenditure

Seven cents of every dollar spent by State and local governments 
in 2001 was for justice activities. Among all State and local
expenditures, 3% was for police protection, nearly 3% for 
corrections, and 2% for judicial and legal services.

By comparison, 30% of State and local government spending went 
to education, 14% to public welfare, 7% to health and hospitals, 
and over 4% to interest on debt.

From 1977 to 2001 total State and local expenditures for all 
functions increased 485%.
*  police protection rose 470% 
*  corrections rose 1101%
*  judicial and legal rose 1766%.

Among some other government functions during the same period --
*  education increased 448%
*  hospitals and healthcare increased 482%
*  interest on debt increased 543%
*  public welfare increased 617%.
------------------------------------------

Distribution of employment by level of
government and activity

In March 2001 the Nation's civil and criminal justice system 
employed nearly 2.3 million persons, with a total March payroll
of $8.1 billion. Relative to the entire employed population 
in 2001, approximately 2% of the Nation's labor force worked 
in the justice system. (For more detailed information on the 
national labor force, see <http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat1.pdf>.) 

Local governments accounted for more justice employment than 
the Federal and State governments combined. Of all the Nation's 
justice employees, 59% were engaged in local justice activities.

The State and local governments employed over 91% of all justice 
system workers. The Federal Government employed almost 9% of all 
justice system employees.

The distribution of corrections employees reflects State 
government dominance in that sector   approximately 63% of 
corrections employees worked for State governments, followed 
by 32% at the local level and 4% at the Federal level.

As law enforcement is primarily the responsibility of local 
governments, 80% of the Nation's police employees were
working at the local level. State governments employed 10% 
of police protection workers; the Federal Government, 10%.

Throughout the justice system, approximately 59% of expenditures 
were for payrolls (not shown in table).

The Federal Government spent less on payrolls relative to total 
expenditure ($12 billion out of $30 billion, or 41%) than did
the State and local governments (47% and 66% respectively).

Police protection was the activity with the highest percentage 
of expenditure going to payrolls (66%). The local governments in
particular spent 71% of their expenditures for police protection
on salaries. 

The activity with the lowest percentage of expenditure for 
payrolls was corrections nearly (50% for all governments).

Employment by State

In total, 13% of State and local public employees worked in the 
justice system. Nevada had the highest percentage of justice 
employees relative to employees for other government functions 
(17%), followed by Florida. The States with the lowest percentage 
of justice employees were West Virginia and Vermont (less than
8% of all employees). 

California had the most State and local employees (1.7 million) 
and the most employees in the justice system (over 233,600). 
Vermont was the State with the fewest employees in State and 
local government for justice (fewer than 3,000) and for all 
functions (approximately 37,000).

----------------------------------
Expansion of Nation's justice system, 1982-2001 

The increase in justice expenditures over nearly 20 years 
reflects the expansion of the Nation's justice system. For 
example, in 1982 the justice system employed approximately 
1.27 million persons; in 2001 it reached over 2.2 million. 

Police protection

One indicator of police workload, the FBI's arrest estimates 
for State and local police agencies, grew from 12 million in
1982 to an estimated 13.7 million in 2001.***Footnote 1: Crime
in the United States, 1982 (FBI, 1983) and 2001 (FBI, 2002).***
The number of employees in police protection increased from 
approximately 724,000 to over 1 million. 

Judicial and legal 

The judicial and legal workload, including civil and criminal 
cases, prosecutor   functions, and public defender services,
also expanded during this period. Cases of all kinds (criminal, 
civil, domestic, juvenile, and traffic) filed in the nearly
16,000 general and limited jurisdiction State courts went from 
about 86 million to 92.8 million in the 18-year period, 1984-
2001.***Footnote 2: Examining the Work of State Courts, 2002:
A National Perspective from the Court Statistics Project, 
National Center for State Courts.***  The juvenile court 
workload also expanded from 1 million delinquency cases in 1982 
to nearly 1.7 million in 2000.***Footnote 3: OJJDP Statistical
Briefing Book, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, 2000 <http://www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/index.
html>.***  The total of judicial and legal employees grew about 
97% to over 488,000 persons in 2001.  

Corrections

The total number of State and Federal inmates grew from 488,000 
in 1985 to over 1.3 million in 2001.***Footnote 4: Sourcebook of
Criminal Justice Statistics, 2001 (table 6.12),
<http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook>.*** The number of local jail 
inmates tripled from approximately 207,000 in 1982 to over
631,000 in 2001.***Footnote 5: Sourcebook of Criminal Justice
Statistics, 2001 (6.1), <http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook>.*** 
Adults on probation increased from over 1.3 to about 4 million 
persons.***Footnote 5: Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics,
2001 (table 6.1), <http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook>.*** Overall, 
corrections employment more than doubled from nearly 300,000 to 
over 747,000 during this period.
---------------------------------------

Per capita justice employment of all State and local governments 
was about 70 per 10,000 resident population in 2001. Per capita 
employment was lowest in West Virginia, with 42 full-time
equivalent justice employees per 10,000 residents, and highest 
in the District of Columbia, with nearly 119 employees per
10,000 residents. 

Vermont had the fewest State and local sworn police per capita, 
with approximately 15 per 10,000 residents. The District of 
Columbia employed about 62 officers per 10,000 residents. The 
District of Columbia also had the highest per capita rate of 
employment of corrections employees (35) followed by Texas 
and New York (nearly 33 State and local officers per 10,000
residents). Maine had the fewest State and local employees 
in judicial and legal services (7) while New Jersey had the
most (25 per 10,000 residents).

Definition of terms

Expenditure includes only external cash payments made from any 
source of funds, including any payments financed from borrowing, 
fund balances, intergovernmental revenue, and other current 
revenue. It excludes any intragovernmental transfers and
noncash transactions, such as the provision of meals or housing 
of employees. It also excludes retirement of debt, investment 
in securities, extensions of loans, or agency transactions. 
Total expenditures for all government functions do include 
interest payments on debt, but the justice expenditure data 
do not.

Expenditure's two major categories:

*  Direct expenditure is all expenditure except that classified 
as intergovernmental. It includes "direct current expenditure"
(salaries, wages, fees, and commissions and purchases of 
supplies, materials, and contractual services) and "capital 
outlays" (construction and purchase of equipment, land, and 
existing structures). Capital outlays are included for the year 
when the direct expenditure is made, regardless of how the
funds are raised (for example, by bond issue) or when they are 
paid back.

*  Intergovernmental expenditure is the sum of payments from 
one government to another, including grants-in-aid, shared
revenues, payments in lieu of taxes, and amounts for services 
performed by one government for another on a reimbursable or
cost-sharing basis (for example, payments by one government to 
another for boarding prisoners). It excludes amounts paid to 
other governments for purchase of commodities, property, or 
utility services.

Employees are all persons on government payrolls during the 
pay period including March 15, 2001. They include all paid
officials and persons on paid leave, but exclude unpaid 
officials, persons on unpaid leave, pensioners, and 
contractors.

Full-time employees are all persons employed on a full-time 
basis, including all full-time temporary or seasonal workers
who were employed during this pay period.

---------------------------------------
Components of total expenditure

The expenditure data discussed in this Bulletin include direct
expenditure and intergovernmental expenditure. Intergovernmental 
expenditure is the sum of payments from one government to another, 
including grants-in-aid, shared revenues, and amounts for
services performed by one government for another on a 
reimbursable or cost-sharing basis.   

The three levels of government in the United States (Federal, 
State, and local)have varying responsibilities for justice
activities, and funds are often passed between governments to 
reflect these responsibilities. For example, Federal
intergovernmental expenditures include grants to States, and 
State direct expenditures will include those grants.  

Therefore, to avoid double counting the sum of Federal, State, 
and local intergovernmental expenditures, the direct expenditure 
is used to calculate total expenditure for all governments.
For 2001, the total direct expenditure for all governments was 
over $167 billion.
-----------------------------------------

Full-time equivalent employment (FTE)is a statistical measure 
that estimates the number of full-time employees that could 
have been employed if the reported number of hours worked by 
part-time employees had been worked by full-time employees. 
This statistic is calculated separately for each function of
a government by dividing the "part-time hours paid" by the 
standard number of hours for full-time employees in the 
particular government and then adding the resulting quotient 
to the number of full-time employees.  

Payroll is the gross 1-month payroll before deductions and 
includes salaries, wages, fees, and commissions paid to 
employees as defined above for March 2001.

Police protection is the function of enforcing the law, 
preserving order, and apprehending those who violate the 
law, whether these activities are performed by a city police
department, sheriff's department, State police, or Federal 
law enforcement agency such as the FBI or the Drug Enforcement
Administration. Private security police are outside the scope 
of the survey.

Judicial and legal services includes all civil and criminal 
courts and activities associated with courts such as law 
libraries, grand juries, petit juries, medical and social 
service activities, court reporters, judicial councils,
bailiffs, and probate functions. It also includes the civil 
and criminal justice activities of the attorneys general, 
district attorneys, State's attorneys, and their variously 
named equivalents and corporation counsels, solicitors, and 
legal departments with various names. It excludes legal units
of noncriminal justice agencies, whose functions may be 
performed by a legal services department in other 
jurisdictions (such as a county counsel).

Corrections involves the community supervision, confinement, 
and rehabilitation of adults and juveniles convicted of offenses
against the law and the confinement of persons suspected of a 
crime awaiting trial or adjudication. It includes the costs of
operation and employment for jails, prisons, probation, parole, 
pardon, and correctional administration. Data for institutions 
with authority to hold prisoners beyond arraignment (usually 48 
hours or more) are included in this sector. Data for lockups or 
"tanks" holding prisoners less than 48 hours are included in 
"police protection."

Methodology

The justice data in this report include the expenditures and 
employment of the Federal Government, the State governments, 
and a sample of county, municipal, and township governments.  
Unless otherwise noted, data for total governmental functions 
and non-justice governmental functions also include the 
expenditures of special districts and school districts, which 
generally do not have justice functions.

This report is based on a compilation of data from the U.S. 
Census Bureau's annual surveys of governmental finances and
employment.  The survey sample was selected from the 1997 
Census of Local Governments and consists of large units of
government (including all 50 States) sampled with certainty 
and smaller units selected with a probability proportional 
to the unit's expenditure.  The total number of local 
governments in the finance sample was 7,002, and the number 
of local governments in the employment sample was 10,574.

Certain limitations reflect the fact that the surveys from 
which this Bulletin was extracted are not designed to obtain 
data on specific justice functions. The sampling variability, 
or "standard error," for each of the justice activities is 
likely to be larger than for the major categories that the 
surveys were designed to estimate. Similarly, the standard 
error is likely to be greater for local governments than for 
State-local aggregates which are sampled in part with 
certainty.  Specific standard errors can be found on the
Census Bureau's website (<http://www.census.gov>).
  
Differences in functional responsibilities from State to State 
and government to government can affect the comparability of
expenditure and employment data. Readers should be generally 
cautious in comparing governmental expenditures because of 
this variation in the division of responsibilities.  

The data in this report differ in some cases from those 
previously published in the Census Bureau's finance and 
employment survey reports because of definitional
differences and the more intensive review procedures and 
data refinements used for this compilation.  

Data on State and local justice system per capita expenditure 
by State and activity were not collected in 2001. These data 
will be available in 2002. 

The data here differ from other BJS series which collect 
agency-based employment and expenditure data because of
collection methods, units of analysis, and data collection 
purposes.
These include --

Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics, 
Prosecutors in State Courts and various court statistics
series, The Census of Local Jails, The Census of State and 
Federal Correctional Facilities, and the report State Prison 
Expenditures, 1996.

Financial data for the Federal Government were extracted from 
The Budget of the United States Government, FY 2003, Appendix. 
The historical finance data may differ slightly from the 
justice expenditure data found in the Expenditure and
Employment Extracts because of definitional differences.

Federal Government civilian employment data were obtained from 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. Statistics for State
and local governments were obtained by a mail survey including 
all State departments, agencies, and institutions, and a local 
central reporting office supplemented by special mailings.

Trend comparisons between the data in this report and reports 
covering data for 1971-79, 1985, 1988, 1990, and 1997 from the 
Justice Assistance Data Survey (JADS) are complicated by 
differences in methodology. These differences are described in 
the BJS reports for these years, and on the BJS website. In 
making trend comparisons, users should limit their analysis to 
one of the two sources:
*  long-term trends for 1971-79, 1985,
1988,1990, and 1997 from the JADS
*  recent year-to-year trends from the
1980-2001 Justice Expenditure and
Employment Extracts data.
                                     
A more detailed description of the survey methodology (including 
sample design and sampling errors) can be found in the Justice 
Expenditure and Employment Extracts at <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs>.

Intergovernmental spending on justice activities through grant 
programs Grant programs affecting expenditure for justice, as 
discussed on page 2, include the following:

*  Administration for Children and Families within the 
Department of Health and Human Services, which gives 
grants to States for non-custodial child support
enforcement (See <http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cse>.)

*  Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program 
(See <http://www.cops.usdoj.gov>.)

*  Edward Byrne Memorial State and Local Law Enforcement 
Assistance Programs (See <http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/BJA/grant/byrne.html>.)

*  Local Law Enforcement Block Grant program. 
(See <http://www.ojp.usdoj. gov/BJA/grant/llebg_app.html>.)

------------------------------------------
This report and others from the Bureau
of Justice Statistics are available
through the Internet --

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

The data from the Justice Expenditure
and Employment Extracts are available
from the National Archive of Criminal
Justice Data, maintained by the
Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research at the University
of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960. The
archive may also be accessed through
the BJS Internet site.
---------------------------------------

---------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department of
Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection
programs.

Lynn Bauer wrote this report under the
supervision of Steven K. Smith. Statistician
Intern Kinny Jeng provided data analysis
assistance. Steven W. Perry provided statistical 
review. Tom Hester produced and edited the 
report. Jayne Robinson prepared the report for
publication.

The data extraction, editing, and tabulation
for the 2001 Justice Expenditure and
Employment Extracts were performed at the
U.S. Census Bureau by Steven D. Owens.

May 2004, NCJ 202792                A
-----------------------------------------

End of file
04/19/04 ih