U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Justice Expenditure and Employment in the 
United States, 2003

April 2006, NCJ 212260


-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jeeus03.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may 
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cjee
--------------------------------------------------------

Kristen A. Hughes
BJS Statistician

------------------------------------------
Highlights

Expenditure for justice functions varies
by level of government
In fiscal year 2003 States spent the most
–- $39.2 billion for corrections. 

Local governments spent the most for police 
functions -- $57.5 billion Justice employees 
by level of government The total number of 
justice employees grew 86% between 1982 and 
2003 with the Federal Government having the 
largest percentage increase --168%
------------------------------------------

In 2003 the United States spent a record
$185 billion for police protection,
corrections, and judicial and legal
activities. Expenditures for operating the
Nation's justice system increased from
almost $36 billion in 1982 to over $185
billion in 2003, an increase of 418%.

Local governments funded nearly half of
all justice system expenses. Another 33%
of direct justice funding came from the
States. 

Total justice expenditures comprised
approximately 7.2% of all State and local
public expenditures in 2003. Compared to
justice expenditures, State and local
governments continued to spend almost 4
times as much on education, twice as much
on public welfare, and roughly an equal
amount on hospitals and healthcare.

In March 2003 the Nation's justice system
employed nearly 2.4 million persons, with
a total March payroll of approximately $9
billion. More than half of all justice
employees worked at the local level (58%),
a third were State employees (31%), and
the remaining 11% worked at the Federal
level.

Data presented in this report are derived
from the Justice Expenditure and Employment 
Extracts, compiled from the U.S. Census 
Bureau's Annual Government Finance Survey 
and Annual Survey of Public Employment. 

The extracts present public expenditure and 
employment data pertaining to justice 
activities in the United States, including 
police protection, judicial and legal 
services, and correctional activities. (For 
definition of terms, see page 8).

Trends in spending by level of 
government

Between 1982 and 2003, per capita expenditure, 
including Federal, State, and local governments 
across justice functions, increased from $158 
to $638, over 300%. During the same time
period:  

* Correction expenditures increased 436%,
from $39 to $209 per U.S. resident.

* Judicial and legal expenditures increased 
320%, from $34 to $143.

* Police protection expenditures increased
240%, from $84 to $286.

Since 1982 total direct expenditures increased 
more than five-fold from nearly $36 billion to 
over $285 billion, a 418% increase. The average 
annual increase between 1982 and 2003 was 
nearly 8%.

The total justice expenditure reflected
the Federal Government's expanded role as
it had a larger average annual increase in
justice spending from 1982 to 2003 (10%)
than State and local governments (8% and
7% respectively).

Federal intergovernmental spending on justice 
activities rose from $189 million in 1982 to 
more than $5.1 billion in 2003. This increase 
was due primarily to the creation of several 
large law enforcement related grant programs 
in the 1980's and 1990's.***Footnote 1: For 
detailed information on Federal Government 
grants and payments to State and local
governments see U.S. Census Bureau
publication Federal Aid to States for
Fiscal Year 2003 at http://www.census.gov/
prod/abs/fas.html***

Between 1982 and 2003, the Federal Government 
increased expenditures on police protection 
by 708%, judicial and legal services by 573%, 
and corrections by 925%. State and local 
governments had smaller percent increases in 
all functions.

Trends by function

The average annual increase was highest
for corrections, ranging from a 9%
increase by the local governments to an
11% increase by the Federal Government.
Police protection experienced the lowest
average annual increase. Among State and
local governments the average annual
increase for police protection was about
6.5%. The Federal Government expenditure
for police protection has increased 10%
annually.

------------------------------------------
Accounting for inflation

The Consumer Price Index (CPI), reported
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, is a
commonly used measure of inflation.
**For more information about the Bureau of
Labor Statistics website: <http://www.bls.
gov>.**  According to the CPI, the average 
price level for all urban consumers 
increased 184% between the base years 1982-
84 and 2003; the annual average increase 
was 2.3%.

To maintain consistency in reporting, the
expenditure data discussed in this Bulletin 
are not adjusted for inflation. However, 
expenditure on all justice functions and 
among all levels of government increased at 
a rate greater than inflation. For example, 
if increases in total justice expenditure 
were limited to the rate of inflation (184%) 
after 1982, expenditures in 2003 would have 
been approximately $65.7 billion ($35.7B x
184%), as opposed to the actual $185.5
billion.

Justice expenditure relative to the Gross
Domestic Product(GDP)

A common way to express the size and growth 
of government functions is the ratio of 
expenditure to the GDP or "percent GDP."
**For more information about the GDP, see
the Bureau of Economic Analysis website: 
<http://www.bea.gov>.** In 2003, the ratio 
of justice expenditure to GDP was $185
billion/$10,182 billion (1.8%). In 1982
the percent GDP was 1.1%. 
------------------------------------------

Distribution of direct expenditure by
level of government and activity

Within each category of justice activity,
the distribution of expenditure by level
of government reflects the different
responsibilities of each level: 

* Overall, local police spending represented 
45% of the Nation's total justice expenditure, 
and State corrections accounted for the second 
largest portion, 33%.

* Police protection is primarily a local
responsibility; accordingly, local
governments spent 69% of the total police
protection expenditure in the country in
2003.

* Corrections is primarily a State
responsibility; as such State governments
accounted for 64% of the Nation's
corrections expenditure.

* Judicial and legal services in the
United States were funded primarily by
local (43%) and State (38%) governments.

The Federal Government spent the most on
intergovernmental grants-in-aid, shared
revenues, and amounts paid to other
governments for services performed. Almost
92% of the Federal intergovernmental
expenditure was for police protection,
much of which was distributed through law
enforcement related grants. About half of 
the State and local intergovernmental 
expenditures were for corrections. 

------------------------------------------
Justice share of State and local expenditures

In 2003, 7.2% of total State and local
expenditures was for justice activities  
3% for police protection, 2.6% for
corrections, and 1.5% for judicial and
legal services.

By comparison, 29% of State and local government 
spending went to education, 14% to public welfare, 
7% to health and hospitals, and 4% to interest 
on debt.
From 1977 to 2003 total State and local
expenditure for all functions increased
567%:
 *police protection -- 545%
 *corrections -- 1173%
 *judicial and legal -- 1974%

Other government functions also increased
during the same period:

 *education -- 505%
 *hospitals and health care -- 572%
 *interest on debt -- 577%
 *public welfare -- 766%
------------------------------------------

Expenditure of State governments

In 2003 total justice system expenditure
of State governments increased from $34
billion in 1993 to over $66 billion in 
2003 -- a 93% increase.

Total per capita justice expenditure of all 
State governments was $227. Alaska spent 
the most on justice functions at $621 per 
U.S. resident, followed by Delaware ($478) 
and Connecticut ($372). Mississippi and 
Nevada spent the least per capita for all 
justice functions at $147 and $150, 
respectively.

Distribution of employment by level of
government and activity

In March 2003 the Nation's civil and criminal 
justice system employed over 2.3 million
persons, with a total March payroll of $89 
billion. Relative to the entire employed 
population in 2003, approximately 2% of the 
Nation's labor force worked in the justice 
system. (For more detailed information on 
the national labor force, see
<http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat1.pdf>.)

Local governments accounted for more
justice employment than the Federal and
State governments combined. Of all the
Nation's justice employees, 58% were
engaged in local justice activities.

The State and local governments employed
almost 89% of all justice system workers,
while the Federal Government employed the
remaining 11%.

The distribution of corrections employment
reflects State government dominance in that 
sector -- 62% of corrections employees
worked for State governments, followed by
33% at the local level and 5% at the Federal 
level.

As law enforcement is primarily the
responsibility of local governments, 77%
of the Nation's police employees were
working at the local level. The Federal
Government employed 14% of police
protection personnel while State
governments employed the remaining 10%.

Throughout the justice system, an estimated 
59% of total justice expenditures were for 
payroll.***Footnote 2:This figure was 
calculated by multiplying the March 2003 
payroll figure by 12 and dividing by total 
justice expenditure.***

In 2003, the Federal Government spent less
on payrolls relative to total expenditure
($15 billion out of 35 billion or 43%)
than did State and local governments (48%
and 65% respectively).

Police protection was the activity with
the highest percentage of expenditure
going to payrolls (66%). In particular 70%
of local government justice expenditure
went to police protection.

The activity with the lowest percentage of
payroll expenditure for all levels of
government was corrections at approximately 
50%.

Employment by State

In total, almost 13% of State and local
employees worked in the justice system
(table 6). Nevada had the highest
percentage of justice employees relative
to all public employees (16.9%), followed
by Florida (16.6%). 

The States with the lowest percentage of
justice employees were Vermont and North
Dakota (both at less than 8%).

------------------------------------------
Expansion of the Nation's justice system
1982-2003

The increase in justice expenditures over
nearly 20 years reflects the expansion of
the Nation's justice system. For example,
in 1982 the justice system employed
approximately 1.27 million persons; in
2003 it reached over 2.3 million. 

Police protection

One indicator of police workload, the
FBI's arrest estimates for State and local
police agencies, grew from 12 million in
1982 to an estimated 13.6 million in
2003.*Crime in the United States, 1982 
(FBI, 1983) and 2003 (FBI, 2004),
<http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius_o3/pdf/toc03.
pdf>.* The number of employees in police
protection increased from approximately
724,000 to over 1.1 million. 

Judicial and legal 

The judicial and legal workload, including
civil and criminal cases, prosecutor
functions, and public defender services,
also expanded during this period. Cases of
all kinds (criminal, civil, domestic,
juvenile, and traffic) filed in the nearly
16,000 general and limited jurisdiction
State courts went from about 86 million to
100 million in the 16-year period, 1987-2003.
**Examining the Work of State Courts, 2003: 
A National Perspective from the Courts 
Statistics Project, National Center
for State Courts, <http://www.ncsconline.
org/D_Research/csp/2003_Files/2003_Main_
Page.html>.** The total of judicial and legal 
employees grew about 101% to over 494,000 
persons in 2003.

Corrections

The total number of State and Federal
inmates grew from 403,000 in 1982 to over
1.4 million in 2003. The number of local
jail inmates more than tripled from
approximately 207,000 in 1982 to over
691,000 in 2003. Adults on probation
increased from over 1.4 million to about
4.1 million persons.***Sourcebook of Criminal 
Justice Statistics, 2003 (table 6.1.2004), 
<http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/pdf/6120
04.pdf>.***Overall, corrections employment 
more than doubled from nearly 300,000 to 
over 748,000 during this same period.
------------------------------------------

California had the most State and local
employees (1.8 million) as well as the
largest number of employees in the justice
system (247,110). Vermont was the State with 
the fewest justice employees in State and 
local government (slightly over 3,000) and 
for all functions (approximately 39,000).

In March 2003 the number of full-time
equivalent (FTE) State and local government 
justice system employees was just over 2 
million. Almost 45% of all FTE justice system 
State and local employees worked in police 
protection; 35% were employed in corrections, 
while the remaining 20% were in judicial and 
legal jobs. 

The District of Columbia had the largest
percentage of FTE State and local justice
system employees working in police
protection at 63%. Massachusetts and Rhode
Island followed at 56% and 54%, respectively. 
At 37%, Delaware had the smallest percentage 
of employees working in police protection.

In corrections, Texas had the largest
percentage of FTE State and local justice
system employees at 46%. Virginia and
North Carolina followed at 44% and 43%,
respectively. 

Definition of terms

Expenditure includes only external cash
payments made from any source of funds,
including any payments financed from
borrowing, fund balances, intergovernmental 
revenue, and other current revenue. It 
excludes any intragovernmental transfers 
and noncash transactions, such as the provision 
of meals or housing of employees. It also 
excludes retirement of debt, investment in 
securities, extensions of loans, or agency 
transactions. Total expenditures for all 
government functions do include interest
payments on debt, but the justice 
expenditure data do not.

Expenditures two major categories–-
   
* Direct expenditure is all expenditure
except that classified as intergovernmental. 
It includes "direct current expenditure" 
(salaries, wages, fees, and commissions and 
purchases of supplies, materials, and 
contractual services) and "capital outlays"
(construction and purchase of equipment,
land, and existing structures). Capital
outlays are included for the year when the
direct expenditure is made, regardless of
how the funds are raised (for example, by
bond issue) or when they are paid back.

* Intergovernmental expenditure is the sum
of payments from one government to another, 
including grants-in-aid, shared revenues, 
payments in lieu of taxes, and amounts for 
services performed by one government for 
another on a reimbursable or cost-sharing 
basis (for example, payments by one 
government to another for boarding prisoners). 
It excludes amounts paid to other governments
for purchase of commodities, property, or
utility services.

------------------------------------------
Components of total expenditure

The expenditure data discussed in this
Bulletin include direct expenditure and
intergovernmental expenditure.
Intergovernmental expenditure is the sum
of payments from one government to
another, including grants-in-aid, shared
revenues, and amounts for services
performed by one government for another 
on a reimbursable or cost-sharing basis. 
 
The three levels of government in the
United States (Federal, State, and local)
have varying responsibilities for justice
activities, and funds are often passed
between governments to reflect these
responsibilities. For example, Federal
intergovernmental expenditures include
grants to States, and State direct
expenditures will include those grants. 

To avoid double counting the sum of Federal, 
State, and local intergovernmental 
expenditures, the direct expenditure is 
used to calculate total expenditure for 
all governments. For 2003, the total direct 
expenditure for all governments was over 
$185 billion.
------------------------------------------

Employees are all persons on government
payrolls during the pay period including
March 15, 2003. They include all paid
officials and persons on paid leave, but
exclude unpaid officials, persons on
unpaid leave, pensioners, and contractors. 

Full-time employees are all persons
employed on a full-time basis, including
all full-time temporary or seasonal
workers who were employed during this pay
period. 

Full-time equivalent employment(FTE)is a
statistical measure that estimates the
number of full-time employees that could
have been employed if the reported number
of hours worked by part-time employees had
been worked by full-time employees. This
statistic is calculated separately for
each function of a government by dividing
the "part-time hours paid" by the standard
number of hours for full-time employees in
the particular government and then adding
the resulting quotient to the number of
full-time employees. 

Payroll is the gross 1-month payroll
before deductions and includes salaries,
wages, fees, and commissions paid to
employees as defined above for March 
2003.

Police protection is the function of
enforcing the law, preserving order, and
apprehending those who violate the law,
whether these activities are performed by
a city police department, sheriff's
department, State police, or Federal law
enforcement agency such as the Federal
Bureau of Investigation or the Drug
Enforcement Administration. Private
security police are outside the scope of
the survey.

Judicial and legal services include all
civil and criminal courts and activities
associated with courts such as law
libraries, grand juries, petit juries,
medical and social service activities,
court reporters, judicial councils,
bailiffs, and probate functions. It also
includes the civil and criminal justice
activities of the attorneys general,
district attorneys, State's attorneys, and
their variously named equivalents and
corporation counsels, solicitors, and
legal departments with various names. It
excludes legal units of noncriminal
justice agencies, whose functions may be
performed by a legal services department
in other jurisdictions (such as a county
counsel).

Corrections involves the community supervision, 
confinement, and rehabilitation of adults and 
juveniles convicted of offenses against the 
law and the confinement of persons suspected 
of a crime awaiting trial or adjudication. It
includes the costs of operation and employment 
for jails, prisons, probation, parole, pardon, 
and correctional administration. Data for 
institutions with authority to hold prisoners 
beyond arraignment (usually 48 hours or more) 
are included in this sector. Data for lockups
or "tanks" holding prisoners less than 48
hours are included in "police protection." 

Methodology

The justice data in this report include the 
expenditures and employment of the Federal 
Government, the State governments, and a sample 
of county, municipal, and township governments. 
Unless otherwise noted, data for total 
governmental functions and non-justice 
governmental functions also include the 
expenditures of special districts and school 
districts, which generally do not have justice
functions.
This report is based on a compilation of
data from the U.S. Census Bureau's annual
surveys of governmental finances and
employment. The survey sample was selected
from the 1997 Census of Local Governments
and consists of large units of government
(including all 50 States) sampled with
certainty and smaller units selected with
a probability proportional to the unit's
expenditure. The total number of local
governments in the finance sample was
7,002, and the number of local governments
in the employment sample was 10,574.

Certain limitations reflect the fact that
the surveys from which this Bulletin was
extracted are not designed to obtain data
on specific justice functions. The sampling 
variability, or standard error, for each of 
the justice activities is likely to be larger 
than for the major categories that the surveys
were designed to estimate. Similarly, the 
standard error is likely to be greater for 
local governments than for State-local
aggregates which are sampled in part with
certainty. Specific standard errors can be
found on the Census Bureau's website
(<http://www. census.gov>).

Differences in functional responsibilities
from State to State and government to
government can affect the comparability of
expenditure and employment data. Readers
should be generally cautious in comparing
governmental expenditures because of this
variation in the division of
responsibilities. 

The data in this report differ in some
cases from those previously published in
the Census Bureau's finance and employment
survey reports because of definitional
differences and the more intensive review
procedures and data refinements used for
this compilation. 

Data on State and local justice system per
capita expenditure by State and activity
were not collected in 2003. These data are
available for 2002. 

The data here differ from other BJS series
which collect agency-based BJS employment
and expenditure data because of collection
methods, units of analysis, and data
collection purposes. These include--   

Law Enforcement Management and Administrative 
Statistics, Prosecutors in State Courts and 
various court statistics series, The Census 
of Local Jails, 1999, The Census of State and 
Federal Correctional Facilities, 2000, and 
the report State Prison Expenditures, 2001.

Financial data for the Federal Government
were extracted from The Budget of the
United States Government, FY 2003, Appendix. 
The historical finance data may differ 
slightly from the justice expenditure data 
found in the Expenditure and Employment 
Extracts because of definitional differences.

Federal Government civilian employment
data were obtained from the U.S. Office of
Personnel Management. Statistics for State
and local governments were obtained by a
mail survey including all State departments, 
agencies, and institutions, and a local 
central reporting office supplemented by 
special mailings.

Trend comparisons between the data in this
report and reports covering data for
1971-79, 1985, 1988, 1990, and 1997 from
the Justice Assistance Data Survey (JADS)
are complicated by differences in
methodology. These differences are
described in the BJS reports for these
years, and on the BJS website. In making
trend comparisons, users should limit
their analysis to one of the two sources:

* long-term trends for 1971-79, 1985,
1988,1990, and 1997 from the JADS

* recent year-to-year trends from the
1980-2001 Justice Expenditure and
Employment Extracts data.

A more detailed description of the survey
methodology (including sample design and
sampling errors) can be found in the
Justice Expenditure and Employment
Extracts at <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs>.

------------------------------------
This report is available in portable
document format and in ASCII. 
Its related statistical data and tables
are available at the BJS World Wide Web
Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>

The data from the Justice Expenditure and
Employment Extracts are available from the
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data,
maintained by the Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social
Research at the University of Michigan,
1-800-999-0960. The archive may also be
accessed through the BJS Internet site.
Office of Justice Programs Partnerships 
for Safer Communities
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-----------------------------------

--------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department
of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director. 

BJS Bulletins present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection
programs.

Kristen Hughes wrote this report under the
supervision of Steven K. Smith. Mark
Motivans and Steven D. Owens provided
statistical review. Tina Dorsey and
Marianne W. Zawitz produced and edited the
report. Jayne Robinson prepared the report
for final printing.

The data extraction, editing, and
tabulation for the 2002 and 2003 Justice
Expenditure and Employment Extracts were
performed at the U.S. Census Bureau by
Steven D. Owens.

April 2006, NCJ 212260 
-------------------------------------

End of file
04/25/06 ih