U. S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Juvenile Felony Defendants in Criminal Courts:
Survey of 40 Counties, 1998

May 2003, NCJ 197961


---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jfdcc98.htm

---------------------------------------------------------------

Gerard A. Rainville
Steven K. Smith
BJS Statisticians
              
-----------------------------------------
Highlights
              
27% of the 7,135 juvenile felony defendants were sentenced 
to prison

*  In 1998 in 40 of the largest urban counties, approximately 
7,100 juvenile felony defendants were adjudicated in adult 
criminal court.

*  In criminal court juveniles (64%) were more likely than 
adults (24%) to be charged with a violent felony. 

These juvenile defendants were generally regarded as serious 
offenders, as 52% did not receive pretrial release, 63% were 
convicted of a felony, and 43% of those convicted received a
prison sentence.

*  States have expanded mechanisms by which juveniles can be 
charged in criminal courts. In 1998 statutory exclusion was 
the most common method (42%) used to charge juvenile 
defendants compared to the more traditional juvenile waiver
(24%).

*  Of the 7,135 juvenile felony defendants, 62% were black, 
20% were white, 96% were male, and at the time of arrest 55% 
were within 1 year of adulthood as defined by their State.

*  66% of the juvenile felony defendants were convicted, either 
of a felony or a misdemeanor. Of those convicted, 64% were 
sentenced to jail or prison as the most serious penalty. The 
average prison sentence received was about 90 months.
--------------------------------------

In 40 of the Nation's largest urban counties, approximately 
7,100 juveniles were charged with felonies in adult criminal 
court during 1998. Nearly two-thirds of the defendants were 
charged with a violent felony. 

These findings are from a BJS-sponsored data collection 
in Baltimore City and 39 urban counties in 19 States. (The 
term "40 counties" in this report refers to this sample.) 
Information was collected on all juvenile defendants who 
went to criminal court. (See Methodology for complete project
description.) This report provides aggregate county data. 
Tables of individual county data are available on the BJS 
website. (See <www.usdoj.gov/bjs>.)
 
State laws establish the age at which defendants are 
automatically tried in criminal courts. Defendants at or 
below this age (the "upper age of jurisdiction") are handled 
in juvenile courts unless certain criteria are met. Each 
State specifies the criteria that must be met for juveniles
to be prosecuted in criminal court. 

* Transfer to criminal court traditionally involves a
hearing before a juvenile court judge to determine
whether a juvenile is amenable to treatment in the juvenile 
system. In cases where a juvenile court judge transfers 
jurisdiction to the criminal courts, transfer is effected 
by means of a judicial waiver.   

*  State statutes can specify the criteria that will exclude 
a juvenile from juvenile court. Juveniles sent to criminal 
court by these means are said to be statutorily excluded 
from juvenile court jurisdiction.

*  The prosecutorial direct file, some-times referred to as 
a concurrent jurisdiction waiver, occurs where State statutes 
have established criteria for cases which may be prosecuted 
in either juvenile or criminal court. For such cases,
discretion lies with the prosecutor. 

The most common method of transferring juveniles to adult 
court, statutory exclusion, represented 42% of all such 
cases in the 40 counties. Prosecutorial direct file accounted 
for 35%, and the judicial waiver, 24%. 

Arrest charge

Nearly two-thirds of the juveniles processed in adult court 
in 1998 were charged with a violent felony.

Almost a third were charged with robbery and about a fifth 
with assault.

Property offenses accounted for 18% of the juvenile felony 
defendants. Drug offenses accounted for 15%, with drug 
trafficking the majority of these drug offenses. Less than 
4% of the juvenile felony defendants had a public-order
arrest charge.

Gender and race/Hispanic origin

In 1998, 96% of the juveniles charged with a felony in criminal 
court were male. Females made up 6% of those  juveniles charged 
with a violent offense. Among all other general arrest charge
categories (drug, property, and public-order crime), about 2% 
of the juvenile felony defendants were female.

In 1998 in the 40 counties, 62% of the juvenile felony 
defendants were black, 20% were white, 16% were Hispanic, 
and almost 2% were another race. 

A majority of the juvenile felony defendants charged with a 
violent (60%), drug (87%), or public-order (63%) felony offense 
were black. Blacks were 49% of property defendants. Whites
were 35% of juvenile felony property defendants and nearly 20% 
of juveniles charged with violent or public-order felony 
offenses. 

Hispanic juveniles represented more than 15% of those charged 
with a felony property offense and nearly 20% of violent or 
public-order felony arrest charges. Whites and Hispanics each 
accounted for less than 10% of juvenile felony drug defendants.

Age at arrest

The established upper age of jurisdiction for criminal 
jurisdiction varied for the 19 States in the 40 county 
sample. In 1998 New York had an upper age of jurisdiction of 
15, 6 States (Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Texas,
and Wisconsin) had an upper age of jurisdiction of 16, and 
the remainder (Alabama, Arizona, California, Florida, Hawaii, 
Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, 
and Washington) had an upper age of jurisdiction of 17. 

Most juveniles (55%) in adult court in the 40 large counties 
were within 1 year of adulthood at the time of arrest as defined 
by their State. Regardless of the State upper age of jurisdiction,
the majority of juveniles transferred to criminal courts would 
have been considered adults within a year; 40% were within 6 
months of adult status. Ten percent of the juvenile felony 
defendants were 3 or more years away from the upper age of
jurisdiction. 

About 26% of defendants were less than 16 years old, 31% were 
between ages 16 and 17, and 43% were 17 years or older.

Pretrial release

Fifty-two percent of the juvenile felony defendants were 
released prior to the disposition of their case. Those 
charged with a violent felony offense were the least likely 
to be released pretrial (45%).  Fewer than 10% of defendants 
charged with murder were released, and under half of those
charged with rape (47%), robbery (49%), or assault (47%) were 
released. Over 60% of those charged with property, drug, or 
public-order offenses were released before trial. 

Of the 3,576 juveniles who were released pending trial, 55% 
were charged with a violent offense; about 20% with a property 
or drug offense, and 4% were charged with a public-order
offense.

About half of released juvenile felony defendants were released 
by a non-financial arrangement (personal recognizance, unsecured, 
or conditional supervised release). The remaining half were
released by some form of financial release (surety, deposit, 
cash, or property bonds).

About half of released juvenile felony defendants charged with 
a violent (48%) or property (49%) offense were released by a 
financial arrangement. Sixty-four percent of released public-
order defendants and 53% of released drug defendants were 
released by a financial arrangement. More than 70% of released 
murder defendants were released by a financial arrangement. 

Adjudication outcome

Sixty-six percent of the juvenile felony defendants prosecuted 
in criminal court were convicted. Of the 6,568 juveniles 
arrested for a felony for whom adjudication outcome data were 
available, 63% were convicted of a felony, 2% were convicted 
of a misdemeanor, and 1% were adjudicated delinquent.

Most cases in which the defendant was not convicted were 
dismissed by the court or not pursued by the prosecutor. About 
1% of all juvenile felony defendants were found not guilty,
by either a jury or bench trial.

In 1998 59% of the juvenile defendants charged with a violent 
offense were convicted -- a lower conviction rate than for those 
juveniles charged in criminal court with property (80%), public-
order (74%), or drug offenses (74%). 

Seventy-four percent of juvenile felony defendants charged 
with murder were found guilty; 7% were found not guilty. In 
the 40 counties, no juvenile defendant charged with murder 
was adjudicated delinquent.

Half of the juvenile felony defendants charged with rape were 
convicted; 48% had cases that were dismissed or not pursued 
by the State, and 2% were found not guilty.

Conviction offense and arrest charge

The majority of convicted juvenile felony defendants were 
convicted for the same type of offense for which they were 
originally charged. For those arrested for murder and 
subsequently convicted, 86% were convicted of the original
charge of murder. Almost 30% of the juveniles convicted had 
been charged with robbery: 89% of these juveniles were 
convicted of robbery.

Sentencing

Sentencing outcomes for 4,101 juvenile felony defendants 
convicted in criminal courts reveal that 64% received some 
form of incarceration (prison or jail) as the most serious 
penalty. 

Forty-three percent of those convicted were sentenced to 
prison, and 20% to jail as their most serious incarceration 
penalty. Jail sentences are for short-term confinement 
(usually for a year or less) in a county or city facility, 
while prison sentences are for long-term confinement (usually
for over a year) in a State facility. About 25% received non-
incarceration sentences as the most serious penalty -- 
primarily probation. Less than 1% of all convicted juvenile 
felony defendants received a fine as the most serious penalty. 

In 1998 juvenile felony defendants convicted of a violent 
offense were more likely to receive a sentence of incarceration 
than those convicted of a nonviolent offense. Sixty percent of 
juvenile defendants convicted of violent offenses received a 
prison sentence.  An additional 12% were sentenced to jail. 
Nearly all defendants (94%) convicted of murder received a 
prison sentence, as did 68% of those convicted of rape.

About 60% of those convicted of property and public-order 
offenses received incarceration sentences. Forty-seven 
percent of convicted juvenile felony drug offenders received 
a sentence of confinement. Sixty percent of those convicted 
of misdemeanors received incarceration sentences -- most 
frequently jail. 

Sentence lengths

Four percent of juvenile felons received a sentence of life in 
prison. Including those life sentences, nearly 40% of all 
defendants sentenced to prison received sentences longer
than 72 months. About 18% received prison terms up to 2 years. 
Twenty-six percent received sentences between 2 and 4 years. 
The most common prison sentence for violent offenders
was over 72 months. 
   
For property and public-order offenders, the most common 
prison sentence was up to 2 years.

The average or mean term of imprisonment for convicted 
offenders sentenced to incarceration was 89 months. The 
median sentence length was 60 months. The difference between 
these measures is due to a small number of relatively long 
prison terms affecting the mean.  

Juvenile felony defendants convicted of drug or property 
offenses received a median prison sentence of 36 months. 
Juveniles sent to prison for violent offenses received 
sentences with a mean length of 106 months (excluding 
"life") and    a median length of 72 months.

More than 800 juvenile defendants received a term in a local 
jail as the most serious sanction.  The most common jail 
sentences were 9 to 12 months (40%) and 4 months or less 
(37%). Three percent of juvenile felony defendants received 
jail sentences exceeding 1 year.

Nine hundred ninety-nine juvenile felony defendants received 
probation as the most serious sanction. About 3% of those 
sentenced to probation were to serve more than 5 years and
14%, a year or less. 

Over a third of the juveniles sentenced to probation were 
convicted of a violent felony: most of them were to serve 
4 years or more. Drug offenders comprised about 29% of 
the juveniles sentenced to probation. Most of these drug
offenders were sentenced to 2 years or less of supervision.

Comparing juvenile and adult defendants in
criminal courts

A comparison of juvenile felony defendants with adult 
defendants in nearly the same set of counties in 1998 
reveals differences between the most serious arrest 
charge.

For example, 64% of juvenile felony defendants had a violent 
offense as their most serious arrest charge, compared to 24% 
of adults. Ninety-six percent of juvenile felony defendants 
were male compared to 82% of adult defendants in 1998.

The likelihood of being released pre-trial was lower for 
juvenile felony defendants than for adults, generally due to 
their more serious arrest charges. About half of the juveniles 
charged in criminal courts were released pretrial, compared
to about two-thirds of adults.

The likelihood of conviction did not differ markedly
between juvenile transferred defendants and adult
felony defendants, with about two-thirds of each
group being convicted of some offense (not shown in 
table).

For violent and property conviction offenses, similar 
percentages of juvenile felony defendants and adults 
were sentenced to incarceration as their most serious 
sanction.

Of those who received incarceration sentences, juvenile 
felony defendants were more likely than adults to receive 
prison sentences. For example, among those convicted of 
violent offenses, 60% of juveniles and 43% of adults were 
sentenced to prison. These differences could be related 
to criminal histories or statutory considerations which 
these data do not address. 

Methodology

The Juvenile Defendants in Criminal Courts (JDCC) sample is 
an independent sample of cases drawn from the county sample 
used in the State Court Processing Statistics 1998 series. 
(See Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 1998
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fdluc98.ht
m> for information on the SCPS sample.) Two county 
substitutions were made for the JDCC dataset: Honolulu, HI, 
replaced Erie County, NY, and Westchester County, NY, replaced
Monroe County, NY. Within each sampled site, data were gathered 
on each juvenile felony case. Cases were tracked through 
adjudication or for up to 1 year. Data for adult defendants 
are from the SCPS 1998 survey.  

Offense categories
 
Felony offenses were classified into 12 categories for this 
report. These were further classified into the four major 
crime categories of violent, property, drug, and public-order. 
The following listings are a summary of the crimes in each 
category; however, these lists are not meant to be exhaustive. 
All offenses, except for murder, include attempts and 
conspiracies to commit. 

Violent offenses 

Murder  Includes homicide, nonnegligent manslaughter, and 
voluntary homicide. Does not include attempted murder 
(classified as felony assault), negligent homicide, involuntary 
homicide, or vehicular manslaughter, which are classified as 
other violent offenses.

Rape  Includes forcible intercourse, sodomy, or penetration 
with a foreign object. Does not include statutory rape or 
nonforcible acts with a minor or someone unable to give legal 
consent, nonviolent sexual offenses, or commercialized sex 
offenses.

Robbery  Includes the unlawful taking of anything of value 
by force or threat of force. Armed, unarmed, and aggravated 
robbery, car-jacking, armed burglary, and armed mugging are 
included.

Assault  Includes aggravated assault, aggravated battery, 
attempted murder, assault with a deadly weapon, felony 
assault or battery on a law enforcement officer, and other 
felony assaults. Does not include extortion, coercion, or 
intimidation. 

Other violent offenses  Includes vehicular manslaughter, 
involuntary manslaughter, negligent or reckless homicide, 
nonviolent or nonforcible sexual assault, kidnaping, unlawful
imprisonment, child or spouse abuse, cruelty to a child, 
reckless endangerment, hit-and-run with bodily injury, and 
intimidation. 

Property offenses

Burglary  Includes any type of entry into a residence, 
industry, or business with or without the use of force with 
the intent to commit a felony or theft. Does not include 
possession of burglary tools, trespassing, or unlawful entry 
for which the intent is not known.

Larceny/theft  Includes grand theft, grand larceny, and any 
other felony theft, including burglary from an automobile, 
theft of rental property, and mail theft. Does not include 
motor vehicle theft, receiving or buying stolen property,
fraud, forgery, or deceit.

Other property offenses  Includes motor vehicle theft, forgery, 
fraud, receiving or buying stolen property, arson, reckless 
burning, damage to property, criminal mischief, vandalism, 
criminal trespassing, possession of burglary tools, and 
unlawful entry. 

Drug offenses

Drug trafficking  Includes trafficking, sales, distribution, 
possession with intent to distribute or sell, manufacturing, 
and smuggling of controlled sub-stances. Does not include 
possession of controlled substances.

Other drug offenses  Includes possession of controlled substances,
prescription violations, possession of drug paraphernalia, and 
other drug law violations.

Public-order offenses

Weapons  Includes the unlawful sale, distribution, 
manufacture, alteration, transportation, possession, or 
use of a deadly weapon or accessory.

Other public-order offenses  Includes driving-related offenses,
flight/escape, parole or probation violations, prison contraband, 
habitual offender, obstruction of justice, rioting, libel,
slander, treason, perjury, prostitution/pandering, bribery, and 
tax law violations. 

Additional notes on key variables

Age  Juvenile status is measured by the age at time of offense. 
Only those cases in which the defendant was a juvenile at time 
of offense were retained in the study.

Race and Hispanic/Latino origin Jurisdictions were not able to 
report both a defendant's race and Hispanic origin. Defendants 
were classified as black, white, other race, or Hispanic. These
four categories account for 100% of the defendants.

Adjudication type  To be "adjudicated delinquent" refers to a 
juvenile not having a record of a conviction in the criminal 
court. It refers to a finding of delinquency by the criminal
court judge and the imposition of a juvenile court sanction.    

Selected reading on juveniles charged in
criminal court

Bishop, Donna (2000). "Juvenile Offenders in the Adult 
Criminal Justice System." In Tonry, M. (editor) Crime and 
Justice. A Review of Research (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press) 81-167.  

Bishop, Donna and Frazier, Charles (2000). "Consequences of 
Transfer." In Fagan, J. and Zimring, F. (eds). The Changing 
Borders of Juvenile Justice: Transfer of Adolescents to the
Criminal Court (Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 227-
276).

Bishop, Donna, Frazier, Charles, Lanza-Kaduce, Lonn, and 
Winner, Lawrence (1996). "The Transfer of Juveniles to 
Criminal Court: Does it Make a Difference?" Crime and 
Delinquency, 42,2, 171-191.

Bortner, M.A., Zatz, Marjorie, and Hawkins, Darnell (2000). 
"Race and Transfer: Empirical Research and Social Context." 
In Fagan, J. and Zimring, F. (eds). The Changing Borders of
Juvenile Justice: Transfer of Adolescents to the Criminal 
Court (Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 277-320).

Feld, Barry (2000). "Legislative Exclusion of Offenses from 
Juvenile Court Jurisdiction: A History and Critique." In 
Fagan, J. and Zimring, F. (eds). The Changing Borders of 
Juvenile Justice: Transfer of Adolescents to the Criminal 
Court (Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 83-144).

Fritsch, Eric, Caeti, Tory, and Hemmens, Craig (1996). "Spare 
the Needle but not the Punishment: The Incarceration of Waived 
Youth in Texas Prisons." Crime and Delinquency, 42, 4, 593-609.

Griffin, Patrick, Torbet, Patricia, and Szymanski, Linda 
(1998). Trying Juveniles as Adults in Criminal Court: An 
Analysis of State Transfer Provisions. Washington DC: U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention.

Snyder, Howard and Sickmund, Melissa (1999). Juvenile Offenders 
and Victims: 1999 National Report. Washington DC: U.S. Department 
of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.

Strom, Kevin J. and Smith, Steven K. (1998). Juvenile Felony 
Defendants in Criminal Courts. Washington DC: U.S. Department 
of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (NCJ 165815). 

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. 
Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director.

Gerard A. Rainville and Steven K. Smith of BJS
wrote this report. Matthew Hickman provided
verification. Carolyn C. Williams produced and
edited the report. Jayne Robinson administered
final production. 

Dennis Ranalli, of Pretrial Services Resource
Center (PRSC), collected and processed the
data, under the supervision of Jolanta
Juszkiewicz. Thomas Cohen assisted in data
collection. Howard Snyder and Melissa Sickmund
of the National Center for Juvenile Justice
provided comments.

The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention (OJJDP) provided funding for this
project.

May 2003, NCJ 197961
---------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in
ASCII, its tables, and related statistical data 
are available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet
site: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>
---------------------------------------------

End of file 
05/14/03 ih