U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
                                                           

Jail Inmates at Midyear 2008  - Statistical Tables

March 2009, NCJ 225709           
    
----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jim08st.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to the http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#jim

----------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
----------------------------------------------------------

By Todd D. Minton and William J. Sabol, Ph.D.

BJS Statisticians

Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ): definitions and functions

Jails--facilities in the ASJ include confinement facilities
usually administered by a local law enforcement agency,
intended for adults but may hold juveniles before or after
adjudication. Facilities include jails and city/county
correctional centers, special jail facilities such as medical
or treatment or release centers, halfway houses, work farms,
and temporary holding or lockup facilities that are part of
the jail's combined function. Inmates sentenced to jail
facilities usually have a sentence of 1 year or less.  

Jail functions--within the ASJ, jail functions are to:

*receive individuals pending arraignment and hold them
awaiting trial, conviction, or sentencing,

*readmit probation, parole, and bail bond violators and
absconders,

*temporarily detain juveniles pending transfer to juvenile
authorities,

*hold mentally ill persons pending their movement to
appropriate mental health facilities, 

*hold individuals for the military, for protective custody,
for contempt, and for the courts as witnesses, 

*release convicted inmates to the community upon completion
of sentence,

*transfer inmates to federal, state, or other authorities,

*house inmates for federal, state, or other authorities
because of crowding of their facilities,

*sometimes operate community-based programs as alternatives
to incarceration.

Admissions--persons officially booked and housed in jails by
formal legal document and the authority of the courts or some
other official agency. Jail admissions include persons
sentenced to weekend programs and who are booked into the
facility for the first time. Excluded from jail admissions
are inmates reentering the facility after an escape, work
release, medical appointment or treatment facility, and bail
and court appearances. BJS collects jail admissions for the
last 7 days in June.

Average daily population--sum of the numbers of inmates in
jail each day for a year, divided by the number of days in
the year (i.e., between July 1, 2007, and June 30, 2008).
 
Average annual change--mean average change across a 12-month
time period. 

Calculating annual admissions--BJS collects the number of
jail admissions during the last 7 days in June. Annual jail
admissions are calculated by multiplying weekly admissions by
the sum of 365 days divided by 7 days.

Calculating weekly jail turnover rates--calculated by adding
admissions and releases and dividing by the average daily
population. See Methodology for additional information.
 
Inmates confined at midyear--number of inmates held in
custody on the last weekday in June.

Jail incarceration rate--number of inmates held in the
custody of local jails, per 100,000 U.S. residents.

Non-U.S. citizen--any foreign born person who has not been
granted U.S. citizenship. Includes but is not limited to
those in an alien status; lawful permanent residents (green
card holders); refugees, persons applying for political
asylum depending upon the date the asylum was pending or
approved; asylum grantees; diplomats; and foreign nationals
living temporarily in the United States (e.g., tourist,
medical treatment, business, temporary work, study, or other
similar reasons). Definitions may vary by state.
 
Percent of capacity occupied--number of inmates at midyear
divided by the rated capacity multiplied by 100.

Rated capacity--number of beds or inmates assigned by a
rating official to a facility, excluding separate temporary
holding areas. 

Releases--persons released after a period of confinement
(e.g., sentence completion, bail/bond releases, other
pretrial releases, transfers to other jurisdictions, and
deaths). Releases include those persons who have completed
their weekend program and who are leaving the facility for
the last time. Excluded from jail releases are temporary
discharges including work release, medical appointment or
treatment center, court appearance, furlough, day reporting,
and transfers to other facilities within the jail's
jurisdiction.

Under jail supervision but not confined--all persons in
community-based programs operated by the jail facility.
Programs include electronic monitoring, house arrest,
community service, day reporting, and work programs. Under
jail supervision but not confined excludes persons on
pretrial release and who are not in a community-based program
run by the jail. Excludes persons under supervision of
probation, parole or other agencies, inmates on weekend
programs, and inmates who participate in work release
programs and return to the jail at night.

Weekend programs--allow offenders to serve their sentences of
confinement only on weekends (i.e., Friday Sunday). 

Methodology

Annual Survey of Jails

In each year between the years that BJS conducts a complete
census of local jails, BJS conducts the Annual Survey of
Jails (ASJ). ASJ is a sample survey of local jails used to
estimate the number and characteristics of local inmates
nationwide. For the 2008 ASJ, the U.S. Census Bureau, as the
collection agent, drew a sample of 875 jurisdictions and 934
jail facilities. Local jail jurisdictions included counties
(parishes in Louisiana) or municipal governments that
administered one or more local jails. During the collection
process, two new regional jails were added to the sample and
one jurisdiction was closed and removed from the sample. Data
were estimated for one jurisdiction that did not respond to
the survey.

The 2008 ASJ sample included all jails with certainty (65)
that were operated jointly by two or more jurisdictions, or
multi-jurisdictional jails. Other jail jurisdictions included
with certainty (269) were those that--

*held juvenile inmates at the time of the 2005 Census of Jail
Inmates and had an average daily population of 500 or more
inmates during the 12 months ending June 30, 2005

*held only adult inmates and had an average daily population
of 750 or more.

The remaining jurisdictions were stratified into two groups:
jurisdictions with jails holding at least one juvenile on
June 30, 2005, and jails holding only adults on that date.
Using stratified random sampling, 541 jurisdictions were
selected from 8 strata based on the two conditions enumerated
above and 4 strata based on the average daily jail inmate
population during 2005. The average daily jail inmate
population was derived from the 2005 Census of Jail Inmates.

Data were obtained from sampled jurisdictions by mail-out and
web-based survey questionnaires. After follow-up phone calls
to respondents, the response rate for the survey was 100% for
critical items, such as the number of inmates confined,
average daily population, and rated capacity. (See appendix
tables 12, 13 and 14 for standard errors associated with
reported estimates from the ASJ 2008 at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/jim08.pdf>).

Weekly admission and release estimation procedures

Based on the 2008 ASJ, 834 of the 934 jail facilities (89%)
provided valid data on weekly admissions and releases.
Because there were nonresponse and incomplete data on
admissions and releases, data on offender flows through local
jails were estimated for 100 jail facilities to calculate a
weekly estimate. Estimates were based on two criteria: 

*Data for 99 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on data from the 2007 Annual Survey of Jails.

*Data for 1 jail facility was based on the average number of
admissions and releases for the average daily population
category in which the facility was grouped.

Calculating annual admissions 

Based on findings from the 2004 Survey of Large Jails (SLJ),
BJS determined that the June admission data were a reliable
source to calculate a nationwide annual admission estimate.
Although the number of admissions to jails fluctuated
throughout the year, the SLJ tracked monthly movements from
January 2003 to January 2004 and determined that the June
2003 count (339,500) closely matched the annual average
number of admissions (342,956). The number of annual
admissions was calculated by multiplying the weekly
admissions by the sum of 365 days divided by 7 days. 

Calculating weekly turnover rates

Weekly jail turnover rates were modeled after the Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
Additional information on turnover rates is available at
<http://www.bls.gov/jlt/>. Jail turnover rates were
calculated by adding admissions and releases and dividing by
the average daily population. The turnover rate takes into
account admissions into and releases from jails and gives an
indication of the volatility of the jail population. Higher
turnover rates mean relatively larger numbers of admissions
and releases relative to the size of the average daily
population. 

Revised inmate population

The number of inmates held at midyear 2006 and 2007 for San
Bernardino County, CA, and Wayne County, MI, are based on
revised data. The number of inmates held at midyear 2007 for
Hillsborough County, FL, are based on revised data.

Revised average daily population

The average daily population in 2006 and 2007 for San
Bernardino County, CA, Wayne County, MI, and Clark County,
NV, are based on revised data. The average daily population
in 2007 for Hillsborough County, FL, and Lee County, FL, are
based on revised data.

Revised rated capacity 

Capacity data for Miami-Dade County, FL has been revised for
2005 to 2007 to reflect rated capacity. Capacity data for
Baltimore City, MD, in 2006 and 2007 was revised to reflect
design capacity. BJS was reporting the operating capacity for
both jail jurisdictions. The rated capacity in 2007 for Clark
County, NV, and the District of Columbia are based on revised
data.

----------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is the
acting director. 

The data were analyzed and tables were prepared 
by Todd D. Minton and William J. Sabol, Ph.D. 
Heather C. West, Ph.D., verified the report.

Lisa A. McNelis carried out the data collection and
processing with assistance provided by Joshua Giunta and
Alonzo Johnson under the supervision of Pam Butler,
Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of
Commerce. Duane H. Cavanaugh and Diron J. Gaskins provided
technical assistance.

Tina Dorsey and Georgette Walsh produced and edited the
tables. Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final
printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

March 2009, NCJ 225709

-------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation . Partnerships . Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------
               
3/31/2009/JER