U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Technical Report

Justice Expenditure and Employment
Statistics
            
Justice Variable
Passthrough Data, 1997
            
Sidra Lea Gifford
BJS Statistician 

Stephen D. Owens
Chief, Public Finance Analysis Branch
U.S. Census Bureau


November 2001, NCJ 190359


---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jvpd97.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/pubalp2.htm#Justice
Variable Passthrough Data.
-----------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------
Highlights

The State share of expenditures 
for justice has increased from 
29% in 1971 to 41% in 1997

*  In 1997 State and local governments
spent $103 billion of their own-source
revenues on police, prosecution and
judicial activities, and corrections.

*  Local governments spent more on
justice functions than did State
governments. In 1997 the national ratio 
of local to State spending was 59% to 
41%.

*  The State with the lowest variable
passthrough (VPT) percentage was
Alaska, with 24% being passed through 
to the local governments.

*  The State with the highest VPT percent
was Nevada, with a local share of 72%.

*  Since 1990, the last year in which the
VPT was calculated, the percent required
for passthrough to the local governments
has increased slightly, from 57% to 59%.

*  In Nevada, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee, 
the impact of the new VPT will be greatest.  
The amounts of their Byrne Formula awards 
that must be passed through to local govern-
ments will increase by more than 20%.
-----------------------------------------------

BJS provides the variable passthrough
(VPT) data for use in the Edward Byrne
Memorial State and Local Law Enforcement 
Assistance Programs authorized by the Anti-
Drug Abuse Act of 1988, as amended (Public 
Law 90-351). The Byrne program focuses on 
assisting State and local law enforcement 
with the control of violent and drug-related 
crime and serious offenders, in support of
national drug-control priorities (box on
page 2). 

The Byrne program includes a discretionary 
grant program and a block grant program.  
This report describes the development of 
data used to compute the block grant formula.  
According to Public Law 90-351, the formula 
for distributing block grant funds to the 
States is based on each State's percentage 
of the total US population; the VPT data 
indicate how funds are to be distributed 
to State agencies compared to the localities 
within each State.  In conjunction with 
the BJS Justice Expenditure and Employment
Statistics Program, BJS estimates VPT
distributions by conducting the Justice
Assistance Data Survey (JADS)
periodically, most recently in 1997.

Features of the block grant program

Eligibility

Under Public Law 90-351, the 50 States,
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, 
and the U.S. Virgin Islands are each 
considered eligible State-level 
jurisdictions.  In addition, the 
Territories of Guam, American Samoa, and 
the Northern Mariana Islands share a State
allocation.

---------------------------------------
Byrne Program purposes

Grants may be used to provide personnel,
equipment, training, technical assistance,
information systems, victim assistance,
prosecution and adjudication services,
detention, and rehabilitation.

Byrne Program mandates

*  States must use at least 5% of their 
formula grant awards for the improvement 
of criminal justice records.
*  States must develop methods to notify
the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS) of alien convictions and to
provide records of those convictions to
INS.
*  States must enact and enforce a law
that requires sex offenders to be tested
for HIV if the victim requests such testing.
*  States must establish 10-year
registration requirements for persons
convicted of certain crimes against minors
and sexually violent offenses and a more
stringent set of registration requirements
for sexually violent predators.

For more information about the Byrne
Program, see Bureau of Justice
Assistance's Fact Sheet Edward Byrne
Memorial State and Local Law
Enforcement Assistance (July 2001).
------------------------------------------------

Eligible local governments include "any
city, county, township, town, borough,
parish, village, or other general purpose
political subdivision of a State, any law
enforcement or judicial enforcement district 
that is established under applicable State 
law; and has the authority to, in a manner 
independent of other State entities, 
establish a budget and impose taxes, an 
Indian tribe that performs law
enforcement functions as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior, or, for 
the purpose of assistance eligibility, 
any agency of the government of the 
District of Columbia or the Federal Govern-
ment that performs law enforcement functions 
in and for the District of Columbia, or 
any the Trust Territory of the United
States.***Footnote 1:  As defined in 
Public Law 90-351 sec. 901 (a)(3).***

Formula

Public Law 90-351 contains a formula for
distributing the funds available for block
grants to the States. In general, this
formula --

*  Reserves some funds for Bureau of
Justice Assistance discretionary grants
and administrative costs

*  Awards to each State a base amount of
money specified in the legislation (0.25%
of the total allocation)

*  Allocates the remaining funds to each
State according to its percentage in the
total U.S. population

*  Requires a minimum passthrough amount 
to local governments based on the percentage 
of funds expended by units of local 
government relative to the total State and 
local criminal justice expenditure in the 
State.

The specific features of the formula used
to distribute the block grants among
States have changed several times since
1968 when Public La w 90-351 was enacted.  
This report provides the basis for the 
amount of Federal funds retained at the 
State level and the amount distributed to 
local jurisdictions within the State.

Calculation of the variable 
passthrough percentages 

The Justice Expenditure and Employment
Series and the JADS, which produce the
VPT data, collect extensive, detailed 
data for three justice functions (police
protection, judicial and legal, and
corrections) and for three character and
object classes (current operations, 
capital outlay, and intergovernmental
expenditure). 

Public Law 90-351 indicates that
expenditures used in the calculation of
variable passthrough percentages are to
be from a government's "own revenue
sources."  Thus, a government would not
benefit from spending another
government's money, as in revenue from
payments for boarding prisoners. 
Expenditures from sales or property tax
revenue are included; amounts expended
from intergovernmental revenue, such as
Federal grant monies, are excluded.

The computation of own-sources
expenditure involves summing certain
character and object classes of
expenditure within each State.  From 
this total are subtracted certain revenue
amounts for the State government and for
the aggregate of local governments within
the State.

In general, the own-sources computations
assume that all intergovernmental
payments received by a government will
be expended during the same fiscal year. 
While every jurisdiction did not spend all
the money received, the total generally
balanced out because some jurisdictions
spent money received in 1996 while
others did not spend all money received 
in 1997.

The local government totals within a State
are actual amounts based on the 1997 Census 
of Governments. The Federal revenue amounts 
received by local governments are actual 
1997 amounts received during the Federal
fiscal year which ran from October 1,
1996, through September 30, 1997. These 
amounts were derived from the Federal 
Assistance Award Data System (FAADS) 
developed by the Census Bureau. The local 
government own-sources calculation --

 *  Use actual expenditures for 
 all local governments in the State 
 
 *  Use actual Federal revenue
 amounts received by all local
 governments
 
 *  Use the actual amount of payments
 made by the State government to local
 governments according to State
 records
 
 *  Do not use intergovernmental
 expenditures between local
 governments within the State (which
 would  result in double-counting).
 
1997 variable passthrough
percentages

In fiscal 1997 the VPT share for local
governments ranged from 24% in Alaska
to 72% in Nevada.  Conversely, the State
share in these States ranged from 76% in
Alaska to 28% in Nevada.  Most States
showed less dramatic differences between 
the State and local share:  the national 
ratio was 59.2% local to 40.8% State.

The organization of criminal justice
functions in each State can affect the 
ratio of State-to-local own-sources expendi-
ture. For instance, State governments with 
low VPT percentages tend to have more 
criminal justice services at the State level
relative to States where similar services
are delivered at the local level.  Alaska,
with a State share of 76%, Delaware with
73%, Vermont with 71%, and Connecticut
with 62% are examples of States in which
the majority of courts, public defense
systems, and correctional systems are
funded at the State level.
 
-------------------------------------------------
Examples of own-source revenues

Taxes                                                        
 Property              
 General sales    
 Motor vehicle license          
 Motor fuel   
 Income (individual and
 corporate)    
 Death/gift 
Utility revenue 
Liquor store revenue
Insurance trust receipts for: 
 Employee retirement 
 Unemployment compensation
                                                                     
Charges and fees
    Parking          
    Sanitation        
    Parks and recreation
    Airport      
    Toll roads
    Hospital fees
    College tuition
Special assessments
Interest earnings 
Sale of government property
Bond issue proceeds

Examples of revenues not from own-
sources

Federal payments received for:            
    Housing Federal prisoners 
Police overtime in emergencies 
State assistance payments received for:
 Aid to local police
 Aid to local corrections 
State or local payments received for:    
    Housing another government's
       prisoners 
 Providing police protection to 
       another government 
 Training another government's
       justice personnel

Federal grants
   Juvenile justice grants
   Anti-drug abuse grants

Alcohol safety program
  Child support enforcement
  Research participation
  Victim assistance
------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------
Coumputing own-source expenditure for 
State governments

A State government's total justice
expenditure is derived by summing the
State government's justice expenditures
for --   
  Current operations
  Capital outlay
  Intergovernmental expenditure 
  to local governments. 

To produce the State government's
own-sources expenditure, the following 
are deducted from the total:

 Justice revenue received directly 
    from the Federal Government
 Local justice payments to the State
    government

Cumputing own-source expenditure for
local governments

The total justice expenditure for all local
governments in a State is derived by
summing the total local justice
expenditures for--
    Current operations
    Capital outlay
    Intergovernmental expenditure 
    to the State.

To produce own-sources expenditure for
all local governments in the State the
following are deducted from the total:

 Revenue directly from the Federal
    Government and earmarked for
    justice purposes

 State payments to local governments
    for justice purposes, including
    Federal grants "passed through" 
    to the State government
----------------------------------------------------

Why variable passthrough 
percentages change

In fiscal 1990, the last year in which these
data were calculated, the VPT percentage
for local governments ranged from 22% in
Alaska to 67% in Minnesota.  Most States
were similar to the national State-to-local
ratio of 42.6% to 57.4%.  The new data,
based on 1997 expenditures, effectively
increased the share of funds going to the
local governments.  The national ratio is
40.8% to the States and 59.2% to the
localities.  The State with the highest
passthrough percentage is California, with
67% going to the local governments. The
State with the lowest percentage to be
passed through to local governments is
still Alaska, with 24%.

Between 1971 and 1990, the State share
of variable passthrough percentages
increased steadily from 28.9% to 42.6%
(Highlights).  Although there was a slight
decrease from 1990 to 1997, future JADS
conducted using the 1997 methodology
should indicate a continuing trend of
increasing State shares.

State shares decreased from 42.6% in
1990 to 40.8% in 1997 because the
Federal grants portion was collected
differently in 1997.  Prior to 1997
respondents were asked to provide
information for specific justice grants 
that they may have received during the 
fiscal year.  In 1997 the grant information 
was pulled from the FAADS survey.  This
survey goes to all Federal grant-making
agencies every 3 months and asks for the
types and amounts of Federal grants
given to State and local governments.
This approach is more accurate because
it collects information from a few 
granting agencies as opposed to thousands 
of State and local governments.  

Several new Federal justice grants were
authorized in the period spanning from
1990 to 1997, which can impact the
proportion of State to local expenditure. 
The most notable of which was the Child
Support Enforcement Grant program.  In
1988 State and local governments
reported approximately $529 million in
justice revenue receipts.  In 1997 State
and local governments received over $2.5
billion from the Child Support Enforcement
program alone.  Over $2 billion of this
amount was granted directly to the States,
in effect reducing their own-source
expenses for child support enforcement. 
The remainder went to the local
governments, reducing their own- source
expenses to a lesser degree.

The VPT percentages for individual States
can vary widely from year to year.  Prison
and jail construction can have considerable 
impact on the VPT percentages because the 
expenditures can be tabulated in the year 
in which construction of the facility began, 
not necessarily the year(s) in which the 
cost was incurred.  State governments that 
had large capital outlays for prison
construction in 1990, but not in 1997, had
State-share decreases in the VPT
percentages in 1997, all other factors
being constant.  

Prison construction in 1990 combined with
reduced construction expenditures in 1997 
contributed to the following decreases in 
State VPT percentages:

 Kansas, down 9.6 percentage points
 Alabama, down 9.2 points
 Virginia, down 5.1 points
 North Dakota, down 2.5 points
 Connecticut, down 1.3 points.

In some States large capital outlays for
corrections and increases in current
operations expenditure increased the
State VPT share for 1997 relative to 1990. 
This was the situation in Pennsylvania, 
up 8.8 percentage points, and in Montana, 
up 6.0 points.

Between 1990 and 1997 the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts abolished a few of its county 
governments and absorbed their justice 
functions.  This contributed to the slight 
increase in the State share in Massachusetts.

States with considerable increases in
funding between 1990 and 1997 often
displayed corresponding increases in their
State VPT shares.  The State than doubled 
their total criminal justice spending 
during the period and had subsequent 
increases in their VPT shares.

Methodology

The expenditure data used to calculate
the variable passthrough percents were
collected by the Census Bureau for BJS
during the 1997 Census of  Governments. 
Data were collected for -- 
 All State governments
 All county governments
 All municipal and township   
 governments.
              
The Census included a total of 39,044
local governments (3,043 county
governments, 19,372 municipalities, and
16,629 townships).  The District of
Columbia was treated as a municipal
government.  Expenditure data were not
collected for Puerto Rico and the
territories because their justice
expenditures occur at only one level of
government and the VPT does not apply
to them.

Data collection
              
From August 1997 to September 1998
Census Bureau employees compiled
expenditure data from government
records for the 50 States, 25 largest
counties, and 24 largest cities.  The
Census Bureau mailed questionnaires 
to the other local governments in
November 1997.  Nonresponse follow-up
was conducted until the response rate 
for local governments reached 85%. 
Response for field-compiled units was
100%.  Subsequently an effort was made
to canvass State agencies that performed
justice functions, but not as their 
primary function.  Responses varied by 
State. Data collected were added to
existing State justice expenditures.

The survey period

The State expenditure data presented in
this report cover the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1997, for all States except four
whose fiscal years ended as follows:  New
York, March 31, 1997; Texas, August 31,
1997; and Alabama and Michigan, September 
30, 1997.  Some State agencies operate on 
a different fiscal year basis from the State 
government.  In such instances, the data in 
this report are for the agency's fiscal year 
that ended within the State's regular 
fiscal year. For local governments the 
expenditure data here are for the 
governments' fiscal years that ended 
between July 1, 1996, and June 30, 1997.  
By using the July 1, 1996, to June 30, 
1997, reference period, some governments' 
data are for a fiscal year that the local 
government may refer to as fiscal 1996, 
for example those that ended December 31, 
1996.  The fiscal year reported for 
Washington, D.C., ended September 30, 
1997.

Limitations of the data

Readers should compare States with
caution.  Differences in functional
responsibilities from State to State 
affect the comparability of the data.  
Some State governments directly administer 
activities that local governments 
administer in other States; for example, 
the State governments of Alaska, Connecticut,
Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, Vermont, 
and to some extent Massachusetts operate 
local jails as well as State prisons.

All data are subject to possible
inaccuracies in classification, response,
and processing.  Every effort was made to
keep such errors to a minimum by careful
examining, editing, and tabulating of the
data submitted by government officials
and by extensive follow-up procedures to
clarify inadequate or inconsistent survey
returns.

Definitions of terms

More explicit definitions can be found in
the Justice Expenditure and Employment
Extracts, 1997, at <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jeee97.htm>. 
The following definitions are the same as
those presented in the 1990 report.

Total expenditure includes only external
cash payments made from any source of
monies, including any payments financed
from borrowing, fund balances,
intergovernmental revenue, and other
current revenue.  It excludes any
intragovernmental transfers and noncash
transactions, such as providing
employees' meals or housing.  It also
excludes retirement of debt, investment in
securities, extensions of loans, agency
transactions, and government
contributions for employee benefits.

Variable passthrough percentages are
developed to comply with the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968, as amended (Public Law 90-351),
which requires that the block grants 
made by the Bureau of Justice Assistance 
(and formerly by the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration) to each State
be allocated between the State and local
governments according to the ratio of
State-to-local criminal justice
expenditures.  The legislative history of
this act indicates that these expenditures
are to be own-source expenditures.

Unit of local government as specified by
Public Law 90-351, only includes
expenditures of units of general local
government, and independent law
enforcement or judicial enforcement
districts.  Of the five broad classes 
of local government identified by the 
Census Bureau, the Public Law 90-351 
definition encompasses three (counties,
municipalities, and township or "town"
governments), part of one (special
districts), and excludes another
(independent school districts) 
altogether. Only special district 
governments whose primary function is 
law enforcement are included.  Thus, a 
transit authority that has a police 
force would not be eligible as its 
primary function is public transit.

Justice expenditure includes the justice
functions of police protection, 
adjudication, prosecution, and legal
services, public defense, corrections, and
a residual "other" category, as defined
below.

Police protection is the function of
enforcing the law, preserving order, and
apprehending those who violate the law,
whether these activities are performed by
a city police department, sheriff's
department, or State police.  Private
security police are outside the scope of
the survey, but government contract
payments to a private security firm would
be tabulated as direct expenditures of the
government.

Adjudication includes all civil and criminal
courts and activities associated with
courts such as clerks of court, law
libraries, grand juries, and petit juries.

Prosecution and legal services includes
the civil and criminal justice activities 
of the attorneys general, district attorneys,
State's attorneys (and their variously
named equivalents), and corporation
counsels, solicitors, and legal departments 
with various names.  It also includes 
government payments to private legal counsel.

Public defense includes legal counsel and
representation in either criminal or civil
proceedings as provided by public defenders 
and other government programs that pay the 
fees of court-appointed counsel.

Corrections involves the confinement and
rehabilitation of adults and juveniles
convicted of offenses against the law and
the confinement of persons suspected of
a crime awaiting trial or adjudication. It
includes jails, prisons, probation, parole,
pardon, and correctional administration. 
It includes drug treatment and rehabilitation 
programs that are administered by a justice 
agency.

Other justice activities includes
expenditures that are not elsewhere
classified, that cut across more than one
category, or that are not allocable to
separate categories.  Examples are crime
commissions, neighborhood crime councils, 
State criminal justice coordinating councils, 
and criminal justice planning agencies.

Sources of additional information

To obtain other reports on Justice
Expenditure and Employment Statistics,
visit the BJS website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
eande.htm>

Further information about the Bureau of
Justice Assistance grant programs is
available on the Internet at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/html/
fund1.html>

In addition, information about both BJS's
Justice Expenditure and Employment
Series and BJA's Byrne Program can be
obtained from the National Criminal
Justice Reference Service
(1-800-732-3277). 

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld is 
acting director.
                    
Sidra Lea Gifford, statistician in the Law
Enforcement, Adjudication, and Federal
Statistics Unit at BJS, and Stephen D.
Owens, Chief of the Public Finance
Analysis Branch in the Governments
Division at the  Bureau of the Census,
wrote this Technical Report.  Steven K.
Smith at BJS supervised this project. 
Tom Hester edited the report and Jayne
Robinson prepared it for final production. 
At the Census Bureau, Paul C. Clark II
performed legal research for the project,
and Lynn Zhao coordinated the
supplemental State data collection.

November 2001, NCJ 190359
-------------------------------------------

End of file
11/07/01 ih
