U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Technical Report

Local Law Enforcement Block Grant Program, 1996-2004

September 2004, NCJ 205988


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in 
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/llebgp04.htm
--------------------------------------------------------------

Lynn Bauer
BJS Statistician

In the 104th Congress, the House of Representatives passed the
Local Law Enforcement Block Grant Act (H.R. 728) of 1995.
This amended the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement
Act of 1994 to establish the Local Law Enforcement Block Grant
(LLEBG) Program. 

The Fiscal Year 1996 Appropriations Act (Public Law 104-034)
instructed the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) to make funds
available to units of general purpose local government under the
LLEBG Program pursuant to H.R. 728. The grants were to be
based on a jurisdiction's number of Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR) Part I violent crimes reported to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). The LLEBG program provides funds to units
of local government to reduce crime and improve public safety
(see box on page 2). Each year since 1996 Congress has
appropriated funds to continue the program.

This report describes the LLEBG formula calculation stages,
including the determination of how funds are distributed, and
provides an example of the award process.  

Program trends

Since the LLEBG program began in  FY 1996, the total award
has decreased from $424 million to $115 million in 2004 (figure
1). As a result, the minimum allocation amount (de minimus) to a
State in 2004 was $286,882, a decrease of 72% from 1996
($1,060,000). Twelve States received the minimum allocation in
2004.

  
In FY 2004 Alaska received the lowest award amount
($291,401). California received the largest ($16,428,618), 
followed by Florida, Texas, New York, Illinois, and Michigan
(table 1). The percentage change in the total State allocation
between FY 1996 and FY 2004 was greatest in Puerto Rico
(-84%), followed by New York (-81%), Kentucky (-80%) and
California (-77%) (table 2).

The decrease in program funds has also affected eligibility for
local governments. Over 1,200 local governments that received a
FY 2003 award were ineligible for an allocation in FY 2004
(figure 2).

Formula calculation process

The formula calculation process for distributing funds in the
LLEBG program is completed in two stages: 

Stage I: State allocation

In the first stage, State allocations are calculated proportionate to
each State's average annual number of UCR Part I violent crimes
compared with that for all other States for the three most recent
calendar years of data from the FBI dating back to 1992. The
program mandates, however, that each State must receive a
minimum award (the de minimus) of 0.25% of the total amount
available under the LLEBG program. The de minimus funds are
subtracted from the total LLEBG allocation and the new total is
then distributed to the remaining non-
de minimus States. See Example of award process on page 4 for
more complete description of the de minimus process.

Stage II: Local allocation
 
In the second stage, local awards are made proportionate to each
reporting local jurisdiction's average annual number of UCR Part
I violent crimes compared with that for all other local
jurisdictions in the State for the three most recent calendars
years. Only those jurisdictions which qualify for an award of
$10,000 or more are eligible to receive an allocation. 

If a unit of local government is allocated less than $10,000 for
the payment period, the amount is not awarded but transferred to
the chief executive officer of the State. These funds must then be
distributed amon State police departments that provide law
enforcement services to units of local government and to units of
local government whose award is less than what is reasonable to
reduce crime and improve public safety. Local governments who
do not report to the UCR program are not eligible for LLEBG 
funding.{Footnote 1:  As defined in H.R. 728, section 104(b)(7)}.

The District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam are treated as
independent States with no requirement to distribute funds to
units of local government. {Footnote 2: As defined by Public Law 108-7,
Guam is considered as a State for all purposes under H.R. 728,
retroactive to October 1, 2000}. The Virgin Islands receives the
amount of one de minimus award, and American Somoa and the
Northern Mariana Islands receive a percentage of one de
minimus award, 33% and 17%, respectively. 

To be considered eligible for the LLEBG program, a jurisdiction
must be a general purpose unit of the local government that
carries out substantial governmental duties. The unit of local
government must report, via its law enforcement agency or
agencies, to the UCR program of the FBI.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
States vary widely in how the allocations are distributed to
localities

In FY 2004 over 90% of allocation amounts went to local
governments within California (93%), Florida (93%), Hawaii
(97%) and Nevada (92%).  The balance of those allocations were
to remain at the State government level.

States with the lowest percent allocation to local governments
were Montana (45%), Maine (34%), New Hampshire (33%),
Vermont (33%), and West Virginia (24%).

------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------
Amounts paid to a unit of local government are authorized for
use by the unit for reducing crime and improving public safety,
including but not limited to, one or more of the following
purposes:
 
* Hiring, training, and employing on a continuing basis new,
additional law enforcement officers and necessary support
personnel
* Paying overtime to presently employed law enforcement
officers and necessary support personnel for the purpose of
increasing the number of hours worked by such personnel 
* Procuring equipment, technology, and other material directly
related to basic law enforcement functions
* Enhancing security measures in and around schools and in and
around any other facility or location which is considered by the
unit of local government to have a special risk for incidents of
crime
* Establishing crime prevention programs that may, though not
exclusively, involve law enforcement officials and that are
intended to discourage, disrupt, or interfere with the 
commission of criminal activity, including neighborhood watch 
and citizen patrol programs, sexual assault and domestic violence 
programs, and programs intended to prevent juvenile crime
* Establishing or supporting drug courts
* Establishing early intervention and prevention programs for
juveniles to reduce or eliminate crime
* Enhancing the adjudication process of cases involving violent
offenders, including the adjudication process of cases involving
violent juvenile offenders.
* Enhancing programs under subpart 1 of part E of the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
* Establishing cooperative task forces between adjoining units of
local government to work cooperatively to prevent and combat
criminal activity, particularly criminal activity that is exacerbated
by drug or gang-related involvement
* Establishing a multi-jurisdictional task force, particularly in
rural areas, composed of law enforcement officials representing
units of local government that works with Federal law
enforcement officials to prevent and control crime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Disparate jurisdictions

In some cases, a disparity may exist between funding eligibility
of a county and associated municipalities. {Footnote 3: LLEBG disparate
certification process <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bja/grant/
disparate_certificate_process.html>.} By statute, a potential
disparity exists when --

1. "an associated municipality's eligible funding amount is
greater by legislatively prescribed standards than the funding
amount of the county (a unit of local government's share cannot
exceed 200 percent of the adjacent county's for a single
municipality; 400 percent for multiple municipalities)," and; 

2. "the county bears more than 50 percent of prosecution or
incarceration costs for UCR Part I violent crimes reported by the
corresponding municipality's police department." 

If a county is disparate with multiple municipalities, the county
must show that funding allocation to those municipalities will
likely threaten the efficient administration of justice. 

To qualify for payment, the unit of local government, together
with any such specified geographically contiguous local
government, is required to submit a joint application for the
aggregate of funds allocated to the units of local government. An
agreement must be reached with the State attorney general in
order for the disparate local and county jurisdictions to receive
funds. 

Example of award process

As discussed in stage 1, each State receives a de minimus or
0.25% of the total LLEBG. For LLEBG 2003 this amount was
$286,882. Any State with a 3-year violent crime average that
results in an allocation less than $286,882, received the de
minimus award instead of what they would have received based
on crime alone. The total de minimus award of $286,882 is not
added to the crime-based award amount. Rather, the difference
between what each State would have received based on crime
and the de minimus amount for that year is added to the
crime-based award to total the de minimus. This is referred to as
the "de minimus bonus."

For example, for the 2004 LLEBG calculation (using violent
crime data from 1999-2001), North Dakota's 3-year UCR violent
crime average was 484, which is 0.03% of the total number of
UCR violent crimes reported by the 50 States, District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and the
combined territories (American Samoa and Northern Mariana
Islands). This amounts to an initial UCR-based formula award of
$38,481. Because this is less than the de minimus that each State
is required to receive, North Dakota will receive the difference
between their UCR-based crime award ($38,481) and the de
minimus ($286,882), which amounts to $248,401 (de minimus
bonus). The de minimus bonus is added to their crime award of
$38,481 (to equal $286,882). After all de minimus States are
calculated, the total de minimus award is deducted from the total
LLEBG award ($115,000,000 - $3,514,310 = $111,485,690).
(Note that the violent crime averages and crime-based awards for
de minimus States are removed from the basis for calculating
allocations for remaining States).

Following calculation of the de minimus awards, the awards for
other States need to be calculated. The percentage of 3-year
violent crime averages for each non-de minimus State is
recomputed in proportion to the total violent crime averages for
all non-de minimus States. A final State award is made based on
the newly recalculated percentage of violent crime average
proportionate to the new LLEBG amount of $111,485,690. 

In FY 2004 Alabama was a non-de minimus State, receiving an
initial total State award of $1,659,652 based on their 3-year UCR
violent crime average of 20,874. This is 1.45% of the total UCR
3-year violent crime averages reported by the 50 States, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and
the combined territories. After all de minimus States received
their awards and were removed from the formula, Alabama's
percentage of the total average UCR violent crime was
recomputed to 1.47%, but this was based on $111,485,690, not
the original LLEBG award of $115 million. Therefore, the final
award C after a proportional reduction for this non-de minimus
State C was less, $1,629,758, than what it was ($1,659,652) prior
to the de minimus States receiving their awards. 

Methodology

The data used to calculate the allocation amounts are collected
from numerous sources including the most recently available
UCR Part I Violent Crime data from the FBI's Crime in the
United States (CIUS) and county, municipal, and township data
from the Census Bureau.

Data collection

The most recent State-level violent crime data are obtained from
the FBI's CIUS on an annual basis. Data for local jurisdictions
are obtained in an electronic format directly from the FBI. For
FY 2004, data from 1999 to 2001 were used.

The total LLEBG Program annual allocation is determined by
congressional appropriation.

Limitations of data

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments
within a State will not equal the amount reported by that State in
the FBI's annual publication. BJS uses the published UCR State
figures, which represent official FBI estimates of crime in a
State. The FBI imputes crime data to compensate for
nonreporting local agencies. These imputed values attributed to
nonreporting local jurisdictions do not appear on the electronic
datafile provided to BJS and therefore are not used in the formula
calculation.

Definition of terms

Allocation - an amount designated by formula calculation.

Award - an amount actually received by a State or locality.

Geographically contiguous unit of local government - a unit of
local government that has jurisdiction over areas located within
the boundaries of an area over which a unit of local government
has jurisdiction. 

Non-de minimus States - The District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and Guam are treated as independent States; that is, there is no
distribution of funds to units of local government. The Virgin
Islands receive one de minimus award. American Samoa and the
Northern Mariana Islands share a half of a single de minimus
award, 33% and 17%, respectively.

Reporting unit of local government - any unit of local
government that reported Part 1 violent crimes to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation for the 3 most recent calendar years for
which such data are available. 

Unit of local government - counties, towns, townships, villages,
cities, parishes, Indian tribes, Alaska Native villages, and parish
sheriffs in Louisiana that carry out substantial governmental
duties. 

Sources of additional information

For more information about the LLEBG Formula Block Grant
Program and application process, refer to the Bureau of Justice
Assistance website at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/grant/
Llebg_00main.html>. 

For H.R. 728 Local Government Law Enforcement Block Grants
Act of 1995, see <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJS/
Grant/LLEBG_HR728.html>. 

For public Law 108-7, Consolidated Appropriations Resolution,
2003, refer to the Library of Congress website at 
<http://www.thomas.loc.gov>. See the section "Office of Justice
Programs, State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance" in the
public law. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the
U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence A. Greenfeld is director. 

Lynn Bauer, Statistician in the Law Enforcement, Adjudication,
and Federal Statistics Unit at BJS, wrote this Technical Report
under the supervision of Steven K. Smith. Tina Dorsey and Tom
Hester edited the report.

September 2004, NCJ 203096

End of file
9/3/04  pm



