U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Technical Report

Linking Uniform Crime Reporting Data to
Other Datasets

May 2001 NCJ 185233

---------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/lucrdod.htm
---------------------------------------------------------

By
Sue A. Lindgren
Marianne W. Zawitz
BJS Statisticians

---------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and
the National Archive of Criminal Justice
Data (NACJD) recently developed the
Law Enforcement Agency Identifiers
Crosswalk. For the first time, criminal
justice researchers and statisticians will
be able to analyze crime and arrest data
reported by nearly 20,000 State and local
law enforcement agencies in conjunction
with sociodemographic data from other
official datasets.

The crosswalk merged data from three
major datasets:

*  The FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
(UCR) program file containing 18,725
records, one for each law enforcement
agency in the Nation that had ever
reported to the UCR as of 1996.

*  The BJS 1996 Directory of Law
Enforcement Agencies (DLEA) file of
18,745 law enforcement agencies, a
complete census of publicly funded police
and sheriffs' departments employing at
least one part-time or full-time sworn
police officer with full arrest powers.

*  The Census Bureau's Governments
Integrated Directory (GID), which is a
complete listing of all 86,745 recognized
local governments in the United States.

The resulting file has 23,170 records: 

*  14,313 from both the UCR and the DLEA
*  4,418 from only the UCR
*  4,439 from only the DLEA.

Each record in the file contains the
following geo-coding information where
matches were possible:

* The law enforcement agency's ORI
code. 

* The Census Bureau's Governments
Division code (GOVID), identifying the
parent government of the law enforcement
agency.

*  The National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) FIPS codes, identifying 
the geographic area of the agency.
-----------------------------------------------------------

Since the 1930's the FBI's Uniform Crime
Reporting (UCR) program has collected
data on crimes reported to the police and
on arrests.  These data come from State
and local law enforcement agencies, and
for the UCR the FBI developed its own
agency identifiers. 

Most other Federal data collections,
including the decennial census and the
census of governments, use geocodes
and government entity identifiers
developed by the Census Bureau or by
what is now the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST).
Because the UCR and other data sources
do not share place identifiers, analysis of
crime data in conjunction with data from
other sources has been difficult.  

To overcome this obstacle, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) and the National
Archive of Criminal Justice Data (NACJD)
have created a data file, the Law
Enforcement Agency Identifiers
Crosswalk, that lists agencies by the FBI's
codes as well as the other major
identifying standards in use today.  This
report describes this file and its uses.  
The file is available free of charge from 
the NACJD.

Origin of the crosswalk 

The immediate need for a crosswalk was
administration of the Local Law
Enforcement Block Grant program,
enacted in 1996, and the Juvenile
Accountability Incentive Block Grant
program, enacted the following year.

In both these programs, government
awards are based on a formula that
includes a 3-year average of violent
crimes from the UCR. The juvenile block
grant program also uses government
expenditure data from the Census
Bureau's finance survey files.

-------------------------------------
Research uses for the Law Enforcement
Agency Identifiers Crosswalk

The crosswalk opens many opportunities
for criminal justice research because it
allows linking UCR offenses known,
persons arrested, hate crimes, and
supplementary homicide files to other
official datasets.  Beyond this linking, 
the crosswalk makes available the complete
Federal Information Processing Standards
(FIPS) geocoding for more complete
geographic mapping of UCR data than
previously possible. 

Researchers have always been able to
aggregate UCR data to the State, county, 
and metropolitan area using those FIPS
codes on the UCR tapes.  With the
crosswalk, however, the more detailed
FIPS codes and government identification
(GOVID) codes on the crosswalk allow
more detailed analyses at finer
geographic levels. The GOVID also allows
analysis of multiple datasets, further
enriching analytic possibilities. 

Using the GOVID researchers can link
UCR data to --

*  BJS surveys and censuses of correctional 
programs that collect data on facility 
operations and staffing as well as about 
inmates

*  Census Bureau's Governments Division
files on government finance, expenditure,
and employment, especially the quinquennial 
Census of Governments, last done in 1997, 
that collects data on all known governments 
rather than a sample

* the Federal Assistance Award Data
System of the Census Bureau's
Governments Division that produces
datasets on all types of Federal financial
assistance awards to all types of
recipients.   

Using the FIPS codes researchers can
link the UCR files to data sets from the
Census Bureau, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, and other Federal agencies,
including --

*  the Decennial Census of Population and
Housing, conducted every 10 years, that
provides data on the full range of
population and housing information, with
extensive sociodemographic and
economic data on persons and
households, and about the housing stock. 

*  the Current Population Survey that
provides data on employment, unem-
ployment, earnings, and hours of work.
Data are available by demographic
characteristics, occupation, industry, and
class of worker. Supplemental questions
produce data on topics like school
enrollment, income, previous work
experience, health, employee benefits,
and work hours.

*  the Survey of Income and Program
Participation that provides information on
source and amount of income; labor force
participation; participation in income
supplementing programs such as food
stamps, pension systems, private health
insurance coverage, public or subsidized
rental housing, low-income energy
assistance, and school breakfast and
lunch programs; and general demographic
characteristics.  

*  the National Vital Statistics
System Mortality Data, Multiple Cause-of-
Death Public-Use Data Files that provide
mortality data for cities, counties, and
standard metropolitan areas. These data
are produced by the National Center for
Health Statistics from certificates filed for
deaths occurring in each State. For
example, the crosswalk file was used to
link homicide data from the National Vital
Statistics System to the FBI's
Supplementary Homicide Reports for an
analysis of the agreement between the
two sources at the county level.***(Brian
Wiersma and others, "A comparison of
Supplementary Homicide Reports and
National Vital Statistics system Homicide
Estimates for U.S. Counties," Homicide
Studies, 4,4, Nov. 2000, pp. 317-340.)***
---------------------------------------

The UCR coding does not associate the
agency with its parent government.
The current crosswalk was originally
designed to link the number of violent
crimes reported by individual police
agencies to specific local governments for
formula grant purposes. 

FBI UCR codes (ORI)

Law enforcement agencies voluntarily
report summary crime and arrest data
monthly to the FBI.  Initially most reporting
agencies were in large cities, and before
1957 the FBI did not aggregate data, even
to the national level. Over the years the
number and types of agencies reporting
crime have increased. 

Every agency that reports to the UCR is
assigned a unique Originating Reporting
Agency Identifier or ORI.  For the most
part, police agencies have an ORI and
report crimes, but other agencies -- like
fire marshals, alcoholic beverage control
agencies, regional and special purpose
task forces, Federal agencies, and private
colleges -- also have law enforcement
responsibilities and are assigned ORI
codes.

By design, the ORI codes are the first
seven digits of the FBI's National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) number.
Established in 1967, NCIC is a nationwide
computerized system that provides law
enforcement with ready data about
wanted persons, stolen property, and
other information.

The ORI codes begin with a two-letter
State designation which is similar, but not
identical, to that used by the U.S. Postal
Service. For example, Nebraska in the
ORI numbers is NB, whereas the postal
abbreviation is NE. 

The remaining five digits of the ORI code
are generally numeric. Depending on the
State, the first two or three digits identify
the county within the State and the
remaining digits identify the reporting
agency within the county. The last five
digits sometimes incorporate alpha
characters, such as SP for State police
agency, WL for wildlife police, HP for
highway patrol, and other combinations. 

A government can have more than one
agency with an ORI code. This is
particularly true of State governments in
which the State police have a barracks in
every county, each with its own ORI code.
Add to this, State wildlife agencies and 
alcoholic beverage control agencies, and 
the number of ORI's assigned to a State can 
be large. Florida has the most, with 497 
separate ORI's assigned to the State level 
of government.

About 96% of the general purpose local
governments have one ORI in the UCR
file. But 382 have 2, and New York City
has 20. Of the 1,873 ORI's in multiple-ORI
governments, half are in Texas, as a
result of constables being added to the
crosswalk from the 1996 Directory of Law
Enforcement Agencies (DLEA). 

Federal Information Processing 
Standards (FIPS) codes

FIPS codes were developed to uniquely
identify geographic and population areas
such as States, counties, cities,
Metropolitan Statistical Areas,
congressional districts, foreign geographic
entities, and incorporated and
unincorporated places. More than a single
code, FIPS refers to standardized
systems of numeric and/or alphabetic
coding issued by the NIST, a Department
of Commerce agency. 

Geographic elements to be assigned
codes are alphabetized and then assigned
codes serially, generally with gaps that
permit additions.***Footnote 1: For FIPS
information see <http://www.census.gov/geo/
www/tiger/glossary.html>. See also <http://  
www.itl.nist.gov/fipspubs/index.htm>.***
Codes for entities in a State are unique 
within that State. The basic geographic 
code formats used in the crosswalk are --

* States -- 2 digits 
* Counties and county equivalents -- 
3 digits 
* Places, including incorporated and
unincorporated places and Census
Designated Places -- 5 digits
* Metropolitan Statistical Areas -- 4 
digits
* Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical
Areas -- 2 digits.

The Census Bureau's Governments
Integrated Directory and GOVID

The Census Bureau maintains the
Governments Integrated Directory, a
listing of all known local governments 
in the United States. (See http://www.census.
gov/govs/www/index.html>.)  

The directory includes -- 
*  3,043 county governments
* 19,373 municipal governments
* 16,629 township governments
* 34,684 special districts such as
housing and transit authorities
* 13,726 independent school districts
* 34,684 special districts such as
housing and transit authorities
* 13,726 independent school districts
that are independent of any other
government such as a county or a State.

The Census Bureau assigned a unique
9-digit GOVID code to each of these
87,000 State and local government
entities. The GOVID consists of--

  Digit       Content
  1-2         State ID
   3          Type of government code
  4-6         County code
  7-9         Unit code 

A particularly useful component of the
GOVID is Government type. This single
digit identifies --

     Value     Government type
      0        State                                
      1        County               
      2        Municipal 
     3        Township                         
      4        Special district
      5        Independent school district 
      6        Federal agency
      7        Tribal                                      
  
How ORI relates to FIPS and GOVID

Although the coding schemes have
similarities, each results in codes that 
are not the same for a particular agency 
or locality. For example, Minneapolis City, 
in Hennepin County, Minnesota, has the
following codes from the three coding
schemes included in the crosswalk:

    Minnesota State ID
    UCR ORI   MN
    GOVID     24
    FIPS      27

    Hennepin County ID
    UCR ORI   027
    GOVID     027
    FIPS      053

    Minneapolis City, full ID
    UCR ORI   MN 027 11
    GOVID     24 2 027 020
    FIPS      27 053 43000

Crosswalk description

The crosswalk file contains records for
over 23,000 agencies. It was created by
matching electronic files and manually
looking up agency, government, and
location information.
 
------------------------------------------- 
Contents of the crosswalk file

FBI UCR   
    Originating Agency Identifier (ORI)              
    Agency Name         
    Agency Covered By Another ORI Flag          
    Multiple County Flag     
    State Code          
    County Code         
    County Name         
    Metropolitan Statistical Area
    Population Group Code    
    Population Covered  
    Reporting Agency Address
    Reporting Agency Zip Code
                 
Bureau of the Census (GOVID)
   Governments Division State Number        
   Government ID (Numeric)
   Government ID (String)   
   Census Government Type (Or BJS Assigned)      
   Government Name     
   Population 1994     

Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)        
    State Code          
    County Code         
    Place Code          
    Metropolitan Statistical Area(MSA) Code         
    Metropolitan Statistical Area Name          
    Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area 
    Code (CMSA)
---------------------------------------------

Three main electronic source files 
were used:

*  A file supplied by the FBI that contained
ORI numbers, agency names, and UCR
State and county codes for every ORI that
had ever been issued. Mailing addresses
of most agencies were also included.

*  The BJS Directory of Law Enforcement
Agencies (DLEA), 1996, that lists all
active police agencies, regardless of UCR
participation, with one or more
part-time or full-time law enforcement
officers with arrest power (sworn law
enforcement officers). It was derived from
a complete enumeration of all State and
local police agencies in the United States.
This file contained NCIC numbers as
reported by the respondent agencies and
the GOVID. The first seven digits of the
NCIC number were assumed to be the
ORI number. The date of this file -- 1996
-- was the date assigned to the crosswalk
file.

* The Governments Integrated Directory,
supplied by the Census Bureau, listed all
local governments as defined by the
Census Bureau for general statistical
purposes -- counties, cities, townships,
special districts, and independent school
districts -- with name, address, GOVID,
and FIPS State, county, metropolitan
area, and place codes (where applicable).

Through the ORI codes, the FBI file was
matched to the DLEA file, which contained
both ORI and GOVID. The result was
matched to the GID using GOVID. The
third file that emerged contained ORI,
GOVID, and FIPS State, county, and
place variables.

Matches were obtained for 62% of the
23,000 records in both the UCR and
DLEA files. A few thousand records from
each file remained unmatched.
For most nonmatches, the agency was
included in either the FBI file or the DLEA
file. 

In a few instances the ORI code in the
DLEA differed from the ORI in the UCR.
After verifying that the two records were
from the same agency, the ORI from the
UCR was used. 

                 Number 
Source           of records   Percent
 Total            23,170       100.0%
UCR and DLEA      14,313        61.8
UCR only           4,418        19.1
DLEA only          4,439        19.2
 
It was apparent from agency names and
the absence of UCR reporting that many
agencies in the UCR files no longer exist.
In addition, the ORI dataset includes
some Federal agencies such as China
Lake Naval Air Weapons Station,
California, and Butner Federal prison in
North Carolina, regional task forces,
private colleges, and so on that do not
meet the DLEA definition of a State or
local law enforcement agency. 

Of the agencies in the DLEA that do not
match an ORI from the UCR, about 3,000
of these have an ORI derived from the
first seven digits of the NCIC number they
reported in the DLEA census. A police
agency can have an NCIC number
assigned for participation in the NCIC
program but not have an ORI because
they do not participate in the UCR
program.

In addition, the DLEA lists only the main
or headquarters offices and not individual
branches for multibranch agencies, such
as State police. The FBI lists all branches.

Agencies covered by another ORI 

Some police agencies report data to the
UCR program for other localities.
Sometimes this results from one
jurisdiction contracting with another for
police protection services rather than
having its own police force.  In other
cases the arrangement may be less
formal. In these situations the reporting
agency may include the crime and arrest
data in its own reports or may report
separately using the other agency's ORI
number. 

Overall, about 10% of the general purpose
local government  agencies in the UCR
files indicate that they are covered by
another reporting agency, but many of
these agencies appear to no longer
operate; that is, the jurisdiction once had
a police agency with an ORI number in
the UCR system but has ceased to exist.
About half of the agencies in the UCR
coded as covered by another agency
were not detected during the 1996 DLEA.

Whether an ORI is covered by another
reporting agency is indicated on the UCR
and crosswalk files. This varies by the
type of government: 3.8% of county ORIs,
11.5% of municipal ORIs, and 17% of
township ORIs are coded as covered by
another reporting agency.

Manual matches

Nonmatched records were manually
looked up in the Governments Integrated
Directory file for the GOVID and FIPS
codes.  Because almost all police
agencies have a geographic reference in
their name, this identifier of political
geography and not the mailing address
was used to find the FIPS place code. For
example, a county sheriff's office may
have a mailing address of a city within the
county. Typically, a county encompasses
a city, and the true geographic area the
agency covers is the larger county. 

Complicating the manual lookup was
confusion of place names; many
counties have localities that share their
names with localities in other counties in
the same State. Even within some
counties the same name may refer to
three localities: a city, a township, and a
village. If an agency was definitely linked
to a geographic area, that area's FIPS
codes were assigned to that agency.
Similarly, if the agency could be
definitely linked to a government, that
government's GOVID was added to the
file for that agency record.

Special situations

State police. The crosswalk file contains
both State police headquarters and
branch locations, each with its own ORI
and separate record. The GOVID for all
State police agencies is that of their State
government. The FIPS codes listed for
branches of the State police are based on
the area that the branch covers. For
example, the Michigan State Police --
Washtenaw County (ORI MI81081) is
assigned the State of Michigan's GOVID
and the FIPS place code of Washtenaw
County. In other instances a State police
branch may be assigned to a city, and the
city FIPS place code is used. Headquarters 
are given a separate FIPS place code (98000) 
to indicate that they are not a branch office. 
Analysts may, of course, recode these values 
to meet their own needs.

Colleges and universities. Many
colleges and universities, both public and
private, have their own police
departments. Often the location of the
university can be determined from its
mailing address. For example, the
University of Michigan Department of
Public Safety covers the campus in Ann
Arbor. The place code for the city of Ann
Arbor was assigned to this agency,
although the agency covers an area that
is smaller than the one the FIPS place
code represents. 

With multibranch campuses it is not
always possible to determine the location
from the address. A FIPS place code was
assigned only when it was certain that the
agency's jurisdiction was confined to the
campus within the place. 

The GOVID's listed for college and
university police agencies are the
GOVID's of the government that created
them. This is most often the State GOVID
for public colleges and universities, or less
frequently it is a county, city, or special
district GOVID. Colleges and universities
are either coded with a specific
government type when it was apparent
from the name or coded with 9 for
university/college in the government type
code.

Independent school districts.  These
districts matched electronically only if 
they were in the UCR file and their ORI
numbers were in the DLEA file.  Several
States have independent school districts
that the Census Bureau considers to be
local governments, as distinguished from
school districts that are dependent
agencies of county governments. Some
independent school districts have police
agencies. These agencies were given the
GOVID of their parent government
whenever possible. Some colleges are
also considered to be independent school
districts. They were given their parent
government's GOVID. In many instances
the parent government could not be
identified, but the government type was
apparent and was coded accordingly. 

Special districts.  Special districts
include hospital districts, port authorities,
airport authorities, transportation
authorities, and rail and tunnel authorities.
The prevalence of these special districts
varies greatly by State. Like independent
school districts, special districts matched
electronically only if they were in the UCR
file and their ORI numbers were available
from the DLEA file, which included active
special district police agencies. 

However, there were many instances
when a special police agency was listed in
the UCR files without a match to the
DLEA. In the crosswalk file there are
approximately 250 special district
agencies that could not be electronically
matched by ORI number or manually
matched to a parent government based
on names and addresses. The FIPS place
code listed with these agencies is based
on the main geographic area that it
serves.  For example, many railroad
police contained a county name in the
agency name on the UCR file, and the
FIPS code for that county was used.

Census designated places (CDP's).  
CDP's are densely settled populations
that have a name but are not legally
incorporated. The Census Bureau does
not consider them to be governments.
Their boundaries, which usually coincide
with visible features or the boundary of an
adjacent incorporated place, have no legal
status.***Footnote 2: 1990 Census of 
Population and Housing, Summary Tape File
3, Technical Documentation, December 1991.***      

No elected officials serve traditional
municipal functions for these areas. Given
the above definition, CDP's were not listed
in the Census Bureau's directory file, but
some were listed on the UCR file.  FIPS
place codes for them were obtained from
the Census Bureau and included in the
file. 

Indian tribes.  The Census Bureau has
assigned GOVID's to all tribal police
agencies that have law enforcement
functions as defined for the DLEA; those
agencies were included in the crosswalk.
Many of the Nation's 567 federally-recognized 
tribes do not have a tribal police agency. 
The Bureau of Indian Affairs, State police, 
or a local sheriff perform law enforcement 
functions for them. Consequently, these tribes 
do not have a law enforcement agency specific
to them in the crosswalk. 

Tribal police records differ from other
records in the crosswalk file in two ways:

*  ORI. Not all tribal police agencies had
ORI codes in the UCR or DLEA files.
When an actual ORI for a tribal agency
did not exist or when there were multiple
ambiguous ORI's, an ORI was assigned
to the tribal agency in the crosswalk file
using the following hierarchy: UCR files,
DLEA files, the local law enforcement and
juvenile accountability block grant formula
files, and missing data. In some instances
for tribes without an actual ORI, an ORI
was constructed for a tribal agency for
block grant formula purposes by using the
two-digit UCR State code followed by
"TRIB" and "1," "2," and so on.

*  FIPS codes. Tribal police agencies have
been arbitrarily assigned a FIPS place
code of 97000.

Future routine crosswalk maintenance

Routine periodic maintenance is needed
because the crosswalk quickly becomes
outdated. The next overall update is
scheduled to follow the completion of the
2000 Directory of Law Enforcement
Agencies census in 2001. Thereafter, the
DLEA is expected to be repeated every 4
years. Some types of change that will
affect the crosswalk include:

*  Change in DLEA definition of local
law enforcement agency. The 1996
DLEA included all publicly funded police
and sheriffs' departments that employed
at least one full-time or part-time sworn
officer with general arrest powers. The
2000 DLEA will include only those
agencies that are publicly funded and
employ the equivalent of at least one
full-time sworn officer. An agency will 
be included if it employs two or more
half-time officers, but not if it employs 
only one part-time officer and no full-time
officers. This change is designed to
reduce the number of law enforcement
agencies with very restricted responsibilities.  
In Texas, for example, a constable may be an 
office with a single person who performs 
limited law enforcement duties only a few 
days a month. The 1996 DLEA has 540 agencies
with less than 1 full-time equivalent sworn
officer (counting part-time as .5), and
these appear to not have matches in the
UCR. 

*  Moving to a nine-digit ORI.  States
and localities are implementing the
National Incident Based Reporting System
(NIBRS), creating a record for each crime. 
Currently, UCR summary data are
extracted from the NIBRS records. NIBRS
includes a nine-digit ORI code. To ensure
that each ORI code is unique, the FBI will
move to using nine-digit ORI codes.  For
consistency the crosswalk will also need
to include the nine-digit ORI code.

*  Creation of new agencies. In 1997 the
FBI added 182 new ORI's across 22
States.  These new ORI codes are not
included in the crosswalk because it has
a 1996 reference date. Why these were
added seems to depend on the State, and
it is doubtful that they all represent local
law enforcement agencies meeting the
BJS DLEA definition. For example,
Tennessee added 62 colleges/universities, 
25 drug task forces, and 26 ORI's for the 
Tennessee Technical Centers in 26 locations. 
Most of these are not reporting any violent 
crime, but there were several that appear 
to be new agencies.  These agencies are being
surveyed for the 2000 DLEA to see if they
meet the DLEA definition of a local law
enforcement agency.

*  Out-of-service ORI's. The crosswalk
file contains records of two law
enforcement agencies known to have
been decommissioned since the 1996
DLEA. Agencies may be defunct, for
example, when a municipal government
decides to contract with the county for
police services rather than to maintain 
its own police force. Police departments
cease to exist, or an ORI was assigned to
a regional task force that has completed
its work, and so on. It would be helpful 
for a variety of purposes to code these
agencies as no longer operational.

*  Abolished or created governments.
The Massachusetts legislature recently
abolished seven county governments and
assigned their police protection functions
to the State government. Conversely,
States periodically establish new cities
and towns. The Census Bureau continually 
monitors State legislatures for such changes 
and updates the directory files as changes 
occur.  These will be reflected in the 
crosswalk.

Keeping the crosswalk current will be
fairly straightforward. But, for describing
trends, it may be necessary to devise a
scheme to cover situations like those
described above. 

Future special efforts

Aside from routine maintenance, future
efforts include these areas where
additional work is needed:

*  Railroad police. Based on agency
names, the file contains some 225 records
for railroad police, usually 1 for each
county in which a railroad operates. These
all come from the UCR files, and none
matches to the DLEA files. Most probably
no longer exist. A special research project
may be needed to address these
situations.
 
*  Colleges and universities. The current
crosswalk has 70 colleges and
universities that could not be linked to a
parent government based on name; many
of these are private schools. The U.S.
Department of Education (DEd) directory
of all colleges and universities indicates
whether a school is private or public, and,
if public, which government operates it.
Using the DEd directory, the Census
Bureau has created a file containing
GOVID for public colleges and universities
that will be electronically matched to the
crosswalk in the future. The remaining
private colleges and universities will be
coded manually using the DEd directory. 

Appendix 1. ORI codes and county
identifiers

For most jurisdictions, the first three digits
after the two-letter State identifier of the
ORI code represent the numeric county
code. However, this is not always the
case .  

Of the 3,011 State police agencies on the
crosswalk file from the UCR:
*  68% match on the UCR county code
and the 3rd-5th digits of the ORI code
*  172 (about 6%) use alpha characters
such as SP (State Police) or HP
(Highway Patrol) in the county field of
the ORI 
*  110 have no UCR county code on the
UCR files
*  670 (22%) have a county code that
does not match for any apparent reason.

For general purpose local governments,
83% of the appropriate county digits in the
ORI numbers matched the UCR county
code on the UCR files, but these varied
greatly by State, with some States always
matching and others never matching:

*  19 States have 100% match between
the UCR county code and the 3rd-5th
digits of the ORI code

*  11 States never or rarely match

*  12 States match except for a few large
cities that incorporate alpha characters
in their ORI code.  For example, 
Indianapolis's ORI is INIPD00, and
Newark's is NJNDP00. Perhaps codes
were assigned to these early
participants in the UCR program before
the standardized ORI coding scheme
was developed. 

*  8 additional States seem to follow the
coding convention but have exceptions.
In some cases a few nonmatches
appear to be due to coding errors in the
county code; in other instances it
appears that the county code is correct,
but the ORI county portion of the ORI
code uses a different county number
than the one in the county code variable.

For special police agencies and
universities that are not a part of State
government, the ORI code matches the
UCR county code about 70% of the time.

Appendix 2. Comparing FBI population
groups to Census type of government

The FBI identifies each agency according
to population groups that are used to
present data and calculate estimates in
Crime in the United States.   These
groupings primarily identify if the agency
serves a city or county and the population
of the area it serves. It also stratifies
counties according to whether they are in
Metropolitan Statistical Areas, which the
Census Bureau generally designates as
urban areas with a center city of at least
50,000 population.  

The Census Bureau's Governments
Division codes were compared to the FBI
Population Groups for counties and cities. 
Of those agencies classified as county
agencies by the UCR -- 
*  56% are also classified as counties by
the Census Bureau  
*  39% are classified as State agencies 
*  5% are classified as other types of
government.

Of those agencies classified as city
agencies by the UCR --
*  79% are classified as municipal
agencies by the Census Bureau
*  14% are classified as townships
*  5% are classified as State agencies.

-----------------------------------------
Abbreviations related to the crosswalk

CDP    Census Designated Place
CMSA   Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area
Ded    U.S. Department of Education
DLEA   Directory of Law Enforcement Agencies
FAADS  Federal Assistance Awards Data System 
FIPS   Federal Information Processing Standards
FTE    Full-time Equivalent
GID    Governments Integrated Directory
GOVID  Government Identification
JAIBG  Juvenile Accountability Incentive Block Grant
LLEBG  Local Law Enforcement Block Grant
MSA    Metropolitan Statistical Area
NACJD  National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
NCIC   National Crime Information Center
NIBRS  National Incident-Based Reporting System
NIST   National Institute of Standards and Technology
NVSS   National Vital Statistics System 
ORI    Originating Agency Identifier (FBI-UCR)
SIPP   Survey of Income and Program Participation
UCORI  A locality's crime is reported to Uniform Crime 
       Reporting program by another agency 
UCR    Uniform Crime Reporting program
USPS   United State Postal Service
--------------------------------------------

-----------------------------
How to obtain the Law 
Enforcement Agency Identifiers
Crosswalk, 1996

On the Internet --
*  Go to the website of the National
Archive of Criminal Justice: 
<www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD>
*  Click on "Download Data"
*  Enter study number 2876 in the box on
left
*  Click on "Enter"
*  Answer questions (first time only) and
email address
*  List of files is presented
*  Click on "Uncompressed" to browse
*  Use "shift-click" to download.
-------------------------------

----------------------------------------
Sources of data

BJS and UCR files are available at
NACJD <www.icpsr.umich.edu/ NACJD>.
Census Bureau files are available at
<www.census.gov>.  The Census Bureau
website describes other datasets that may
interest researchers and analysts looking
for data to be analyzed with UCR data. 
Selected census files and data from other
government agencies are available at
NACJD's parent organization, the
Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research at
<www.icpsr.umich.edu>.  The National
Vital Statistics System data are available
from the National Center for Health
Statistics -- 
<www.cdc.gov/nchs>.
--------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  Lawrence A.
Greenfeld is acting director.

Sue A. Lindgren and Marianne W. Zawitz,
BJS, wrote this Technical Report.  Tom
Zelenock, BJS Team Leader, under the
supervision of Chris Dunn, Director,
NACJD of ICPSR at the University of
Michigan, conducted the electronic
merging of files and the many manual
lookups. He also prepared much of the
documentation and codebook.  Stephen
D. Owens, Governments Division, U.S.
Census Bureau, provided the
Governments Integrated Directory file,
supplied technical assistance in its use,
and reviewed this report.  Brian A.
Reaves, BJS Statistician, oversaw the
development of the Directory of Law
Enforcement Agencies and answered
many questions about it.

Kenneth Candell of the Criminal Justice
Information Services Division of the FBI
under the direction of William C. Temple,
Chief, Programs Support Section,
reviewed this report. 

May 2001, NCJ 185233

End of file
05/24/01 ih

