U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

April 2012, NCJ  237308

Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in National Crime Victimization Survey

Janet L. Lauritsen, Jennifer Gatewood Owens, 
Michael Planty, Michael R. Rand, Jennifer L. Truman,
Statisticians
---------------------------------------------------         
This file is text without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2240
---------------------------------------------------

****************************************************     
Technical Series Report

Bureau of Justice Statistics

James P. Lynch. Director

BJS Website: www.bjs.gov
askbjs@usdoj

***************************************************

Executive Summary

As part of ongoing research efforts associated with the
redesign of the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS), the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) has
investigated ways to include high-frequency repeat
victimizations, or series victimizations, in estimates of
criminal victimization. Including series victimizations
would obtain a more accurate estimate of victimization.
This report summarizes the research results and describes
changes in BJS's enumeration practices regarding the
treatment of series victimizations when estimating annual
victimization rates.

The NCVS's primary purpose is to accurately estimate
the number and type of criminal victimizations that
occur each year in the United States. To enumerate and
classify victimizations, the NCVS employs an interview
procedure that asks respondents to recall specific types of
criminal events that occurred over the previous 6 months.
Repeatedly victimized persons have experiences that
present considerable challenges for the accurate counting
and description of criminal events. These experiences
involve multiple crimes that are often indistinguishable to
victims, making it difficult for them to separate the details
of each event. Such experiences may include intimate
partner violence or bullying by schoolmates. To handle
these repeated victimizations, the NCVS employs a series
victimization protocol. Currently, the NCVS records a series
victimization when the respondent reported experiencing
six or more similar crimes during the 6-month reference
period and was unable to recall or describe each event
in detail. If all of these conditions are met, the NCVS
interviewer records the victim's report of the number of
times this type of victimization occurred and collects
detailed information only for the most recent victimization.

Although information about series victimizations is
collected in the NCVS, BJS typically excludes series
victimizations from annual estimates of crime. This
enumeration practice resulted from concerns about
the accuracy of the victimization count, whether each
victimization in the series occurred within the reference
period, and whether characteristics of the most recent
victimization (such as whether an injury occurred) would
apply to the other victimizations in the series.

To assess the strengths and weaknesses for enumerating and
classifying series victimizations into national victimization
estimates, this report examined the extent and the nature of
series victimization in the NCVS and reviewed the general
patterns and statistical properties of victims' responses
to being asked how many times the incident occurred.
Series victimization analyses also examined how different
treatments would affect conclusions about the victimization
level and annual rate of change for various crime types and
victimization characteristics.

*********
Findings
*********

* While violent series victimizations have declined in
number and proportion over time, the characteristics of
these victimizations have exhibited little change. Violent
series victimizations primarily consist of domestic
violence, school violence, and work-related violence.

* Many series victims had difficulty recalling exactly how
many times violent victimizations occurred within a
6-month reference period. The observed patterns of
response clustering indicate that many victims provided
estimates of the number of times the incidents occurred.
Victim responses tended to be consistent when asked for
a second time about the frequency of such victimizations.

* Including series victimizations in national rates results
in rather large increases in the level of violent
victimization; however, trends in violence are generally
similar regardless of whether series victimizations are
included. The impact of including series victimizations may
vary across years and crime types, in part reflecting the
relative rarity of the offense type under consideration.

* The series victimization counting rule has limited
statistical and substantive effects on the proportions and
patterns of some victimization characteristics, such as
the percentage reported to the police, the percentage
involving weapon use, and the proportion resulting in
injury. For other victimization characteristics, such as the
proportions involving strangers or intimate partners, the
treatment of series victimizations had a larger impact.

Given the findings from this research, BJS will enumerate
series victimizations using the victim's estimates of the
number of times the victimizations occurred over the past 6
months, capping the number of victimizations within each
series at a maximum of 10. This strategy for counting series
victimizations balances the desire to estimate national rates
and account for the experiences of persons with repeated
victimizations while noting that some estimation errors exist
in the number of times these victimizations occurred.

*********
Contents
*********

Introduction............................................1

Counting and classification............................ 1


History of counting high-frequency repeat victimization
in the NCVS........................................1

Analysis of series victimization in the NCVS.............3

Extent and nature of series victimization in the NCVS ...3

Victim responses to "How many times did this type of
incident happen?".................................... ..8

Counting series victimizations.........................14

Impact of including series victimizations on national
estimates of violence..................................15

Impact of including series victimizations on major crime
categories............................................ 17

Impact of including series victimizations on violence
rates for types often reported as series ..............20

Impact of series counting decisions on selected
victimization characteristics..........................23

Conclusions ...........................................27

Methodology............................................28

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006............ 28

Series victimizations in intimate partner violence.....28

Standard error computations.......................... .28
 
Definitions......................................... ..29

References.......................................... ..30

**************
List of Tables
**************

Table 1. Percent of victimizations reported as series
victimizations, 1993 2009...............................3

Table 2. Percent of victimizations reported as series
victimizations, by type of crime, 1993 1999 and
2000 2009...............................................3

Table 3. Activity at time of most recent violent series
victimization, 1992 1995 and ...........................4

Table 4. Distribution of violent series victimizations,
by age and sex, 2000 2009...............................4

Table 5. Violent series victimizations at work or on duty,
by sex and occupation, age 18 or older, 
2001 2009 ..............................................5

Table 6. Characteristics of most recent series
victimization compared to other victimizations in the
series, by age and sex, 2000 2009.......................7

Table 7. Responses to "How many times did this type of
incident happen?" for all violent victimizations,
1993 2009............................................. 10

Table 8. Consistency of first and second responses to
"How many times did this type of incident happen?",
1993 2009............................................. 11

Table 9. Characteristics of violent incidents for 
nonseries and series victimizations,...................16

Table 10. Percent change in victimization rates with
series victimizations included and excluded, by type of
crime................................................. 17

Table 11. Percent change in victimization rates with
series victimizations included and excluded, 
by type of victimization...............................21

***************
List of Figures
***************

Activity during most recent incident in series victimization
for male and female youth ages 12 to 17, 2000 2009..........5

Activity during most recent incident in series victimization
for male and female adults age 18 or older, 2000 2009.......5

Victim-offender relationship in most recent incident in
series victimization for male and female youth ages 12 to 17,
2000 2009........6

Victim-offender relationship in most recent incident in
series victimization for male and female adults age 18 or
older, 2000 2009............................................6

Responses to "How many times did this type of incident
happen?" for all violent series victimizations, 1993 2009...9

Series victims' first and second responses to "How many times
did this type of incident happen?", 1993 2009..............11

Mean difference between the first and second responses to
"How many times did this type of incident happen?" for all
violent series victimizations, 1993 2009...................12

Responses to "How many times did this type of incident
happen?" for all violent victimizations, 1993 2009.........13

Violent victimization rates with series victimizations
included and excluded, 1993 2009...........................14

Rape and sexual assault victimization rates with series
victimizations included and excluded, 1993 2009............17

Robbery victimization rates with series victimizations
included and excluded, 1993 2009...........................18

Aggravated assault victimization rates with series
victimizations included and excluded, 1993 2009............19

Simple assault victimization rates with series victimizations
included and excluded, 1993 2009...........................19

Rates of female intimate partner violence including series
victimizations counted as 1, and counted using victim 
reports for females age 12 and older, 1993 2009............20

Rates of violent victimization at school with series
victimizations included and excluded for youth ages 12 
to 17, 1993 2009...........................................21

Rates of violent victimization at work or on duty with series
victimizations included and excluded for adults age 18 or
older, 1993 2009...........................................22

Percent of violent victimization reported to police with
series victimizations counted as 1 and counted using victim
reports, 1993 2009........................................23

Percent of violent victimizations resulting in injury with
series victimizations counted as 1 and counted using 
victim reports, 1993 2009.................................24

Percent of violent victimizations involving weapon use with
series victimizations counted as 1 and counted using 
Victim reports, 1993 2009.................................24

Percent of violent victimizations involving strangers with
series victimizations counted as 1 and counted using 
Victim reports, 1993 2009.................................25

Percent of violent victimizations involving intimate partners
with series victimizations counted as 1 and counted using
victim reports, 1993 2009.................................25

Percent of violent victimizations involving intimate 
Partners with series victimizations counted as 1 
and counted Counted Using victim reports for females 
age 12 and older, 1993 2009...............................26

*************************
List of Appendix Tables
*************************

Standard errors for table 1: Percent of victimizations
reported as series victimizations, 1993 2009..............31

Standard errors for table 2: Percent of victimizations
reported as series victimizations, by type of crime,
1993 1999 and 2000 2009...................................31

Standard errors for table 4: Distribution of violent series
victimizations, by age and sex, 2000 2009.................31

Standard errors for figure 1: Activity during most recent
incident in series victimization for male and female youth
ages 12 to 17, 2000 2009..................................31

Standard errors for figure 2: Activity during most recent
incident in series victimization for male and female adults
age 18 or older, 2000 2009................................31

Standard errors for table 5: Violent series victimizations 
at work or on duty, by sex and occupation, age 18 or older,
2001 2009.................................................31

Standard errors for figure 3: Victim-offender relationship 
in most recent incident in series victimization for male and
female youth ages 12 to 17, 2000 2009.....................31

Standard errors for figure 4: Victim-offender relationship 
in most recent incident in series victimization for male and
female adults age 18 or older, 2000 2009..................32

Standard errors for table 6: Characteristics of most recent
series victimization compared to other victimizations in the
series, by age and sex, 2000 2009.........................32

Standard errors for figure 17: Percent of violent
victimizations reported to police with series victimizations
counted as 1 and counted using victim reports, 
1993 2009.................................................32

Standard errors for figure 18: Percent of violent
victimizations resulting in injury with series victimizations
counted as 1 and counted using victim reports,
1993 2009.................................................32

Standard errors for figure 19: Percent of violent
victimizations involving weapon use with series
victimizations counted as 1 and counted using victim reports,
1993 2009.................................................33

Standard errors for figure 20: Percent of violent
victimizations involving strangers with series victimizations
counted as 1 and counted using victim reports, 
1993 2009.................................................33

Standard errors for figure 21: Percent of violent
victimizations involving intimate partners with series
victimizations counted as 1 and counted using victim 
reports, 1993 2009......................................33

Standard errors for figure 22: Percent of violent
victimizations involving intimate partners with series
incidents counted as 1 and counted using victim reports 
for females age 12 and older, 1993 2009......................33

Methods for Counting High- Frequency Repeat Victimizations in
the National Crime Victimization Survey

Janet L. Lauritsen, Jennifer Gatewood Owens, Michael Planty,
Michael R. Rand, and Jennifer L. Truman

*************
Introduction
*************

The primary purpose of the Bureau of Justice Statistics'
(BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is to
accurately measure the number and type of criminal
victimizations that occur each year to persons ages 12 and
older (Groves and Cork, 2008). To enumerate and classify
criminal victimization, the NCVS employs an interview
procedure that asks respondents to recall specific types of
criminal events that occurred over the past 6 months.
Criminal victimization is usually a relatively rare but
salient event, and many victims can recall the details of a
single victimization, such as an armed robbery or a home
burglary. In addition, crimes that result in injury, large
economic loss, and those involving the police are not easily
forgotten. 

For some types of victimization, however, it can be difficult
for the victim to accurately enumerate and describe the
details of their experiences. Persons who are repeatedly
victimized present considerable measurement challenges for
the NCVS.
 
Counting and classification

Measuring repeated or recurring victimization presents
challenges for any survey designed to provide counts of
criminal victimizations that occur each year. Providing a
count of victimizations assumes that crime is a discrete
event with an identifiable beginning and end. Many types of
crime are well-suited to being counted as a discrete event
that occurred within a given time period. For these types of
victimizations, victims can readily identify whether such an
incident occurred within the previous six months.

However, for some people, crime may be a continuous process
or condition (Biderman, 1980; Skogan, 1981). For example, an
abused woman may suffer periodic violence within an on-going
pattern of abuse that extends over time. Victims of bullying
at school may suffer continuous threats and assaults by one
or more offenders over the course of a school year. These
situations may involve multiple crimes that run together in
the victim's mind making it difficult, if not impossible, to
distinguish the details of each victimization during the
interview procedure (Dodge, 1984). Cognitive challenges and
time burdens arise when respondents are asked to recall the
number of victimizations and answer detailed questions about
each incident. Yet these details are necessary for counting
and classifying victimizations that occur each year.

History of counting high-frequency repeat victimization in
the NCVS

The NCVS and its predecessor, the National Crime Survey
(NCS), use a series victimization protocol to address the
cognitive and time burdens on respondents who report a large
number of repeated victimizations during the survey's
reference period. In the earlier NCS, a series victimization
occurred when a respondent reported experiencing three or
more crimes similar in nature during the survey's 6-month
reference period and could not recall the details of each
victimization. When a victim reported these conditions, the
interviewer recorded the number of times the victimizations
occurred and collected detailed information for the last
occurrence.

Analysis based on early NCS data showed that high-frequency
repeat victimizations constituted an important component of
victimization (Dodge, 1984a; 1984b; Dodge and Lentzner, 1980;
Reiss, 1980; 1984). As part of the research that resulted in
the later 1992 redesign of the NCS, BJS conducted a
re-interview study to obtain additional information about the
nature of series crimes (Dodge, 1987). This study found that
most victims could recall the details of individual
victimizations when the minimum number to count as a series
was raised from three to six victimizations. The study also
found that most victimizations within the series were the
same general type of crime. As a result, the redesigned NCVS
raised the minimum number required to use the series protocol
to six victimizations.

Currently, the NCVS records a series victimization when the
respondent reported experiencing six or more similar crimes
during the 6-month reference period and could not recall the
details of each victimization. If these conditions are met,
the interviewer uses the series victimization protocol,
recording the number of victimizations that occurred and
collecting detailed information for the last occurrence.
Then, the NCVS interviewer asks the respondent the following
questions about the series victimization: (1) "How many times
did this kind of thing happen to you during the last 6
months?" (2) "Did all, some, or none of these incidents occur
in the same place?" (3) "Were all, some, or none of these
incidents done by the same person(s)?" (4) "Did the same
thing happen each time?" and (5) "Is the trouble still going
on?" Responses to these questions provide analysts with a
better understanding of the nature of series victimization.

The series protocol addresses the recall and burden issues
for the respondent, but at the cost of having less available
information about these experiences in the data. Since
details are only gathered for the most recent victimization,
specific information to classify the crime type is
unavailable for other victimizations in the series. Along
with concerns about the accuracy of the victimization count
and whether all the series victimizations occurred within the
reference period, this lack of additional detail resulted in
an early BJS decision to exclude series victimizations from
annual crime estimates.

BJS has long recognized that excluding or counting series
victimizations as one victimization, as has been the practice
for various topical reports, lead to undercounts of
victimization. Our practice has been to exclude series
victimizations from crime estimates presented in the annual
Criminal Victimization bulletins due to concerns about
counting and classifying them. Some essential details about
victimization are necessary to classify the crime during
post-interview processing, therefore determining the counts
and rates for a particular type of crime. For example, the
involvement of a weapon or the occurrence of a serious injury
determines whether a victimization is classified as a simple
assault or aggravated assault. If either occurred, then the
victimization is classified as an aggravated assault.
However, without these details it is unknown whether other
assaults in the series should also be classified as
aggravated assaults.

The issue of how to treat high-frequency repeat
victimizations is not limited to the NCVS. Large-scale
victimization surveys conducted in other countries also
obtain information about the occurrence of repeated
victimizations, though the manner of gathering victimization
details varies. Most countries that use survey data to
produce victimization rates implement a capping method that
limits the maximum number of counted victimizations when a
victim reports a series-type incident. 

In the British Crime Survey (BCS), respondents who reported
being victimized more than once are subsequently asked if
they would identify the victimization as a series of crimes
that were very similar, done under the same circumstances,
and probably by the same people (Bolling, Grant, and Donovan,
2009). When estimating victimization rates, BCS publications
typically limit the inclusion of series victimizations to a
maximum of five. The national survey conducted for Mexico,
the Encuestas Nacionales Sobre Iseguridad (ENSI), also uses a
cap of five incidents when estimating victimization rates. 

The International Crime Victimization Survey (ICVS) and the
European Union International Crime Survey (EUICS), which have
been administered in a variety of countries, do not use
open-ended responses to the question "How many times did this
incident occur?" when estimating national victimization
rates. These surveys typically present prevalence rates,
which represent the proportion of the population that has
experienced one or more crimes of a specific type, and such
rates do not take into consideration how many times a person
experienced a victimization (van Kesteren, Mayhew, and
Nieuwbeerta, 2000; EUICS Consortium). Large national
victimization surveys conducted around the world have handled
the issue of series and repeat victimizations in different
ways, and those that ask victims how many times an incident
occurred typically cap or limit the contribution that these
types of victimizations can have on national victimization
rates.

*********************************************
Analysis of series victimization in the NCVS
*********************************************

We conducted multiple analyses using NCVS data to assess the
strengths and weaknesses for incorporating series
victimizations into national victimization estimates. These
analyses were designed to build on prior methodological
studies of series victimizations in the NCS, such as Biderman
and Lynch (1991), Dodge (1984a, 1984b, 1987), Dodge and
Lentzner (1980), Reiss (1980, 1984), and in the NCVS, such as
Lynch, Berbaum, and Planty (1998) and Planty and Strom
(2007). 

The first set of analyses examined the extent and nature of
series victimization by assessing the most common
characteristics and recent trends in the proportion of all
incidents reported as series victimizations. The second set
of analyses assessed the general patterns and statistical
properties of victims' responses to the question "How many
times did this incident occur?" Because the interviewer asked
this before and after the details of the last victimization
were collected, the consistency of victims' responses to
these two items could also be assessed. The results of the
first two sets of analyses informed decisions about how BJS
would count series victimizations in its reports. 

The third set of analyses examined how different treatments
of series victimizations affected conclusions about the level
of and annual rate of change for various types of violent
crime, including the types of crime most commonly found among
series victimizations. The fourth set of analyses assessed
how different treatments of series victimizations would
affect conclusions about the prevalence of various
victimization characteristics, such as the percentage of
crimes reported to the police or involving intimate partners.
The results of the latter two sets of analyses showed how
changing the treatment of series victimizations might affect
some key findings about trends in victimization
characteristics.

Extent and nature of series victimization in the NCVS
Extent of series victimization

Beginning in 1993, BJS fully implemented the new NCVS
methodology for measuring series victimization. In that year,
respondents reported 6.7% of all violent victimizations and
1.3% of property crime as series victimizations. Over the
next 17 years, the proportion of victimizations that were
reported as series victimizations declined (table 1). Series
victimizations in both violent and property crime constituted
a smaller proportion of crime in recent years compared to the
past.

When considering specific types of violent crime, series
victimizations were slightly more common for rape and sexual
assault and simple assault victimizations compared to
incidents involving robbery and aggravated assault, and this
pattern existed during both the 1993 to 1999 and 2000 to 2009
periods (table 2). The NCVS data show that the proportion of
violent victimizations reported as series victimizations
declined over time for each category of violent crime. Among
property crimes, series victimizations were slightly more
common for burglaries than for other types of thefts, though
series victimizations for property crime were less common
than for violent crime. As was the case for violent crime,
the proportion of property crimes that were reported as
series victimizations declined over time. 

Nature of violent series victimizations

Prior research by Lynch, Berbaum, and Planty (1998), Planty
and Strom (2007), and Dodge (1984a; 1984b; 1987) examined the
characteristics of violent series victimizations in detail.
These studies found that typical violent series
victimizations primarily consisted of three categories of
assaults: those that occurred in the home and involved
intimate partners or other family members; those that
occurred at school and often involved persons known to one
another; and those associated with certain occupations,
typically involving offenders who were strangers to the
victim. Victims in the third category were often police
officers or other types of security officers, as well as
medical workers.

We conducted a general replication of this past research
using NCVS data from 2000 to 2009 to determine whether the
characteristics of recent violent series victimizations
remained similar. When a victim reported a series
victimization, the interviewer obtained details about the
most recent victimization. Assuming that the most recent
victimization was similar to others in the series allowed for
a description of the typical series victimization. The
validity of this assumption could be examined because victims
were also asked several questions about the similarities of
the last victimization to others in the series. Analyses of
the 2000 to 2009 NCVS data showed that the primary types of
violent series victimization have changed little over time.

Victims reported that the most recent series victimization
typically took place at work, at home, or at school, as was
generally the case during the early 1990s (table 3). Because
school- and work-related victimizations were primarily youth-
and adult-related phenomenon, we further disaggregated the
series victimizations by the victim's age. Males and females
were considered separately because intimate partner violence
was predominantly experienced by females. Examination of
series victimizations disaggregated by the victim's age found
that youth age 12 to 17 accounted for 19% of series
victimization reports, and adults age 18 or older accounted
for 81% (table 4). As persons ages 12 to 17 composed
approximately 10% of the population age 12 and older during
2000 to 2009, the data suggested that youth experienced
series victimizations disproportionately compared to adults.
Persons age 12 to 17 also accounted for a disproportionate
share (22%) of non-series victimizations; therefore, youth
were more likely than adults to report experiencing violent
series and nonseries victimizations.

Among youth, males and females reported comparable numbers of
series victimizations. With regard to the activity at the
time of the most recent victimization, the proportion of
series victimizations that occurred at school was similar for
male and female youth (figure 1). Adult males and females
also reported similar numbers of series victimizations during
2000 to 2009. However, greater differences in the victim's
sex were found among adults than among youth regarding their
activity during the most recent series victimization (figure
2). Adult male victims most often reported that the series
victimization took place while at work or on duty, while
adult females most often reported that series victimizations
occurred at home. Both male and female adults reported
roughly similar proportions of victimizations occurring on
the way to work or elsewhere and at the home of their
friends. 

For adult males, 65% of the series victimizations that took
place at work or on duty involved victims who worked in law
enforcement and security occupations (table 5). For adult
females in series victimizations, 31% involved health
occupations, 13% involved law enforcement and security
occupations, 9% involved community and social work, and 7%
involved teaching occupations. In previous research, the
types of occupations found to be most associated with
repeated victimizations were law enforcement, health-related,
and teaching. The same general pattern occurred during 2000
to 2009, though the relatively low numbers of such cases in
the data limit the ability to draw firm conclusions about the
differences in occupations across men and women.

The victim-offender relationship reported in the most recent
series also varied according to age and sex. For male and
female youth, the victim most often reported that they knew
the offender (figure 3). Greater sex differences occurred
among adults in the victim-offender relationship in series
victimizations (figure 4). Adult females most often reported
that the offender was an intimate partner, and least often
reported that the offender was a stranger. In comparison,
among adult males, series victimizations were most likely to
involve an offender who was a stranger and least likely to
involve an offender who was an intimate partner.

To understand the possible similarities between the most
recent victimization and others in the series, BJS examined
the extent to which victims responded that the series
victimizations involved the same offenders and whether they
occurred in the same place. Victims were also asked whether
the same thing happened each time and if the trouble was
ongoing. Among both youth and adults, males and females most
often reported that the victimizations occurred in the same
place and that the same thing happened each time (table 6).
However, females experienced more repeated violent
victimizations at the hands of the same person than did
males. 

Summary

The first set of analyses showed that series victimization
reports have declined over time, as series incidents
constitute a smaller proportion of all victimizations in more
recent years when compared to the past. Victims were more
likely to report a violent incident as a series victimization
than theft as a series victimization. While violent series
victimizations have declined in number and proportion over
time, little has changed in the general nature of these
victimizations. Similar to the findings from past research,
analyses showed that violent series victimizations primarily
consisted of domestic, school, and work-related violence.
Overall, approximately 18% of series victimizations involved
female intimate partner victims, 11% involved youth victims
at school, and 36% involved adult victims at work. These
three types of victimizations accounted for approximately
two-thirds of all series victimizations reported from 1993 to
2009. 

Among both youth and adults, males and females reported
series victimizations at similar levels. However, adult
females experienced more repeated incidents of violence at
the hands of the same person, particularly intimate partners,
and adult males experienced more repeated victimizations at
the hands of strangers.

Victim responses to "How many times did this type of incident
happen?"

For victims of repeated violence, one of the reporting
challenges is to recall exactly how many times the various
victimizations occurred within a specific time period. Prior
research shows that victims of repeated violence provide
estimates of the number of times the incident occurred rather
than counting directly from memory (Rand and Rennison, 2005;
Planty and Strom, 2007). For some research purposes,
estimations of the number of times an event occurred are
sufficient, because the victims' responses can be treated as
ordinal in scale to distinguish higher-rate victims from
lower-rate victims.

If the purpose is to provide a count of victimizations in
order to calculate a national rate of victimization, the
precision of the victim's response is very important. This is
especially true when the event being measured is
statistically rare. Under this condition, the inclusion of a
small number of high-rate victims can result in national
rates that vary widely. The challenges that victims of
repeated crimes have in recounting the number of times an
event occurred are not unique to surveys designed to estimate
victimization. Instead, they are common to all survey
research in which respondents are asked to recount events
that they experience frequently (e.g., Sudman et al, 1996;
Groves et al, 2004). 

When victims report that a high number of incidents have
occurred, the issue of respondent burden is also a concern.
Prior research shows that when survey questions impose
greater demands on respondents, some respondents will either
refuse to answer the questions or state that they do not know
the answer. Most survey developers are aware of this problem,
and they design questionnaires to obtain the maximum amount
of information from as few questions as possible. Depending
on experience, the interviewer may also prompt and encourage
high-rate victims to provide details on each victimization,
thus determining whether a series or nonseries strategy is
used to gather the victimization information (Dodge, 1984a).

We analyzed victims' responses to being asked how many times
the victimization occurred to assess two issues: (1) the
degree to which respondents appeared to estimate the
frequency of the victimizations rather than directly counting
from their memories of the experiences, and (2) the extent to
which interviewers decided to use the series victimization
reporting strategy to reduce respondent burden. The first
issue was assessed by comparing the observed distribution of
the number of times series victims said they were victimized
during the 6-month reference period to a theoretical
distribution of expected responses. We also examined the
consistency of victims' responses, as series victims were
asked this question twice within a single interview for the
NCVS: once before they answered questions about the most
recent victimization, and once after those characteristics
were ascertained. Comparing answers to the same question
asked twice during an interview constituted a test-retest
reliability assessment that provided information about the
consistency of victims' responses.

The second issue investigated the interviewers' use of series
victimization reporting to reduce respondent burden. We
assessed this issue by examining the distribution of the
number of times all respondents said they were violently
victimized during the 6-month reference period, and comparing
the observed distribution of these counts against a
theoretical distribution of expected responses to see if
significantly fewer responses than expected occurred in the
range of values leading up to 6 responses (i.e., fewer
responses of 4 or 5 than of 6). If so, this would suggest
that interviewers were engaging with respondents to decide
how their repeated victimizations should be handled during
the interview. If there were fewer than expected responses
for values 4 or 5, then interviewers may have encouraged
victims to report at least six victimizations so that the
victim needed to only provide the details for the most recent
victimization. 

NCVS protocol asks victims who report five victimizations or
fewer to report the details of each victimization. If the
average length of time to administer the victimization form
was 10 minutes, then victims who reported five victimizations
may have spent 50 minutes discussing their experiences, while
those who reported six incidents as a series victimization
would have instead spent 10 minutes discussing the same
experiences. Interviewers who sensed that the victim was
unwilling or unable to provide the details for each
victimization may have recorded 6 victimizations in response
to the question "How many times did this type of incident
happen?" so that only one victimization report was taken. If
this occurred, incidents for such victims may have been
overestimated and may not indicate the true number of
victimizations.

Distribution of series victim responses

We examined the distribution of series victims' responses to
being asked "How many times did this type of incident happen?"
using data from the full NCVS period from 1993 to 2009 (figure
5). The data indicated that 6 was the most common answer to
this question, and responses tended to cluster at values such
as 10, 12, 15, 20, 24, and 30. These clusters of responses
tended to be either multiples of 5, 6, or 10, suggesting that
victims provided estimates of the number of times the incident
occurred rather than counting directly from memory. Answers
that are multiples of 5 or 10 are common in survey research
(Blair and Burton, 1987; Burton and Blair, 1991; Belli et al,
2000). Answers that are multiples of 6 suggest that victims
estimated the number of times the incident occurred each month
and then multiplied it by 6 (the number months in the recall
period). 

Six was determined to be the modal response to how many times
the incident occurred in all years of the NCVS, which was the
minimum number required for invoking the series incident
protocol. The median value was 10 in nearly all of the years
(table 7). However, the mean number of incidents per series
victimization varied considerably over the years due to some
victims' reports of very high values, such as 480 or 750 times
during a 6-month period. Also, the mean number of
victimizations declined over time because of reductions in the
number of very high estimates from series victims. From 2007
to 2009, 30 was the maximum value for the number of times the
victimizations occurred. Further investigation of this pattern
revealed that this value reflected a programming decision to
change from paper and pencil personal interviewing (PAPI) to a
fully computerized administration of the NCVS interview (CAPI)
in 2006. Since then, information about the number of times the
victimizations occurred has been truncated to a maximum of 30.

Responses to "How many times did this type of incident
happen?" constituted count data, and we conducted a series of
dispersion tests using the generalized linear models (GLM)
commands in Stata statistical software to determine which
distribution best fit series victims' responses (StataCorp,
2007). The negative binomial distribution was found to be the
best fit for these responses, because the reporting patterns
were highly skewed or overdispersed as the variance exceeded
the mean. The observed response distribution was subsequently
compared to those predicted by the negative binomial
distribution parameters, and a Chi-square goodness of fit test
was used to assess the deviation of series victims' responses
from the predicted distribution. This test indicated that
significantly more responses occurred than expected for values
such as 10, 12, 15, and 20, as well as a larger number of
multiples of 5 and 6 (p < .001). It also indicated that
victims reported fewer cases than expected for the values in
between these cluster points (e.g., 7, 8, 9, and 11). 

This statistical test supported the interpretation that the
responses were not clustered randomly, but systematically.
Series victims have some difficulty recounting precisely how
many times violent victimizations occur within a 6-month
period. Victims also approximate the number of times the
victimizations happened by either selecting numbers that are
multiples of 5, or by estimating the number of times the
victimization occurred each month and then multiplying that
number by 6.

Consistency of responses

After series victims finished answering questions about the
most recent victimization in the series, they were asked "How
many times did this kind of thing happen to you during the
last 6 months?" This allowed BJS to test the reliability of
the respondent's answers across similar questions asked at
different times during the same interview. Approximately 22%
of the data were missing for this question, so a comparison of
these two items could only be done for 78% of violent series
crime victims. The bivariate correlation between series
victims' response to this question and the first question was
high (r = .87, p<.001), and 89% of the responses overall were
the same for both questions (figure 6). 

The percentage of consistent responses varied depending on how
many incidents the victims reported when first asked the
question. For the majority of series victims who initially
reported experiencing 6 to 10 victimizations, 93% reported the
same number when subsequently asked. For those who initially
reported 11 or more victimizations, 84% reported the same
number when asked again. The relationship between the number
of victimizations initially reported (6 to 10 compared to 11
or more) and the consistency of responses (yes or no) was
statistically significant (Chi-square = 36.93, df=1, p <
.001).

We also assessed whether victims who did not report the same
count in both questions provided higher or lower estimates to
the later question. The distribution of the discrepant answers
balanced somewhat evenly with roughly 7% responding with a
higher number to the later question and 4% responding with a
lower number (table 8). Even though a small proportion of
series victims provided different answers to the two
questions, the magnitude of the discrepancies was often quite
large. For victims who provided higher estimates to the later
question, the mean change was 35.1 (standard deviation=61.5)
victimizations. For victims who provided lower estimates to
the later question, the mean change was 25.1 (standard
deviation=41.3) victimizations. Additional analyses revealed
that the magnitude of the discrepancy increased as the
victims' responses to the initial question increased. For
example, the mean discrepancy between the two estimates for
victims who initially reported 10 or more incidents was 5.5
victimizations (figure 7). For those who initially reported 18
or more victimizations, the mean discrepancy was 8.4
victimizations. For those who initially reported 60 or more
victimizations, the average discrepancy was 15.2
victimizations.

Distribution of responses by all victims of violence

To examine the possibility that interviewers recorded violent
crime victims with fewer than six victimizations as having
more than six victimizations and used the victim series
protocol, we analyzed the distribution of all violent crime
victims' responses to being asked "How many times did this
type of incident happen?" Both the mode and the median answer
to this question was one, indicating that the vast majority of
violent crime victims reported one victimization over the
6-month recall period. 

The negative binomial distribution was the best fitting
distribution for the responses of all violent crime victims
because the values were highly skewed (figure 8). A comparison
between the observed distribution of responses to those
predicted by the negative binomial distribution revealed that
significantly fewer responses were reported than expected for
values 4 and 5, and significantly more responses were reported
than expected for 6. This pattern of responses suggested that
interviewers may have decided to use the series victimization
reporting protocol to reduce respondent burden. 

Summary

Our assessment of series victims' responses to being asked
"How many times did this type of incident happen?" confirmed
past research findings suggesting that many series victims
have difficulty recalling exactly how many times violent
victimizations occurred within a 6-month reference period. The
observed patterns of response clustering indicated that many
victims provided estimates of the number of times the
victimizations occurred rather than counting directly from
memory. 

Comparisons of the counts from the two different questions
suggested that even though series victims may have
approximated the number of times the events happened, a large
majority did so consistently. Those discrepancies that did
occur were often large in magnitude, especially when the
initial response to the question suggested higher counts of
violent victimization. 

In addition, when we examined the responses to the question
using data from all victims of violence, evidence suggested
that interviewers classified some victims who may have had
four or five victimizations as series victims, perhaps because
the interviewer decided that it was important to use the
series victimization protocol to reduce respondent burden. For
these cases, a count of 6 victimizations was likely to be an
overestimate of the number of victimizations that occurred.

Counting series victimizations

Prior research findings and our analyses suggest using a
capping method when counting series victimizations for
national victimization rates to limit the influence of higher
and less consistent reports. Using a capping strategy made it
necessary to determine at what level the cap should be set.
Other countries that provide victimization rates (rather than
prevalence rates) used a cap of five for victimizations
similar in nature (using a 1-year recall period). A comparable
cap of five for the NCVS would be illogical, as series
victimizations must include at least six victimizations
according to the definitions used in the NCVS. Although the
modal response category by series victims is six
victimizations for all NCVS years, a cap of six would be too
low, as it would not capture the relative frequency of
victimizations for the majority of series victims. 

The median response count for series victims of violence was
10 victimizations per the 6-month recall period across nearly
all NCVS years. The decision was made to use a value of 10 as
the cap on series victimizations because it was found to be
stable over time and included the count provided directly from
the victim for the majority of series victimization cases. The
cap of 10 was also selected because the consistency of
responses began to decline at that point, and the magnitude of
the discrepancies began to increase.

Now when the NCVS national victimization rates are estimated
to include series victimizations, the experiences of all
series victims will be taken into consideration. When series
victims state that the number of times the victimization
occurred is 10 or fewer, those experiences will be counted at
their stated value using the victim's response provided when
first asked to report this count. Series victims who provide
responses that are greater than 10 will have their experiences
counted as 10 victimizations so that the overall impact on the
victimization rates of the higher and less consistent
estimates will be reduced. Series victims who are unable to
provide a count of the number of times the victimization
occurred, but who report that it occurred at least six times,
will be counted as having experienced 6 victimizations (the
modal response category).

This new series counting decision balances the concerns of
wanting victimization rates to include the experiences of
high-rate victims while understanding that multiple sources of
error exist in estimates of the number of victimizations that
occurred. These sources of error include less consistency when
the counts are higher, a greater magnitude in the
discrepancies when the counts are higher, and possible
overestimation of some victimization counts in instances where
victims report four or five victimizations, but interviewers
then use the series protocol requiring a minimum of six
victimizations to reduce respondent burden. 

Beginning with NCVS data for 2010, the annual BJS report
Criminal Victimization included estimates of violent
victimization that took series incidents into account by using
a cap of 10 victimizations per series report (figure 9). (For
more information, see Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ
234408, September 2011.) To assess the impact of the new
series counting, the rates of violent victimization were
compared without the inclusion of series victimizations to the
rates that included series victimizations from 1993 to 2009.

********************************************************
Impact of including series victimizations on national
estimates of violence
********************************************************

Including series victimizations in the rate estimation
procedure required subsequent analyses to determine how the
new counting procedure affected conclusions about the levels
and trends in rates for specific types of crime, such as those
most typically found in series incident reports. These
analyses examined whether incorporating series victimizations
would produce different conclusions about the trends in the
violent crime. While the level of the rates would be higher,
it was unknown whether the trends from 1993 to 2009 would
differ depending on the treatment of series victimizations.
The research extended the earlier analyses of series
victimization by Planty and Strom (2007) that covered the
period from 1993 to 2000 by including data from the subsequent
decade. 

From 1993 to 2009, the victimization rates ranged from 23% to
37% lower than the rates obtained when series victimizations
were included. Differences between the two estimates were
statistically significant in each year (p < .05). However, the
introduction of series victimizations in these estimates did
not affect the general trends in the violent victimization
rate. Both trends showed a similar pattern of decline from
1993 to 2009. The decline from 1993 to 2009 was 70% when
violent victimization rates excluded series victimizations,
and the decline was 76% when series incidents were included.
Similarly, the declines ranged from about 30% to 52% from 2001
to 2009. The average change estimate from 2008 to 2009 showed
a 6% decline with the inclusion of series victimizations and
an 11% decline without the inclusion of series victimizations.
Due to the declines in the proportions of violent
victimization reported as series incidents, BJS expects a
greater similarity over time in the levels of violent
victimization under the two counting schemes.

When attempting to compare specific crime types including and
excluding series victimizations, conceptual issues arose
because victimization details were gathered only for the most
recent incident in the series victimization. They were the
only details available for the purpose of classifying the
victimizations into specific types of crime, and the new
series counting procedure treated all other victimizations in
the series as the same. It seemed reasonable to assume that if
the most recent victimization was violent, then the other
victimizations in the series were also violent. Also, when a
victim reported that the victimizations were of the same type
and that the most recent victimization was sexual violence,
one may assume that the other victimizations in the series
were similar because sexual aspects of assaults are highly
memorable. 

However, it was less clear whether victims thought about
specific aspects of the victimization necessary for
classification, such as a theft in an attempted or completed
robbery, when asked if the incidents were similar to each
other in detail. If the objective was detailed classification
of victimization, the assumption of incident homogeneity
across series victimizations for some types of crime was less
likely to be supported. For example, in the case of repeated
bullying among youth at school, the most recent victimization
may have involved the attempted or completed taking of
property by force; however, the majority of the other
victimizations experienced by the victim may not have included
this specific element, which distinguishes an assault from a
robbery. 

The counting of series aggravated assaults and simple assaults
raised similar concerns about incident homogeneity. The main
difference between a simple assault and an aggravated assault
was whether a serious injury resulted from the victimization
or whether a weapon was used during the assault. Victims may
not have been making such distinctions when asked whether a
series of victimizations were similar to each other in detail.
It was also possible that victims recalled and focused on
other aspects of the victimization, such as the context in
which the victimization occurred (e.g., at school, home, or
work) or whether it involved the same offender (e.g., intimate
partner violence). In addition, when victims reported about
the most recent victimization, they may have been instead
reporting the details of the most salient of recent
victimizations, which was likely the more serious type of
assault in the series. Without further questioning, it was
difficult to know exactly what victims were thinking about
when asked if the series of victimizations were similar to
each other in detail. This issue about the nature and degree
of similarity across series victimizations became more
important as the level of detail in the crime classification
scheme increased.

To gain further information about violent series and 
nonseries victimization characteristics, we examined whether
series victimizations appeared to be significantly different
in their details compared to nonseries victimizations. If the
detailed characteristics of series and nonseries
victimizations did not statistically differ from each other,
it would have suggested that victims reported about the most
recent victimization when asked to do so rather than reporting
about the most serious victimization in the series.

A comparison of the distribution of specific characteristics
for series and nonseries victimizations suggested that the two
types of victimization reports were significantly different
(Chi-square=180.2, df=19, p < .001) (table 9). In other words,
series victimization reports differed in at least some
characteristics from nonseries victimization reports of
violence. However, the magnitude of the differences between
series and nonseries victimizations was relatively small
(V=.07). (See Methodology for more information about the
standard error computations.) 

The specific victimization characteristic that accounted for
much of this observed difference was whether the victimization
was primarily a verbal threat of assault. A verbal threat of
assault was the most common type of violent victimization but
had somewhat more prevalence among series victimizations.
Verbal threats of assault constituted 27% of violent
victimizations in nonseries and 36% of violent victimizations
in series reports. These patterns suggested that the
characteristics of series victimizations were only slightly
different in nature from nonseries victimizations, and that
victims were likely to report about the most recent
victimization in the series instead of the most serious
victimization in the series. This helped confirm that the
inclusion of series victimizations in the victimization rate
will have had a slightly greater effect on simple assault
rates than on rates of more serious forms of violence, because
verbal threats are generally categorized as simple assaults in
BJS reports.

The degree to which the inclusion of series victimizations
would affect crime-specific rates depended on the relative
rarity and the proportion of series victimizations for that
type of crime. Annual estimates of rape and sexual assault
varied more from year to year depending on the inclusion of
series victimizations, because this type of crime occurred
less often than nonsexual assaults. Rape and sexual assaults
contained a higher proportion of series victimizations
compared to robbery and aggravated assault. When annual
estimates were sensitive to the inclusion of series
victimizations, percentage change estimates across selected
years were more likely to vary.

Prior research by Planty and Strom (2007) found that the
degree to which the inclusion of series victimizations
affected the annual victimization rates varied by crime type.
Using data from the NCVS from 1993 to 2000, they found that
estimates of rape and sexual assault were most sensitive to
the inclusion of series victimizations, as were simple
assaults. Our research suggested similar conclusions to those
reported by Planty and Strom (2007).

Impact of including series victimizations on major crime
categories

Rape and sexual assault rates

For rape and sexual assault, the rates excluding series
victimizations ranged from 0% to 48% lower than the rates
obtained when series victimizations were included (figure 10).
In 1998, 2004, 2005, and 2007, the differences between the two
estimates were not statistically significant (p < .05),
primarily because victims reported very few series
victimizations of these types. In each of these years, the
total unweighted number of series rape and sexual assault
victimizations reported was three or fewer. The inclusion of
series victimizations in the estimates generally did not
affect the long-term trends in rape and sexual assault,
although the estimate of the magnitude of change over time
varied depending on the years selected for comparison. 

While both trends showed a similar pattern of decline from
1993 to 2009, more annual variation occurred in the rates that
included series victimizations. From 1993 to 2009, rape and
sexual assault rates declined 80% when excluding series
victimizations and declined 72% when including series
victimizations (table 10). When estimating the change from
2001 to 2009, the rates declined 54% when excluding series
victimizations and 42% when including series victimizations.
The most recent annual change in this series (i.e., from 2008
to 2009) was estimated to be a 39% decline excluding series
victimizations and a 13% decline including series
victimizations. Since BJS reports included tests for whether
each percentage change estimate was statistically significant,
the same general conclusion would have been made about the
changes in rape and sexual assault from 2008 to 2009
regardless of whether series victimizations were included. In
this instance, neither change estimate was significant.

Robbery rates

Robbery rates that excluded series victimizations ranged from
about 5% to 28% lower than rates that included series
victimizations (figure 11). In several years (1998, 2001 to
2005, 2008, and 2009), the differences between the two
estimates were not statistically significant (p < .05) because
very few victims reported series victimizations of robbery. In
each of these years, the total annual number of unweighted
series robbery victimization reports was five or fewer. The
long-term trends in robbery tended to not be sensitive to the
inclusion of series victimizations, but the estimates of the
magnitude of change also varied depending on the years
selected for comparison. 

Both trends showed similar rates of declines from 1993 to
2009. the rate declined 65% when excluding series
victimizations and declined 70% when including series
victimizations. From 2001 to 2009, the rate declined 24%
excluding series victimizations and 14% including series
victimizations. From 2008 to 2009, the rate declined 4%
excluding series victimizations and 7% including series
victimizations. Even when the differences in the change
estimates appeared to be somewhat large in magnitude (e.g.,
down 24% compared to down 14%), the same general conclusion
might have been drawn. In this instance, both estimates
revealed a significant decline; however, what remains unclear
is which estimate BJS should use to indicate the size of the
decline.

Aggravated assault rates

Aggravated assault rates that excluded series victimizations
ranged from about 12% to 35% lower than rates that included
series victimizations, and the differences in the annual rates
were statistically significant in all of the years except 2001
and 2008 (p < .05) (figure 12). There were 9 unweighted series
aggravated assault victimization reports in 2001 and 4 in
2008. The long-term trends in aggravated assault were
generally similar with and without series victimizations, but
the estimates of the magnitude of change varied depending on
the years selected for comparison.
 
Both trends show declines from 1993 to 2009, but the decline
was 57% when series victimizations were excluded and 75% when
series victimizations were included. From 2001 to 2009, the
rate declined 39% excluding series victimizations and declined
33% including series victimizations. However, estimates
comparing 2008 to 2009 appeared to suggest different
short-term trends depending on how series victimizations were
treated. When series victimizations were excluded, the
aggravated assault rate appeared to decline 3% from 2008 to
2009. When series victimizations were included, the rate of
aggravated assaults appeared to increase 5% during the same
time period. Neither of the more recent changes (2008 to 2009)
in aggravated assault were statistically significant, so the
general conclusion that no significant change occurred in this
type of victimization from 2008 to 2009 held regardless of
which series counting procedure was used.

Simple assault rates

Simple assault rates with and without the inclusion of series
victimizations exhibited generally similar long-term trends
(figure 13). The rates that excluded series victimizations
ranged from about 23% to 42% lower than those that included
series simple assaults. These level differences were
statistically significant (p < .05) in all years, primarily
because the proportion of simple assaults reported as series
victimizations was relatively high compared to other types of
violence. 

The fewest unweighted number of series simple assault reports
was 28 in 2009. The trends showed roughly similar rates of
declines from 1993 to 2009, with a 62% decline when series
victimizations were excluded and 71% decline when series
victimizations were included. The declines from 2001 to 2009
were also comparable, with a 29% decline when series
victimizations were excluded and a 33% decline when series
victimizations were included. The percentage change from 2008
to 2009 also suggested similar rates of decline. During this
time period, the simple assault rate declined 13% when
excluding series victimizations and 16% when including series
victimizations.

Impact of including series victimizations on violence rates
for types often reported as series

Female intimate partner violence

Among the most typical types of series victimizations,
intimate partner violence was the most consistent in its
characteristics across all victimizations in the series. For
example, from 1993 to 2009, female intimate partner series
victimizations were reported to have been committed by the
same offender in 99% of the series reports, and in 86% of the
series reports the victim said that the same thing happened
each time. Unlike the annual Criminal Victimization bulletin,
BJS special topic publications about female intimate partner
violence have included series victimizations by counting the
series victimization as one.

BJS practice has been to count series victimizations as one
victimization in the intimate partner violence reports, rather
than as the number of victimizations that the victim reported
for the series (with or without a cap), due to concerns about
whether the characteristics of the most recent victimization
were the same for other victimizations in the series. Counting
a series victimization as one victimization has both
advantages and drawbacks. The advantage is that the details
the victim provided are known for at least one victimization
(that is, the last victimization in the series), and no
assumptions are made about the last victimization's
similarities to other victimizations in the series. The
drawback is that at least six victimizations must be reported
to qualify for the series incident protocol; therefore, the
rates are clearly underestimated by counting the victimization
as one. However, counting a series victimization as the number
of victimizations that the victim reported (with a cap of 10)
produces the same uncertainties because the degree of
similarity in characteristics across the victimizations in the
series is unknown.

To assess how the treatment of series victimizations affects
the levels and trends in intimate partner violence, we
estimated female victimization rates by counting series
intimate partner violence as one, then compared those rates to
the estimates of the number of times the victim said the
victimizations happened, using a cap of 10 (figure 14). The
definition of intimate partner violence used here was a
summary measure including all forms of violence (i.e., rape
and sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated and simple
assault). Female rates of intimate partner violence that
included series victimizations counted as one range from about
25% to 49% lower than those that included series
victimizations using the alternative counting strategy. The
level differences in the annual rates were statistically
significant in each year (p < .05).
 
While the differences in the levels were apparent, the overall
trends showed roughly similar patterns across the period from
1993 to 2009. During this time, annual rates of female
intimate partner violence declined 51% when series
victimizations were counted as one and declined an estimated
55% when series victimizations were counted using the victim
reports (table 11). The percentage change from 2001 to 2009
also differed only slightly. When series victimizations were
counted as one, the rates indicated a 12% decline from 2001 to
2009. When the victimizations were counted using the victim
reports, the rates suggested a 15% decline. From 2008 to 2009,
counting series victimizations as one suggested a 6% increase
in intimate partner violence, while counting them using the
victim reports resulted in a 1% decline. However, neither of
the 2008 to 2009 change estimates was significant, generally
concluding that no significant change in female intimate
partner violence occurred from 2008 to 2009. Even though the
actual percentage change estimates were somewhat sensitive to
the years under consideration, these differences in the
percentage change estimates were not statistically
significant.

Youth violence at school

A notable proportion of series victimizations involved victims
ages 12 to 17 who reported that the last victimization in the
series occurred at school. To assess how estimates of youth
violence at school were affected by the inclusion of series
victimizations, BJS compared the victimization rates with both
series victimizations included and excluded using the victim's
report capped at 10. 

From 1993 to 2009, youth reported that the same thing happened
each time in 84% of the series reports. Unlike intimate
partner violence, these victimizations were not overwhelmingly
committed by the same person. Victims responded that the
victimizations at school were committed by the same offender
in 54% of the reports, that some of the victimizations
involved the same offender in 34% of the reports, and that
none of the victimizations involved the same offender in 7% of
the reports. While the nature of the victimizations may have
been similar from the victim's perspective, the same offenders
may not have been involved in a large proportion of these
series victimizations. Based on this analysis, if the purpose
is to estimate the characteristics of offenders in youth
violence victimizations, it cannot be assumed that the
characteristics of the offenders in the most recent
victimization are indicative of others in series. However, if
the purpose is to estimate rates of violent youth
victimization at school, then the inclusion of series
victimizations would appear to be reasonable.

Victimization rates of youth violence at school that excluded
series victimizations ranged from about 13% to 52% lower than
rates that include series victimizations using the victim's
report capped at 10 (figure 15). The level differences in the
annual rates were statistically significant (p < .05) in each
of the years except 2002, 2004, and 2007. 

While the differences in the levels in some of the years were
considerable, the two trends showed roughly similar rates of
declines from 1993 to 2009. The rate of youth violence at
school declined 54% when excluding series victimizations. When
series victimizations were included and counted using the
victim reports, the decline was somewhat larger at 66%. The
magnitudes of the declines from 2001 to 2009 differed more
depending on the treatment of series victimizations. Between
2001 and 2009, the rates suggested a 15% decline when series
victimizations were excluded. However, when the series
victimizations were counted using the victim reports, the
rates suggested a 31% decrease which was twice as large.
Between 2008 and 2009, the rates for youth violence at school
suggested a 13% decrease when excluding series victimizations,
while the rates including series victimizations showed a 4%
decrease. Long-term trends in youth violence at school
suggested somewhat similar declines under both treatments of
series victimizations. However, the percentage change
estimates were sensitive in some instances to the treatment of
series victimization and the years selected for consideration.

Adult violence at work or on duty

The largest proportion of series victimizations were those
that the victim reported to have occurred at work or on duty.
In 80% of these series victimizations, the victim said that
the same thing happened each time, which was slightly lower
than those for female intimate partner violence and youth
violence at school. Victims reported that the victimizations
involved all the same offender in only 12% of the series
reports for violence at work. In the case of work-related
violence, it is not reasonable to assume that the offender
characteristics found in the series report were the same as
those for the other victimizations in the series.

We estimated rates of violence at work or on duty that
included and excluded series victimizations for persons ages
18 or older, because adults overwhelmingly reported
work-related series victimizations rather than youth. Rates of
work-related victimization that excluded series victimizations
ranged from about 33% to 57% lower than the rates that
included series victimizations using the alternative counting
strategy (figure 16). The level differences in the annual
rates were statistically significant in each of the years (p <
.05). The two trends showed roughly similar rates of declines
from 1993 to 2009. The rate of violence at work or on duty
declined 75% when excluding series victimizations. When series
victimizations were included and counted using the victim
reports, the decline was slightly larger at 82%. In fact,
rates of adult violence at work have declined somewhat faster
than rates of intimate partner violence and youth violence at
school. 

The estimated magnitudes of the declines from 2001 to 2009
differed a bit more. When series victimizations were excluded,
the decline was 48%. However, when counted using the victim
reports, the decline was 43%. The percentage change in
work-related violence from 2008 to 2009 was also similar. The
rates that excluded series victimizations suggested a 23%
decrease, while the rates that include series victimization
indicated an 18% decrease. 

Summary

Including series victimizations to estimate the rates of
specific forms of violence increased the levels substantially.
The magnitude of the impact of including series victimizations
varied across years and crime types, in part reflecting the
relative rarity of a particular type of offense. This was not
unexpected given the findings from previous research on this
issue (e.g., Planty and Strom, 2007). 

The apparently random component of year-to-year variation
among some crime types suggested that caution be used when
estimating the magnitude of change for specific forms of
violence between any two years. Using both methods of counting
series victimizations would be the most comprehensive approach
for assessing change in specific forms of violence, as well as
viewing temporal changes over comparatively long periods of
time. Counting series victimizations using both methods would
provide a more complete understanding of change in violent
victimization by giving context to the difference between the
two rates and their change estimates.

Impact of series counting decisions on selected victimization
characteristics

The final set of analyses assessed how different treatments of
series victimizations affected conclusions about the
prevalence of various victimization characteristics, such as
the percentages of violent victimizations reported to the
police, resulting in injury, involving a weapon, or involving
strangers and intimate partners. We selected these specific
victimization characteristics because they were routinely
reported in the Criminal Victimization bulletins. 

Victimization characteristics were assessed for total violent
victimization and not for any specific type of violence,
because the findings showed that the crime-specific rates
could be sensitive to annual fluctuations even without further
disaggregation by victimization characteristics. Also, many
cases had an insufficient number of victimizations per crime
type in any given year to support such analyses. In many BJS
reports, analyses included series victimization
characteristics that were counted as one victimization, as
victims provided details on only the last incident in the
series.  The results from this series counting strategy were
compared to those that resulted from counting series
victimizations using the victim report and a cap of 10
victimizations per series.

Percentage of violent victimization reported to police

When the two series counting strategies were used to estimate
the percentage of violent crimes reported to the police, the
data showed very similar levels and trends (figure 17). For
any given year, the difference in the two estimates was less
than two percentage points. Because the differences in the
percentage of violent crimes reported to police were minimal,
descriptions of the overall trends in reporting were also very
similar. Furthermore, estimates of changes in police reporting
rates for total violence were not sensitive to the years
selected for comparison. The similarities in these rates
suggested that the average proportion of nonseries violent
victimizations reported to the police was roughly equal to the
average proportion reported to the police in the series report
about the last victimization. The lack of notable differences
in the two reporting trends did not prove that the various
series victimizations were identical. Instead, we found that
the rate of violence reported to the police for the last
victimization in the series was similar to the rate for
nonseries reports of violent victimization.

Percentage of violent victimization resulting in injury

When using the two counting strategies for series
victimization to estimate the percentage of violent crimes
resulting in injury, the data suggested similar levels and
trends (figure 18). For each year, the difference in the two
estimates was less than three percentage points. For the
majority of years, counting series victimizations as one
victimization resulted in a slightly higher estimate of the
proportion injured. Because the differences in the percentage
of violent crimes resulting in injury were minimal across the
two series counting strategies, descriptions of the overall
trends were similar, and specific change estimates would not
be sensitive to the years selected for comparison. 

The similarities in the proportions injured indicated that the
average proportion of nonseries violent victimizations
resulting in injury roughly equaled the average proportion
found for the last victimization in the series. The proportion
injured was slightly higher when series victimizations were
counted as one due to the slightly greater proportion of
simple assaults that were reported as series victimizations,
and injury is a key characteristic that distinguishes simple
assaults from aggravated assaults.

Percentage of violent victimization involving weapon use
The series counting strategy had limited influence on the
levels or trends in the percentage of violent victimizations
involving weapons use (figure 19). The difference in the two
estimates was less than four percentage points for each year,
and descriptions of the overall trends were similar regardless
of the series counting strategy. 

In most years, counting series victimizations as one produced
a slightly higher estimate of the proportion of violent
victimizations involving weapons. As with injury rates, this
small difference indicated that the average proportion of
nonseries violent victimizations involving a weapon was
similar to the average proportion in the last victimization of
the series. The proportion tended to be slightly higher when
counted as one because victims reported a somewhat greater
proportion of simple assaults as series victimizations
compared to aggravated assaults and robbery, which most often
involved the use of a weapon. Counting series victimizations
using the victim reports capped at 10 is unlikely to change
conclusions about the proportion or trends of violent
victimizations that involved a weapon.

Percentage of violent victimization involving strangers

The series counting strategy had some influence on the
percentage levels of violent victimizations involving
strangers; however, the counting strategy did not influence
the overall trends in this proportion (figure 20). The
difference in the two estimates was less than four percentage
points in each year, and descriptions of the overall trends
were similar regardless of the series counting strategy. 

In most years, counting series victimizations as one produced
a slightly higher estimate of the proportion of violent
victimizations involving strangers, indicating that the
average proportion of nonseries violent victimizations
involving strangers was slightly higher than the average
proportion found in the last victimization of the series. This
pattern was expected because intimate partner violence was
more likely to be reported as a series victimization than was
stranger violence. Counting series victimizations using the
victim reports capped at 10 likely would have a limited effect
on conclusions drawn about the proportion of violent
victimizations involving strangers in any given year.

Percentage of violent victimization involving intimate
partners

Compared to stranger violence, the series counting strategy
had a proportionately greater influence on the levels and
trends of violent victimizations involving intimate partners
(figure 21). The difference in the two estimates was less than
four percentage points for each year; however, when compared
to the lower overall base percentage, the effect of including
series victimizations was proportionately larger. 

Unlike other victimization characteristics considered,
counting series victimizations as one produced a lower
estimate of the proportion of violent victimizations involving
intimate partners, because victims were more likely to report
this form of violence as a series victimization than violence
involving other types of victim-offender relationships. 

Since intimate partner victimization involved primarily female
victims, we examined how the series counting strategy affected
the estimates for female victims only (figure 22). Among
female victims, the difference in the two estimates was less
than about six percentage points for each year. In 2008, for
example, counting series victimizations as one suggested that
the percentage of female violent victimizations involving
intimate partners was 24%, while counting series
victimizations using the victim reports capped at 10 suggested
it was 30% a percentage more similar to that found in studies
of female homicide victims from 1976 to 2005. (See the BJS
website for more information on homicide trends in the U.S. by
sex.)

Even though the series counting strategy had an effect on the
estimated proportion of female victimizations involving
intimate partners, the long-term trends based on either
counting strategy were generally similar. Both estimates
suggested that the proportion of female victimization
involving intimate partners was relatively stable from 1993 to
2005, and then appeared to increase some from 2006 to 2009.
However, the rate of female intimate partner violence
exhibited no clear upward trend during the later years in the
series. The trends suggest that declines in female
victimization in more recent years were greater for types of
violence that did not involve intimate partners.

Summary

For the purpose of estimating selected victimization
characteristics, the way in which series victimizations are
counted will have limited, but mixed effects. For
characteristics such as the percentage reported to the police,
the proportion resulting in injury, and the proportion
involving weapon use, few differences occurred in either
overall proportions or the general trends in those
proportions. The similarity in the levels for reporting to the
police, injury, and weapon use suggested that the average
proportions of these characteristics in nonseries
victimizations were very similar to the average proportions
found in the series report. 

Conversely, when the victimization characteristic was the
victim-offender relationship, the treatment of series
victimizations had somewhat different effects on the
proportions of violence involving strangers or intimate
partners. The percentage point differences under the two
series counting strategies were slightly larger, but the
trends in these proportions were minimally affected. 

Intimate partner violence continues to emerge as one of the
main types of series victimization; therefore, the counting
strategy mattered more for assessing victim-offender
relationships. Since these selected victimization proportions
appear to have been minimally affected, conclusions based on
either series counting strategy were generally similar.
However, for the purpose of assessing victim-offender
relationships, relying primarily on the series counting
strategy that uses the victim report with a cap of 10 may be
more useful. The information from these types of
victimization-level analysis should always be considered in
conjunction with changes in actual rates of stranger, intimate
partner, and other forms of violence.

***********
Conclusions
***********

These analyses assessed the strengths and weaknesses of
various options for incorporating series victimizations into
national estimates. The findings must be considered in order
to make decisions about how series victimizations should be
incorporated into annual reports about criminal victimization. 
Building on prior research that examined the nature of series
victimizations, these analyses showed that series
victimizations constituted a smaller proportion of
victimization reports over time. While the proportion of
series victimizations declined over time, the nature of these
series victimizations is similar to those reported nearly two
decades ago. These high-rate violent victimizations tended to
involve either adult violence at work, female intimate partner
violence, or youth violence at school.

To incorporate these experiences in national victimization
rates, the analyses also assessed the statistical properties
and consistencies in victims' responses to being asked "How
many times did this type of incident occur?" These results
suggested that many victims provided estimates of the number
of times the victimizations occurred rather than directly
counting such victimizations from memory. Some consistency was
found in victims' estimates; however, the reports that
involved higher counts when victims were first asked the
question were somewhat less consistent, and the discrepancies
that did occur in the higher counts were often large in
magnitude. In addition, an assessment of all victims'
responses to the question suggested that some victims who may
have had fewer than six victimizations were classified as
series victims and counted as having six victimizations,
perhaps to reduce respondent burden.

Using the results from the full set of analyses, BJS will
count series victimization using the victims' estimates of the
number of times the victimizations occurred over the past 6
months, but will cap the number of victimizations reported at
10. Capping strategies are common in victimization surveys
around the world. Other surveys either use a lower cap or do
not produce estimates of the numbers or rate of
victimizations, choosing instead to produce estimates of the
number of victims, which eliminates the need to make
victimization counting decisions. This BJS strategy for
counting series victimizations balances the desire to account
for the experiences of high-rate victims when estimating
national rates with indications that various sources of error
exist in series victims' estimates about the number of times
these victimizations occurred. 

Not unexpectedly, the inclusion of series victimizations in
national rates results in rather large increases in the level
of victimization especially during 1990s. For the most part,
conclusions about victimization trends are generally similar
regardless of which series victimization counting strategy is
used. 

When the focus of the analysis switched from estimating trends
in victimization rates to estimating trends in the proportion
of victimizations that exhibited various victimization
characteristics (e.g., the percentage reported to police or
involving a weapon) the counting strategy used for series
victimizations had little impact. BJS found greater
differences in the levels but not the trends in the proportion
of victimizations involving intimate partners, primarily
because intimate partner violence is a major form of series
victimization. 

Though the ways of counting series victimizations and
incorporating them in national victimization rates affects the
level of victimization, previous reports do not appear to have
mischaracterized the overall trends by excluding series
victimizations from the national estimates. For the most part,
reports about victimization characteristics do not appear to
be very sensitive to the series counting strategy. The
victim-offender relationship is an important exception, as
counting series using the victim report capped at 10 produced
some increases in the proportion of female victimization
involving intimate partners. Even though the increase
occurred, the trends in these proportions remained the same.

***********
Methodology
***********

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal victimizations, reported and not
reported to the police, against persons age 12 or older from a
nationally representative sample of U.S. households.
Violent crimes measured by the NCVS include rape or sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.
Property crimes include household burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and theft. Victimizations that occurred outside of the
U.S. are excluded from this report. 

The survey results presented in this report are based on data
gathered from residents living throughout the United States,
including persons living in group quarters, such as
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings.
Armed Forces personnel living in military barracks and
institutionalized persons, such as correctional facility
inmates, were not included in the scope of this survey.
 
Each housing unit selected for the NCVS remains in the sample
for 3 years, with each of seven interviews taking place at
6-month intervals. An NCVS field representative's first
contact with a household selected for the survey is in person.
The field representative may conduct subsequent interviews by
telephone.  

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected
the estimates for that year to an extent that some estimates
were not considered comparable to those of previous years.
Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by
BJS and the Census Bureau have found a high degree of
confidence that estimates for these years are consistent with
and comparable to those for 2005 and previous years. See
Criminal Victimization, 2007, BJS Web, NCJ 224390, December
2008, for more information.

Series victimizations in intimate partner violence

Unlike other types of crime in this report, estimates for
intimate partner violence include series victimizations as one
victimization. BJS practice has been to count series
victimizations as one victimization in the intimate partner
violence reports, rather than as the number of victimizations
that the victim reported for the series, due to concerns about
whether the characteristics of the most recent victimization
were the same for other victimizations in the series.

Standard error computations

Any time national estimates are derived from a sample rather
than the entire population, as is the case with the NCVS, it
is important to be cautious when drawing conclusions about the
size of one population estimate in comparison to another or
about whether a time series of population estimates is
changing. Although one estimate may be larger than another,
estimates based on responses from a sample of the population
each have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of
an estimate depends on several factors, including the amount
of variation in the responses, the size and representativeness
of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for which the
estimate is computed.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate
is the standard error. In general, an estimate with a smaller
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the
true value than an estimate with a higher standard error.
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are associated
with less precision and reliability and should be interpreted
with caution.

A statistical test is used to determine whether differences in
means or percentages are statistically significant once
sampling error is taken into account. Most comparisons made in
the text were tested for statistical significance using
t-tests for significance at the p < .05 level to ensure that
the differences were larger than might be expected due to
sampling variation. Significance testing calculations were
conducted at BJS using a generalized variance function (GVF),
a statistical program developed specifically for the NCVS by
the U.S. Census Bureau. These GVFs take into consideration
aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when calculating
estimates.

In other instances, differences were examined using the
Chi-square test. The Chi-square is a statistical test that
evaluates whether the distributions of frequencies observed in
the data differ significantly from those that would be
expected under hypothetical distributions. Chi-square goodness
of fit tests are used to compare the observed frequencies of
one variable against a theoretical distribution, and
Chi-square tests of independence are used to assess whether
paired observations on two variables are independent of each
other. The Cramer's V statistic is a measure ranging from 0 to
1 indicating the strength of the association between two
categorical variables. A value of 0 indicates that there is no
association between the variables, while a value of 1
indicates that the two variables are perfectly associated.

Definitions

Incident--A specific criminal act involving one or more
victims and offenders. For example, if two people are robbed
at the same time and place, this is classified as two robbery
victimizations but only one robbery incident.

Prevalence rate--A measure of the proportion of the population
that has experienced one or more crimes. This rate does not
take into consideration how many times a person experienced
victimization. For personal crimes, this is based on the
number of victims per number of residents age 12 or older.

Victimization--A victimization refers to a single victim or
household that experienced a criminal incident. Criminal
incidents or crimes are distinguished from victimizations in
that one criminal incident may have multiple victims or
victimizations. For violent crimes (rape or sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) and for
personal larceny, the count of victimizations is the number of
individuals who experienced a violent crime. For crimes
against households (burglary, theft, and motor vehicle theft),
each household affected by a crime is counted as a single
victimization.

Victimization rate--A measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specified population group. For violent
crimes, this is based on the number of victimizations per
1,000 residents age 12 or older. 

***********
References
***********

Belli, R.F., Schwarz, N., Singer, E., & Talarico, J. (2000).
Decomposition can harm the accuracy of behavioral frequency
reports. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 14, 295-308.

Biderman, A.D., & Lynch, J.P. (1991). Understanding crime
incidence statistics: Why the UCR diverges from the NCVS. New
York: Springer-Verlag.

Blair, E. & Burton, S. (1987). Cognitive processes used by
survey respondents to answer behavioral frequency questions.
Journal of Consumer Research, 14, 280-288.

Bolling, K., Grant C., & Donovan J.L. (2009). 2008-09 British
Crime Survey (England and Wales). London: BMRB.

Burton, S. & Blair, E. (1991). Task conditions, response
formulation processes, and response accuracy for behavioral
frequency questions in surveys. Public Opinion Quarterly, 55,
50-79.

Dodge, R.W. (1984a). A preliminary inquiry into series
victimization. In R.G. Lehnen & W. Skogan (Eds.), The National
Crime Survey working papers, 2. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.

Dodge, R.W. (1984b). Series victimization   what is to be
done? In R.G. Lehnen & W.Skogan (Eds.), The National Crime
Survey working papers, 2. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice
Statistics.

Dodge, R.W. (1987). Series crimes: report of a field test.
Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Dodge, R.W. & Lentzner, H.R. (1980). Patterns of personal
series incidents in the National Crime Survey. Review of
public data use, 8, 27-41.

EUICS Consortium (2005). Methodology of the European Crime and
Safety Survey. Retrieved from
http://www.europeansafetyobservatory.eu/downloads/WP_methodolo
gy.pdf.

General Social Survey Cycle 18: Victimization, 2004
(2005).User's guide to the public use microdata file. Ottawa,
Ontario: Statistics Canada.

Groves, R.M. & Cork, D.L. (Eds.) (2008). Surveying victims:
options for conducting the National Crime Victimization
Survey. National Research Council panel to review the programs
of the Bureau of Justice Statistics. Washington, D.C.:
National Academies Press.

ICESI (2011). Cuadernos del ICESI 9: Analisis de la Septima
Encuesta Nacional Sobre Inseguridad ENSI-7/2010.

Lynch, J.P., Berbaum, M.L., & Planty, M. (1998). Investigating
repeated victimization with the NCVS. Final report for
National Institute of Justice Grant 97-IJ-CX-0027. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.


Planty, M. & Strom, K.J. (2007). Understanding the role of
repeat victims in the production of annual US victimization
rates. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 23, 179-200.

Rand, M.R. & Rennison, C.M. (2005). Bigger is not necessarily
better: an analysis of violence against women estimates from
the National Crime Victimization Survey and the National
Violence Against Women Survey. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology, 21, 267-292.

Reiss, A.J. (1980). Victim proneness to repeat victimization
by type of crime. In A.J. Reiss & S. Feinberg (Eds.),
Indicators of Crime and Criminal Justice: Quantitative
Studies. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics.    

Reiss, A.J. (1984). Summary of series and nonseries incident
reporting, 1972-75. In R.G. Lehnen & W. Skogan (Eds.), The
National Crime Survey working papers, 2. Washington, D.C.:
Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Sudman, S., Bradburn, N., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Thinking about
answers: the application of cognitive processes to survey
methodology. New York: Jossey-Bass Publishers.

van Kesteren, J., Mayhew, P., & Nieuwbeerta, P. (2000).
Criminal victimisation in seventeen industrialised countries:
key findings from the 2000 International Crime Victims Survey.
The Hague, The Netherlands: Ministry of Justice, WODC.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice.
 James P. Lynch is director.

This report was written and verified by Janet L.
Lauritsen, Jennifer Gatewood Owens, Michael Planty,
Michael R. Rand, and Jennifer L. Truman. Lynn
Langton assisted with verification.

Jill Thomas edited the report, Barbara Quinn and Tina
Dorsey produced the report under the supervision of
Doris J. James.

April 2012, NCJ 237308
*******************************************************

*********************
3/27/2012/JER/9:50

*********************


