U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates

September 2006, NCJ 213600

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mhppji.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

Doris J. James and 
Lauren E. Glaze
BJS Statisticians

--------------------------------------------------
Highlights

High prevalence of mental health problems among 
prison and jail inmates

* Nearly a quarter of both State prisoners and jail 
inmates who had a mental health problem, compared to 
a fifth of those without, had served 3 or more prior 
incarcerations.

* Female inmates had higher rates of mental health 
problems than male inmates (State prisons: 73% of 
females and 55% of males; local jails: 75% of 
females and 63% of males).

* About 74% of State prisoners and 76% of local jail 
inmates who had a mental health problem met criteria 
for substance dependence or abuse.

* Nearly 63% of State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem had used drugs in the month before 
their arrest, compared to 49% of those without a 
mental health problem.

* State prisoners who had a mental health problem 
were twice as likely as those without to have been 
homeless in the year before their arrest (13% 
compared to 6%).

* Jail inmates who had a mental health problem (24%) 
were three times as likely as jail inmates without(8%) 
to report being physically or sexually abused in the 
past. 

* Over 1 in 3 State prisoners and 1 in 6 jail inmates 
who had a mental health problem had received treatment 
since admission.

* State prisoners who had a mental health problem 
were twice as likely as State prisoners without to 
have been injured in a fight since admission (20% 
compared to 10%).
--------------------------------------------------

At midyear 2005 more than half of all prison and jail
inmates had a mental health problem, including 705,600 
inmates in State prisons, 70,200 in Federal prisons, 
and 479,900 in local jails. These estimates represented 
56% of State prisoners, 45% of Federal prisoners, and 
64% of jail inmates. The findings in this report were 
based on data from personal interviews with State and
Federal prisoners in 2004 and local jail inmates in 
2002.

Mental health problems were defined by two measures: 
a recent history or symptoms of a mental health 
problem. They must have occurred in the 12 months
prior to the interview. A recent history of mental 
health problems included a clinical diagnosis or 
treatment by a mental health professional. Symptoms 
of a mental disorder were based on criteria specified 
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, fourth edition (DSM-IV). 

More than two-fifths of State prisoners (43%) and 
more than half of jail inmates (54%) reported 
symptoms that met the criteria for mania. About 23% 
of State prisoners and 30% of jail inmates reported 
symptoms of major depression. An estimated 15% of 
State prisoners and 24% of jail inmates reported 
symptoms that met the criteria for a psychotic 
disorder. 

A quarter of State prisoners had a 
history of mental health problems

Among all inmates, State prisoners were most likely 
to report a recent history of a mental health
problem. About 24% of State prisoners had a recent
history of a mental health problem, followed by 21% 
of jail inmates, and 14% of Federal prisoners.  

A recent history of mental health problems was 
measured by several questions in the BJS' inmate
surveys. Offenders were asked about whether in the 
past 12 months they had been told by a mental health 
professional that they had a mental disorder or 
because of a mental health problem had stayed 
overnight in a hospital, used prescribed medication, 
or received professional mental health therapy. These 
items were classified as indicating a recent history 
of a mental health problem. 

State prisoners(18%), Federal prisoners(10%), and 
jail inmates (14%) most commonly reported that 
they had used prescribed medication for a mental
problem in the year before arrest or since admission. 
They were least likely to report an overnight
stay in a hospital for a mental health problem. 
Approximately, 5% of inmates in State prisons, 2%
in Federal prisons, and 5% in local jails reported 
an overnight stay in a hospital for a mental health 
problem. 

-------------------------------------------
Prevalence of symptoms of mental disorders
among prison and jail inmates 

The Survey of Inmates in State and Federal 
Correctional Facilities, 2004, and the Survey of 
Inmates in Local Jails, 2002, included a modified 
structured clinical interview for the DSM-IV. The 
surveys collected information on experiences of 
inmates in the past 12 months that would indicate
symptoms of major depression, mania, or psychotic 
disorders. The surveys did not assess the severity 
or duration of the symptoms, and no exclusions were 
made for symptoms due to medical illness, bereavement, 
or substance use. Inmates in mental hospitals or 
otherwise physically or mentally unable to complete 
the surveys were excluded from the sample.

Estimates of DSM-IV symptoms of mental disorder 
provide a baseline indication of mental health 
problems among inmates rather than a clinical 
diagnosis of mental illness. Major depression or 
mania symptoms covered a range of feelings and 
behaviors, such as persistent sadness, loss of 
interest in activities, insomnia or hypersomnia, 
psychomotor agitation, and persistent anger or 
irritability.

Insomnia or hypersomnia and persistent anger were 
the most frequently reported major depression or 
mania episodes with nearly half of jail inmates(49%) 
reporting these symptoms. Attempted suicide was the 
least reported symptom by State prisoners (13%), 
Federal prisoners(6%)and local jail inmates(13%).

A psychotic disorder was indicated by any signs of 
delusions or hallucinations during the 12-month period. 
Delusions were characterized by the offenders' belief 
that other people were controlling their brain or 
thoughts, could read their mind, or were spying on 
them. Hallucinations included reports of seeing 
things others said they did not see or hearing 
voices others did not hear. Approximately, 24% of
jail inmates, 15% of State prisoners, and 10% of 
Federal prisoners reported at least one symptom of 
psychotic disorder.  
-------------------------------------------

Symptoms of mental disorder 
highest among jail inmates

Jail inmates had the highest rate of symptoms of a 
mental health disorder(60%), followed by State(49%), 
and Federal prisoners (40%). Symptoms of a mental 
health disorder were measured by a series of questions 
adopted from a structured clinical interview for 
diagnosing mental disorders based on the DSM-IV(see 
box on page 2 and References for sources on DSM-IV
measures). The questions addressed behaviors or 
symptoms related to major depression, mania, or 
psychotic disorders that occurred in the 12 months 
before the interview. 

To meet the criteria for major depression, inmates 
had to report a depressed mood and decreased interest 
or pleasure in activities, along with 3 additional 
symptoms of depression. In order to meet the criteria 
for mania, inmates had to report 3 symptoms during 
the 12-month period. For a psychotic disorder, 1 
symptom of delusions or hallucinations met the 
criteria.

The high rate of symptoms of mental health disorder 
among jail inmates may reflect the role of local 
jails in the criminal justice system. Jails are
locally operated correctional facilities that
receive offenders after an arrest and hold them 
for a short period of time, pending arraignment,
trial, conviction, or sentencing. Among other 
functions, local jails hold mentally ill persons
pending their movement to appropriate mental health
facilities. 

While jails hold inmates sentenced to short terms 
(usually less than 1 year), State and Federal
prisons hold offenders who typically are convicted 
and sentenced to serve more than 1 year. In general, 
because of the longer period of incarceration,
prisons provide a greater opportunity for inmates 
to receive a clinical mental health assessment,
diagnosis, and treatment by a mental health 
professional.***Footnote 1: Persons who have been 
judged by a court to be mentally incompetent to 
stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity are 
not held in these correctional facilities and are 
not covered by this report. ***

High proportion of inmates had 
symptoms of a mental health
disorder without a history

Around 4 in 10 local jail inmates and 3 in 10 State 
and Federal prisoners were found to have symptoms 
of a mental disorder without a recent history. A 
smaller proportion of inmates had both a recent 
history and symptoms of mental disorder: 17% in 
State prisons, 9% in Federal prisons, and 17% in 
local jails. 

An estimated 7% of State prisoners, 5% of Federal 
prisoners, and 3% of local jail inmates were
found to have a recent history of a mental health 
problem and no symptoms. 

--------------------------------------------
About 1 in 10 persons age 18 or older in
the U.S. general population met DSM-IV
criteria for symptoms of a mental health
disorder

* An estimated 11% of the U.S. population age 18 
or older met criteria for mental health disorders, 
based on data in the National Epidemiologic Survey 
on Alcohol and Related Conditions, 2001-2002(NESARC).

* Similar to the prison and jail inmate populations, 
females in the general population had higher rates 
of mental disorders than males (12% compared to 9%).                  
-------------------------------------------------

Mental health problems more 
common among female, white, and
young inmates

Female inmates had much higher rates of mental health
problems than male inmates. An estimated 73% of 
females in State prisons, compared to 55% of male 
inmates, had a mental health problem. In Federal 
prisons, the rate was 61% of females compared to 44% 
of males; and in local jails, 75% of females compared 
to 63% of male inmates. 

The same percentage of females in State prisons or 
local jails (23%) said that in the past 12 months 
they had been diagnosed with a mental disorder by 
a mental health professional. This was almost three 
times the rate of male inmates (around 8%) who had 
been told they had a mental health problem. 

The prevalence of mental health problems varied by 
racial or ethnic group. Among State prisoners, 62% 
of white inmates, compared to 55% of blacks and 46% 
of Hispanics, were found to have a mental health 
problem. Among jail inmates, whites(71%)were also 
more likely than blacks (63%) or Hispanics(51%)to 
have a mental health problem. 

The rate of mental health problems also varied by 
the age of inmates. Inmates age 24 or younger had 
the highest rate of mental health problems and 
those age 55 or older had the lowest rate. Among 
State prisoners, an estimated 63% of those age 24 
or younger had a mental health problem, compared 
to 40% of those age 55 or older. An estimated 70% 
of local jail inmates age 24 or younger had a mental 
health problem, compared to 52% of those age 55 or 
older.

Homelessness, foster care more 
common among inmates who had
mental health problems 

State prisoners (13%) and local jail inmates (17%) 
who had a mental health problem were twice as likely 
as inmates without a mental health problem(6% in 
State prisons; 9% in local jails) to have been
homeless in the year before their incarceration. 

About 18% of State prisoners who had a mental health
problem, compared to 9% of State prisoners who did 
not have a mental problem, said that they had lived 
in a foster home, agency, or institution while 
growing up. 

Among jail inmates, about 14% of those who had a 
mental health problem had lived in a foster home, 
agency, or institution while growing up, compared 
to 6% of jail inmates who did not have a mental 
health problem. 

Low rates of employment, high 
rates of illegal income among
inmates who had mental problems

An estimated 70% of State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem, compared to 76% of those without, 
said they were employed in the month before their 
arrest. Among Federal prisoners, 68% of those who 
had a mental health problem were employed, compared 
to 76% of those who did not have a mental problem.

Among jail inmates, 69% of those who had a mental 
health problem reported that they were employed, 
while 76% of those without were employed in the 
month before their arrest. 

Of State prisoners who had a mental health problem,
65% had received income from wages or salary in the 
month before their arrest. This percentage was
larger for inmates without a mental health problem 
(71%). Over a quarter (28%) of State prisoners who 
had a mental health problem reported income from 
illegal sources, compared to around a fifth (21%) 
of State prisoners without a mental problem. 
    
Past physical or sexual abuse more 
prevalent among inmates who had 
mental health problems

State prisoners who had a mental health problem 
(27%) were over two times more likely than those 
without(10%)to report being physically or 
sexually abused in the past. 

Jail inmates who had a mental health problem were 
three times more likely than jail inmates without 
to have been physically or sexually abused in the
past (24% compared to 8%). 

Family members of inmates with 
mental problems had high rates of 
substance use and incarceration

Inmates who had a mental health problem were more 
likely than inmates without to have family members 
who abused drugs or alcohol or both. Among State
prisoners, 39% of those who had a mental health 
problem reported that a parent or guardian had
abused alcohol, drugs, or both while they were 
growing up. In comparison, 25% of State prisoners
without a mental problem reported parental abuse 
of alcohol, drugs, or both. 

-----------------------------------------
High rates of both mental health problems
and substance dependence or abuse among
State prison and local jail inmates

* An estimated 42% of inmates in State prisons and 
49% in local jails were found to have both a mental 
health problem and substance dependence or abuse. 

* Slightly less than a quarter (24%) of State 
prisoners and a fifth (19%) of local jail inmates 
met the criteria for substance dependence or 
abuse only.
-----------------------------------------

A third (33%) of Federal prisoners who had a mental 
health problem, compared to a fifth (20%)of those 
without, reported that a parent or guardian had
abused alcohol, drugs, or both while they were 
growing up. 

An estimated 37% of jail inmates who had a mental 
health problem said a parent had abused alcohol, 
drugs, or both while they were growing up. This 
was almost twice the rate for jail inmates without 
a mental health problem (19%).

The majority of prison and jail inmates who had a 
mental health problem (52%) reported that they had 
a family member who had been incarcerated in the
past. Among those without a mental health problem, 
about 41% of State inmates and 36% of jails
inmates reported that a family member had served 
time.  

Over a third of both State prisoners and local jail 
inmates who had a mental health problem(35%)had a 
brother who had served time in prison or jail. The 
rate for inmates without a mental health problem was 
29% in State prisons and 26% in local jails. 

Inmates who had mental health 
problems had high rates of
substance dependence or abuse

Among inmates who had a mental health problem, local
jail inmates had the highest rate of dependence or 
abuse of alcohol or drugs (76%), followed by State 
prisoners (74%), and Federal prisoners (64%). 
Substance dependence or abuse was measured as 
defined in the DSM-IV.***Footnote 2: For a 
detailed description of the DSM-IV measures, see 
Substance Dependence, Abuse and Treatment of Jail 
inmates, 2002, <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/sdatji02.htm.>***

Among inmates without a mental health problem, 56% 
in State prisons, 49% in Federal prisons, and 53% 
in local jails were dependent on or abused alcohol
or drugs. 

By specific type of substance, inmates who had a 
mental health problem had higher rates of
dependence or abuse of drugs than alcohol. Among 
State prisoners who had a mental problem, 62% were 
dependent on or abused drugs and 51% alcohol. An
estimated 63% of local jail inmates who had a 
mental problem were dependent on or abused drugs, 
while about 53% were dependent on or abused alcohol. 

When dependence was estimated separately from abuse 
only, local jail inmates who had a mental health 
problem had the highest rate of drug dependence(46%). 
They were two and a half times more likely to be 
dependent on drugs than jail inmates without a
mental problem (18%).

A larger percentage of State prisoners who had a 
mental health problem than those without were found 
to be dependent on drugs(44% compared to 26%). Among
Federal prisoners, 37% who had a mental health 
problem were found to be dependent on drugs, compared 
to 22% of those without. 

State prisoners(30%)and local jail inmates(29%)who 
had a mental health problem had about the same rate 
of alcohol dependence. A quarter of Federal prisoners 
(25%) who had a mental problem were dependent on 
alcohol.

Over a third of inmates who had 
mental health problems had used 
drugs at the time of the offense

Over a third (37%) of State prisoners who had a 
mental health problem said they had used drugs
at the time of the offense, compared to over a 
quarter (26%)of State prisoners without a mental
problem. Also, over a third (34%) of local jail
inmates who had a mental health problem said they 
had used drugs at the time of the offense,
compared to a fifth (20%) of jail inmates who
did not have a mental problem. 

Marijuana or hashish was the most common drug inmates 
said they had used in the month before the offense. 
Among inmates who had a mental health problem, more 
than two-fifths of those in State prisons(46%), 
Federal prisons(41%), or local jails (43%) reported 
they had used marijuana or hashish in the month 
before the offense. 

Almost a quarter of inmates in State prisons or 
local jails who had a mental health problem (24%) 
reported they had used cocaine or crack in the 
month before the offense. A smaller percentage of 
inmates who had a mental health problem had used 
methamphetamines in the month before the offense -- 
13% of State prisoners, 11% of Federal prisoners, 
and 12% of jail inmates. 

Binge drinking prevalent among 
inmates who had mental problems

Inmates who had a mental health problem were more 
likely than inmates without a mental problem to 
report a binge drinking experience. Among State
prisoners who had a mental health problem, 43% 
said they had participated in binge drinking in
the past, compared to 29% of State prisoners 
without mental problems.

Similarly, jail inmates who had mental problems(48%) 
had a much higher rate of binge drinking than jail 
inmates without mental problems (30%). 

Inmates who had a mental problem were more likely 
than inmates without to have been using alcohol at 
the time of the offense (State prisoners, 34%
compared to 27%; Federal prisoners, 22% compared 
to 15%; and jail inmates, 35% compared to 30%.)

Violent offenses common among 
State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem

Among State prisoners who had a mental health problem,
nearly half (49%) had a violent offense as their 
most serious offense, followed by property (20%)
and drug offenses (19%). Among all types of 
offenses, robbery was the most common offense(14%), 
followed by drug trafficking(13%)and homicide(12%). 

An estimated 46% of State prisoners without a 
mental health problem were held for a violent
offense, including 13% for homicide and 11% for 
robbery. 

About 24% of State prisoners without a mental 
problem were held for drug offenses, particularly
drug trafficking (17%). 

Almost an equal percentage of jail inmates who had 
a mental health problem were held for violent(26%) 
and property(27%)offenses. About 12% were held for 
aggravated assault. Jail inmates who had a mental 
health problem were two times more likely than jail 
inmates without a mental problem to be held for 
burglary(8% compared to 4%).

Use of a weapon did not vary by 
mental health status

Convicted violent offenders who had a mental health 
problem were as likely as those without to have used 
a weapon during the offense. An estimated 37% of both 
State prisoners who had a mental problem and those 
without said they had used a weapon during the 
offense. 

By specific type of weapon, among convicted violent
offenders in State prisons who had a mental health 
problem, slightly less than a quarter(24%)had used
a firearm, while a tenth(10%)had used a knife or 
sharp object. 

Violent criminal record more 
prevalent among inmates who had 
a mental health problem 

State prisoners who had a mental health problem(61%) 
were more likely than State prisoners without(56%)to 
have a current or past violent offense.

Among repeat offenders, an estimated 47% of State 
prisoners who had a mental health problem were 
violent recidivists, compared to 39% of State 
prisoners without a mental problem. 

Nearly a third(32%)of local jail inmates who had a 
mental health problem were repeat violent offenders, 
while about a quarter(22%)of jail inmates without 
a mental problem were violent recidivists.

A larger proportion of inmates who had a mental 
health problem had served more prior sentences than 
inmates without a mental problem. An estimated 47% 
of State prisoners who had a mental health problem, 
compared to 39% of those without, had served 3 or 
more prior sentences to probation or incarceration. 
Among jail inmates, 42% of those with a mental 
health problem had served 3 or more prior 
sentences to probation or incarceration, compared 
to 33% of jail inmates without a mental problem. 

State prisoners who had mental 
health problems had longer
sentences than prisoners without  

Overall, State prisoners who had a mental health 
problem reported a mean maximum sentence that was 
5 months longer than State prisoners without a
mental problem(146 months compared to 141 months). 
Among jail inmates, the mean sentence for those 
who had a mental problem was 5 months shorter than 
that for jail inmates without a mental problem(40 
months compared to 45 months).

By most serious offense, excluding offenders 
sentenced to life or death, both violent State
prisoners who had a mental health problem and 
those without had about the same mean sentence
length. Violent State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem were sentenced to serve a mean
maximum sentence length of 212 months and those 
without, 211 months.

Among prisoners sentenced to life or death, there 
was little variation in sentence length by mental
health status (not shown in table). About 8% of 
State prisoners who had a mental health problem
and 9% of those without were sentenced to life or 
death. Among Federal prisoners, 3% of both those 
who had a mental health problem and those without 
were sentenced to life or death. 

State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem expected to serve 4 
months longer than those without 

Overall, the mean time State prisoners who had a 
mental health problem expected to serve was 4
months longer than State prisoners without a mental 
problem (93 months compared to 89 months). Among 
convicted jail inmates who expected to serve their 
time in a local jail, there was little variation by 
mental health status in the amount of time expected 
to be served. About 55% of those who had a mental 
problem, and 54% of those without, expected to serve 
6 months or less. 

A third of State prisoners who had 
mental health problems had 
received treatment since admission

State prisoners who had a mental health problem(34%) 
had the highest rate of mental health treatment 
since admission, followed by Federal prisoners(24%)
and local jail inmates (17%). 

All Federal prisons and most State prisons and jail
jurisdictions, as a matter of policy, provide
mental health services to inmates, including 
screening inmates at intake for mental health 
problems, providing therapy or counseling by 
trained mental health professionals, and 
distributing psychotropic medication.
***Footnote 3: See Mental Health Treatment 
in State Prisons, 2000, <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/
bjs/abstract/mhtsp00.htm> and Census of Jails, 1999,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cj99.htm>.*** 

More than a fifth of inmates (22%) in State prison 
who had a mental health problem had received
mental health treatment during the year before 
their arrest, including 16% who had used prescribed 
medications, 11% who had professional therapy, and 
6% who had stayed overnight in a hospital because of 
a mental or emotional problem. 

Among jail inmates who had a mental health problem, 
an estimated 23% had received treatment during the 
year before their arrest: 17% had used medication, 
12% had received professional therapy, and 7% had 
stayed overnight in a hospital because of a mental 
or emotional problem.

Taking a prescribed medication for a mental health 
problem was the most common type of treatment 
inmates who had a mental health problem had
received since admission to prison or jail. About 
27% of State prisoners, 19% of Federal prisoners, 
and 15% of jail inmates who had a mental problem 
had used prescribed medication for a mental
problem since admission. 

An overnight stay in a hospital was the least likely 
method of treatment inmates had received since 
admission. Among inmates who had a mental problem,
about 5% of those in State prisons, 3% in Federal 
prisons, and 2% in local jails had stayed overnight 
in a hospital for a mental problem.

Use of medication for a mental 
health problem by State prisoners 
rose between 1997 and 2004 

The proportion of State prisoners who had used 
prescribed medication for a mental health problem 
since admission to prison rose to 15% in 2004, up
from 12% in 1997. There was little change in the 
percentage of inmates who reported an overnight 
stay in a hospital since admission(around 3%), or 
in the percentage who had received professional 
mental health therapy(around 12%).

State prisoners who said they had ever used prescribed
medication for a mental or emotional problem in the 
past rose to 24% in 2004, up from 19% in 1997. 
Overall, 31% of State prisoners said they had ever 
received mental health treatment in the past, up 
from 28% in 1997. 

Among jail inmates, in 2002 around 30% said they 
had received treatment for a mental health
problem in the past, up from 25% in 1996. The 
proportion who had received treatment since
admission (11%) was unchanged. 
 
Rule violations and injuries from a 
fight more common among inmates 
who had a mental health problem 

Prison or jail inmates who had a mental health 
problem were more likely than those without to
have been charged with breaking facility rules since
admission. Among State prisoners, 58% of those who 
had a mental health problem, compared to 43% of 
those without, had been charged with rule violations.

An estimated 24% of State prisoners who had a mental 
health problem, compared to 14% of those without, 
had been charged with a physical or verbal assault 
on correctional staff or another inmate. Among 
Federal prisoners who had a mental health problem, 
15% had been charged with a physical or verbal 
assault on correctional staff or another inmate 
compared to 7% of those without a mental problem.

Jail inmates who had a mental health problem were 
twice as likely as those without to have been
charged with facility rule violations (19% compared 
to 9%). 

Inmates in local jails who had a mental health 
problem were also four times as likely as those
without to have been charged with a physical or 
verbal assault on correctional staff or another
inmate (8% compared to 2%).

-------------------------------------------
Three-quarters of female inmates in State
prisons who had a mental health problem met
criteria for substance dependence or abuse

Female State prisoners who had a mental health 
problem were more likely than those without to —

* meet criteria for substance dependence or abuse 
(74% compared to 54%),

* have a current or past violent offense(40% 
compared to 32%),

* have used cocaine or crack in the month before 
arrest (34% compared to 24%),

* have been homeless in the year before arrest(17% 
compared to 9%).
 
They were also more likely to 
report —

* 3 or more prior sentences to probation or 
incarceration (36% compared to 29%),

* past physical or sexual abuse(68% compared to 44%),  

* parental abuse of alcohol or drugs(47% compared 
to 29%),

* a physical or verbal assault charge since 
admission (17% compared to 6%). 
-------------------------------------------

A larger percentage of inmates who had a mental 
health problem had been injured in a fight since
admission than those without a mental problem 
(State prisoners, 20% compared to 10%; Federal
prisoners, 11% compared to 6%; jail inmates, 9% 
compared to 3%).

Methodology

The findings in this report are based on data in the 
Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities, 2004, and the Survey of Inmates in Local 
Jails, 2002. Conducted every 5 to 6 years since 1972, 
the BJS' inmate surveys are the only national source 
of detailed information on criminal offenders, 
particularly special populations such as drug and 
alcohol users and offenders who have mental health 
problems.

The survey design included a stratified two-stage 
sample where facilities were selected in the
first stage and inmates to be interviewed in the 
second stage. In the second sampling stage,
interviewers from the Census Bureau visited each 
selected facility and systematically selected a
sample of inmates. Computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI)was used to conduct the
interviews. 

Survey of Inmates in State and Federal 
Correctional Facilities, 2004  

The State prison sample was selected from a universe 
of 1,585 facilities. A total of 287 State prisons 
participated in the survey; 2 refused, 11 were
closed or had no inmates to survey, and 1 was 
erroneously included in the universe. A total of 
14,499 inmates in the State facilities were
interviewed; 1,653 inmates refused to participate, 
resulting in a second-stage nonresponse rate of
10.2%.

The Federal prison sample was selected from 148 
Federal prisons and satellite facilities. Thirty-
nine of the 40 prisons selected participated in 
the survey. After the initial sample of inmates was 
drawn, a secondary sample of 1 in 3 drug offenders 
was selected. A total of 3,686 inmates in Federal 
facilities were interviewed and 567 refused to 
participate, resulting in a second-stage 
nonresponse rate of 13.3%.

Survey of Inmates in Local Jails, 2002

The local jail sample was selected from a universe 
of 3,365. Overall, 465 jails were selected, and 
interviews were held in 417 jails; 39 jails refused 
or were excluded for administrative reasons; and 
9 were closed or had no inmates. A total of 6,982 
inmates were interviewed; 768 inmates refused to 
participate, resulting in a second-stage nonresponse 
rate of 9.9%. 
 
Accuracy of survey estimates

The accuracy of the survey estimates depends on 
sampling and measurement errors. Sampling errors 
occur by chance because a sample of inmates rather 
than all inmates were interviewed. Measurement error 
can be attributed to many sources, such as nonresponse, 
recall difficulties, differences in the interpretation 
of questions among inmates, and processing errors.

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated 
standard error, varies by the size of the estimate 
and the size of the base population. These standard 
errors may be used to construct confidence intervals 
around percentages. For example, the 95% confidence 
interval around the percentage of jail inmates in 
2002 who had a mental health problem is approximately 
64.2% plus or minus 1.96 times .83%(or 62.6% to 65.8%). 
Standard error tables for data in this report are 
provided in the Appendix which is available in the 
electronic version of the report at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mhppji.htm>.

A detailed description of the method-ology for the 
State and Federal Prison survey, including standard 
error tables and links to other reports or findings, 
is available on the BJS Website
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ sicf04.htm>. 
A detailed description of the methodology for the 
Survey of Inmates in Local Jails is available at
<http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/NACJD-STUDY/
04359.xml>.

Measures of mental health problems in 
the general population

Caution should be used when making comparisons between 
prison and jail inmates and the general population 
based on the a 12-month DSM-IV structured interview. 
There are significant variations in the questionnaire 
design and data analysis. For example, questions on 
the severity or duration of symptoms and questions 
about whether symptoms are due to bereavement, 
substance use, or a medical condition may vary from 
survey to survey. 

For details on the methodology used in the National 
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, 
sponsored by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, see the Data Reference Manual,
<http://niaa.census.gov/>. For additional information 
on the prevalence of mental disorders in the general 
population, see the National Survey on Drug Use and 
Health, sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration,
<http://www.oas.samhsa.gpv/nsduh.htm>.  Also, see 
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication Study, 
sponsored primarily by the National Institute of 
Mental Health,
<http://www.nimh.nih.gov/healthinformation/ncs-r.cfm>. 

---------------------------------------------
References
American Psychological Association, Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition 
(DSM-IV), 1994. Michael B. First, Robert, L. Spitzer, 
Miriam Gibbon, and Janet B.W. Williams, User's Guide 
for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis 
I Disorders, American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. 
Arlington, Va., March 2002. U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, National Epidemiologic Survey on 
Alcohol and Related Conditions, 2002, National 
Institutes of Health, National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, Maryland. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2002, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration, Office of 
Applied Studies, Rockville, Maryland.
----------------------------------------------  

---------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. 
Sedgwick is director.  

Doris J. James and Lauren E. Glaze 
wrote this report, under the 
supervision of Allen J. Beck. Laura M. 
Maruschak, Todd D. Minton, and 
Tracy L. Snell verified the report. 
Rebecca L. Medway provided 
programming assistance. Tina Dorsey 
edited the report and Jayne Robinson 
prepared it for final printing, under the 
supervision of Marianne Zawitz.

Tracy L. Snell, under the supervision 
of Allen J. Beck, was project manager 
for the Survey of Inmates in State and 
Federal Correctional Facilities. 

For the State and Federal prisoners 
survey, at the U.S. Census Bureau 
Steven M. Bittner, Colette Heiston, 
and Kenneth Mayo carried out 
questionnaire design, data collection 
and processing, under the supervision 
of Marilyn M. Monahan, Demographic 
Surveys Division. Renee Arion 
programmed the questionnaire and 
Dave Keating programmed the listing 
instrument, under the supervision of 
Rob Wallace, Technologies Management 
Office. Programming assistance in the 
Demographic Surveys Division was provided 
by Chris Alaura, Mildred Ballenger, 
Bach-Loan Nguyen, and Scott Raudabaugh, 
under the supervision of David Watt. 

Dave Hornick and Danielle N. Castelo, 
Demographic Surveys Methods Division, 
under the supervision of Thomas F. Moore, 
designed the sample and weighting 
specifications. Sydnee Chattin-Reynolds 
and Luis Padilla, Field Division, under 
the supervision of Richard Ning, 
coordinated the field operations. The 
affiliations for the Census Bureau date 
to the time of the survey.

Contributors to the Survey of Inmates in 
Local Jails are listed in Profile of Jail 
Inmates, 2002, at <http://www.ojp. 
usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pji02.htm>. 

September 2006, NCJ 213600 
---------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and 
in ASCII and its related statistical data and 
tables—including appendix tables— are available 
at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/mhppji.htm>
-----------------------------------------------

End of file 
08/25/06 ih