U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Medical Problems of Jail Inmates

November 2006, NCJ 210696


-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mpji.htm
-------------------------------------------------------

By Laura M. Maruschak
BJS Statistician

--------------------------------------------------
Highlights

More than a third of jail inmates reported having a current 
medical problem

* 42% of inmates who reported a current medical problem said 
they had seen a health care professional about the problem.
Nearly two-thirds of jail inmates said they had been tested 
for tuberculosis since admission; over a fifth reported being 
tested for HIV.

22% of jail inmates reported having a learning impairment; 11% 
said they had impaired vision           

* Around 15% of all jail inmates reported having two or more 
impairments.

* About 1 in 5 jail inmates said they considered themselves 
to have a disability.

* Heart valve damage (290 per 10,000 inmates) and arrhythmia 
(211 per 10,000) were the most commonly reported types of 
heart problems.

* About a quarter of convicted (26%) and unconvicted (25%) 
jail inmates reported having a dental problem.

* Inmates age 24 or younger (17%) were more than twice as 
likely as those age 45 or older (8%) to report being injured 
since admission.

* About 61% of inmates age 45 or older reported having a 
current medical problem; 44% reported an impairment.

* More than half (53%) of female jail inmates reported having 
a current medical problem, compared to about a third (35%) 
of male inmates.

* About 5% of female jail inmates said they were pregnant at 
the time of admission.

* Among inmates who were homeless in the year before their 
arrest, 49% reported a current medical problem, compared to 
35% of those who were not homeless.

* More than 4 in 10 inmates reported having a medical exam 
since admission to jail.
--------------------------------------------------

In 2002 an estimated 229,000 jail inmates reported having a
current medical problem other than a cold or virus. Many of
these problems reflect conditions existing before admission.
Medical problems reported by inmates included: 

arthritis (13%)
hypertension (11%)
asthma (10%)
and heart problems (6%). 

Under 5% of inmates reported cancer, paralysis, stroke,
diabetes, kidney problems, liver problems, hepatitis,
sexually transmitted diseases, tuberculosis(TB), or human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 

An estimated 227,200 jail inmates reported having impaired
functioning, most commonly a learning impairment (22%), such
as dyslexia or attention deficit disorder, or having been
enrolled in special education classes. Around 2% of jail
inmates said they had a mobility impairment, requiring the
use of a cane, walker, wheelchair, or other aids to do daily
activities. About 8% of jail inmates said they had a mental
health condition that kept them from participating fully in
school, work, or other activities.

An estimated 83,000 jail inmates reported being injured since
admission. About 7% of jail inmates reported being injured in
a fight and 7% reported an injury due to an accident. 

The findings in this report are based on the 2002 Survey of
Inmates in Local Jails. Data are presented separately on 
medical problems, impairments, and injuries reported by jail
inmates.

22% of jail inmates reported one 
medical problem; 14%, two or more

The majority of jail inmates (63%) did not report a current
medical problem. Around a fifth (22%) reported having 1 of 
14 specific medical problems and 14% reported two or more. 

The prevalence of a current medical problem did not vary by
conviction status. Nearly the same percentage of convicted
(36%) and unconvicted jail inmates (38%) reported having a
current medical problem. 

Medical problems were highest 
among female and older inmates

More than half(53%)of female jail inmates reported having 
a current medical problem, compared to about a third(35%)
of male jail inmates. Male and female inmates were equally
likely to report having had surgery since their admission
(about 1.4%). 

Among jail inmates age 45 or older, 61% reported a medical
problem, compared to a quarter of those 24 or younger. 
Older and younger inmates were equally likely to report 
having surgery.

About 1 in 8 jail inmates reported 
currently having arthritis

Jail inmates reported a wide-range of medical problems, with
arthritis as the most common (13%), followed by hypertension
(11%), and asthma (10%). Heart problems (6%), followed by 
kidney problems and tuberculosis (4%) were the next most 
frequently reported medical conditions. With the exception 
of paralysis, stroke, and tuberculosis, female inmates 
reported higher levels of each specific type of medical 
problem than male inmates. 
  
Women most likely to report 
cervical cancer, men skin cancer

Female inmates reported a higher rate of ever having cancer
than males (831 per 10,000 inmates, compared to 108 per
10,000 inmates). By specific type of cancer, 490 per 10,000
female jail inmates reported ever having cervical cancer, 
110 per 10,000 reported ovarian cancer, and 91 per 10,000
reported ever having breast cancer.

Male jail inmates most commonly reported ever having skin
cancer (37 per 10,000 inmates), followed by lung cancer(15
per 10,000), and testicular and colon cancer (both 13 per
10,000).

Heart valve damage was the most 
commonly reported heart problem

An estimated 880 jail inmates per 10,000 reported ever having
a heart problem, including heart valve damage (290 per 10,000
inmates), arrhythmia (211 per 10,000), and angina (130 per
10,000). About 126 per 10,000 had suffered a heart attack.

Prevalence of a medical problem did 
not change with time served

Inmates who had served a year or more were as likely as those
who had served 7 or fewer days to report a current medical
problem(about 38%). As time served increased, jail inmates 
who reported having had surgery or a dental problem since 
admission increased. Among inmates who had served 7 or fewer 
days, 0.2% reported surgery since admission, compared to 1.6% 
who had served from 61 to 180 days. About 3.5% of jail inmates 
who had served more than a year reported having surgery since 
admission.

Jail inmates who had served more than a year were nearly 3
and a half times more likely than those who had served 7 or
fewer days to report having a dental problem since admission.

More than a third of jail inmates 
reported an impairment

An estimated 227,200 jail inmates said they had an impairment, 
including a learning, speech, hearing, vision, mobility, or 
mental impairment. About 1 in 5 jail inmates said they 
considered themselves to have a disability (not shown in a 
table). 

Around 22% of jail inmates reported a learning impairment,
such as dyslexia or attention deficit disorder, or having
been enrolled in special education classes. About 6% of jail
inmates reported difficulty hearing a normal conversation
even when wearing a hearing aid. Among jail inmates, 11%
reported difficulty seeing ordinary newsprint even when
wearing glasses.

Based on a single survey question, 8% of jail inmates 
reported having a mental or emotional condition that kept
them from participating fully in school, work, or other
activities. In a recent BJS study, an estimated 64% of jail
inmates were found to have a mental health problem. This
measure was based on a series of survey questions about prior
diagnoses of a mental health problem or symptoms of a mental
disorder as specified in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorder, DSM-IV. It was not restricted to
impaired functioning due to a mental health condition. (See
Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates, available
at <http://ojp. usdoj.gov/bjs/mhppji.htm>.

Females most likely to report a 
physical or mental impairment, 
males a learning impairment

Overall, 39% of female inmates and 36% of male inmates
reported having any physical or mental impairment. Male 
inmates were more likely than female inmates to report a
learning impairment (22% compared to 18%).

Females more commonly than males reported a vision impairment
(14% compared to 11%) or a mental impairment (15% compared to
7%).  
 
More than 40% of inmates age 45 
or older reported an impairment

Inmates age 45 or older were the most likely to report having
a physical or mental impairment, followed by those 24 or
younger. Forty-four percent of jail inmates age 45 or older
and 38% of those age 24 or younger said they had a physical
or mental impairment. 

Among the specific physical impairments, 12% of jail inmates
age 45 or older reported difficulty hearing, 24% reported
difficulty seeing, and 7% had a problem with mobility. A
tenth of those age 45 or older said they had a mental
impairment.
Inmates age 24 or younger (28%) were more than twice as
likely as those 45 or older (11%) to report a learning
disability. Four percent of both inmates age 24 or younger
and those age 45 or older reported a speech impairment. 

15% of jail inmates had 2 or more 
impairments

Jail inmates typically reported having one impairment(21%).
About 10% reported two impairments, and nearly 6% reported
having three or more. The number of impairments varied 
little by age. Inmates age 35 or older (17%) were slightly 
more likely than those 34 or younger (14%) to have 2 or more
impairments.

Around 1 in 8 jail inmates reported 
being injured since admission to jail

Overall, an estimated 82,900 jail inmates (13%) reported
being injured since admission. Inmates were equally likely 
to report that they had been injured in an accident(7%)as 
to report that they had been injured in a fight(7%).

Injuries highest among male 
and younger inmates 

Among jail inmates, men (14%) were more likely than women
(10%) to report being injured since admission. About 7% of
males, compared to 4% of females, reported being injured in 
a fight. Male and female jail inmates reported nearly the 
same rate of being injured in an accident. 

Jail inmates age 24 or younger (17%) were more than twice as
likely to have been injured since admission than inmates age
45 or older (8%). They were more than five times as likely to
report being injured in a fight since admission (11% compared
to 2%). 

The percent of inmates who reported being injured in an
accident slightly decreased as age increased. About 8% of
inmates age 24 or younger reported being injured in an
accident, compared to 6% of those age 45 or older.

Violent offenders had higher rates 
of fight-related injuries

About 11% of violent offenders in jail reported being injured
in a fight since admission, compared to 6% of property and
drug offenders and 5% of public-order offenders.

Inmates with an impairment had 
higher rates of injuries 

Among inmates with an impairment, nearly 10% reported being 
injured in an accident and 10% reported being injured in a 
fight. Around 6% of those without an impairment had been
injured. 

Inmates who reported a mental impairment were almost twice as
likely as those not reporting a mental impairment to be injured 
in a fight or in an accident since admission. Nearly 13% of 
those with a mental impairment were injured in a fight and 
12% were injured in an accident. Among those without a
mental impairment, almost 7% had been injured in a fight or
in an accident.

Likelihood of injury increased with 
time served in jail

Among jail inmates who had served 7 or fewer days at the time
of the interview, 4% reported an injury compared to 30% of
those jail inmates who had served 1 year or more at the time
of the interview.

The risk of injury due to an accident or a fight increased
with time served. About 3% of jail inmates who had served 7
or fewer days reported being injured in an accident, compared
to 17% of inmates who had served 1 year or more at the time
of interview. Jail inmates who had served 1 or more years at
the time of interview were 8 times as likely (16%) to report
being injured in a fight as those who had served 7 or fewer
days (2%), and about 2« times as likely as those who had
served between 31 and 60 days (7%).

Male inmates incarcerated between 15 days and 1 year were
more likely to have been injured than female inmates. Among 
those who had been incarcerated more than 1 year at the 
time of the interview, females were more likely than males 
to have been injured.

As time served in jail increased, the prevalence of injuries
among inmates age 34 or younger and inmates age 35 or older
increased. Except for inmates who had served 7 or fewer days, 
inmates age 34 or younger consistently had higher rates of 
injuries than those age 35 or older as time served increased.

Jail inmates who reported any impairment had higher rates of
injuries than other inmates, regardless of how long they had
served in jail.

Regardless of the time served in jail, violent jail inmates
had higher rates of fight-related injuries than other inmates. 
Among jail inmates who had served 7 or fewer days, nearly 3% 
of violent offenders and 2% of nonviolent offenders reported 
having been injured in a fight. Among those inmates who had 
served a year or more, 22% of violent offenders said they had 
been injured in a fight, compared to 12% of nonviolent 
offenders.

Health-related problems more 
common among homeless or
unemployed inmates

Of jail inmates who reported being homeless or living in a
shelter in the year prior to arrest, nearly half said they
had a current medical problem or a physical or mental
impairment, compared to a third of those who were not
homeless.

Medical problems and physical or mental impairments were also
more prevalent among inmates who reported being unemployed
before their arrest or receiving government assistance.
Nearly 44% of jail inmates who were unemployed in the month
prior to their arrest, compared to 34% of those who were
employed, reported having a physical or mental impairment.
About 41% of inmates who were unemployed and 35% who were
employed reported having a current medical problem. 

More than half (57%) of jail inmates who received financial
support from government agencies in the month prior to arrest
reported a current medical problem. About a third (34%) of
jail inmates who received income from wages reported a
current medical problem. 

Fifty-five percent of inmates who received income from
government transfers reported having a physical or mental
impairment, compared to 33% of those who reported receiving
wages.

Medical problems common among 
inmates with a history of drug
use or dependence

Jail inmates who reported ever using drugs (38%) were more
likely than those who never used drugs (31%) to report a
current medical problem. Thirty-eight percent of inmates who
ever used drugs, compared to 30% of those who never used drugs, 
reported an impairment. An estimated 53% of jail inmates who 
reported ever using a needle to inject drugs said they had a 
current medical problem, compared to 35% of those who did not 
use a needle. About 45% of jail inmates who used a needle to 
inject drugs, compared to 37% of those who did not, reported 
having a physical or mental impairment.

Among jail inmates dependent on or abusing drugs, 4 in 10
reported having a physical or mental impairment, compared 
to about 3 in 10 inmates who were not dependent on drugs.

Among jail inmates who were dependent on or abusing alcohol,
two-fifths reported a current medical problem, compared to
about a third of those who were not dependent or abusing
alcohol. About 40% of those dependent on or abusing alcohol
had an impairment, compared to 34% of those who were not
dependent on or abusing alcohol. Alcohol or drug abuse or
dependence is based on symptoms for diagnosing substance
dependence or abuse in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders - fourth edition (DSM-IV)(See Substance
Dependence, Abuse, and Treatment of Jail Inmates, 2002, BJS
Special Report, www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdatji02.htm.)

-------------------------------------------------
Most inmates reported receiving health assessment
or medical exams since admission

About 80% of inmates reported that at the time of admission 
they were questioned about their health or medical history. 
Nearly half said that staff checked them to see if they were 
sick, injured, or intoxicated.

More than 4 in 10 jail inmates reported having a medical 
examination since admission to jail. A third of inmates 
reported having a blood test since admission. Six in ten 
inmates said they had been tested for TB, and more than 2 
in 10 reported they had been tested for HIV.

Among jail inmates who reported a current medical problem, 
42% also reported visiting a health care professional 
because of the medical problem. Twenty percent of inmates 
who had been injured reported seeing a health care 
professional, as did 21% of those who said they had a dental 
problem.

Since their admission to jail, 44% of female jail inmates  
reported having a medical examination. Nearly 20% reported 
having a pelvic exam. About 5% were pregnant at time of 
admission. Among those female inmates who were pregnant at 
the time of admission, 48% had received an obstetrics exam 
since admission and 35% had received some type of pregnancy 
care, such as instructions on child care, exercises, special 
diet, medication, or special testing. 
------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Data in this report are based on hour-long personal interviews 
with jail inmates. As part of an omnibus survey conducted 
every 5 to 6 years, these questions provide an opportunity to 
estimate the prevalence of a variety of diseases, illnesses, 
chronic problems, and other health-related conditions of 
inmates. 

In the 2002 Survey of Inmates in Local Jails, offenders were
randomly selected from a nationally representative sample of
facilities and were asked questions regarding their current
offense and sentence, criminal history, personal and family
background, physical impairment and mental condition, and
medical problems since admission to prison. Detailed
descriptions of the methodology and sample design can be
found in Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002, available at
<http://www.ojp. usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pji02.htm>.

The accuracy of the survey estimates presented in this report
depends on two types of error: sampling and nonsampling. 

Sampling error is the variation that may occur by chance 
because a sample rather than a complete numeration of the 
population was conducted. 

Nonsampling error can be attributed to many sources, such as
nonresponses, differences in the interpretation of questions
among inmates, recall difficulties, and processing errors.
The accuracy of the estimates depends on the ability and
willingness of inmates to report such problems. Inmate self-
reported data may underestimate the prevalence of some medical 
conditions, especially those problems that require more 
sophisticated diagnosis and those that are more sensitive in 
nature. In any survey the full extent of the nonsampling error 
is never known. 

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated standard error, 
varies by the size of the estimate and the size of the base 
population. Estimates of the standard errors for selected 
characteristics have been calculated (see appendix tables 
at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mpji02.htm>).

---------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director.

Laura M. Maruschak wrote this report, 
under the supervision of Allen J. Beck. 
Lauren E. Glaze provided statistical 
review. Margaret Noonan verified the report. 
Tina Dorsey and Carolyn C. Williams edited 
the report, under the supervision of Doris J. 
James. Marianne Zawitz provided editorial 
review. Jayne Robinson prepared the report 
for final printing.

November 2006, NCJ 210696
----------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in 
ASCII and its related statistical data and tables— 
[enter description] — are available at the BJS 
World Wide Web Internet site: 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mpji.htm>
----------------------------------------------


End of file
11/6/06 ih