U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

Federal Justice Statistics Program
Offenders Returning to Federal Prison, 1986-97

September 2000, NCJ 182991

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/orfp97.htm
------------------------------------------------------------------


by William J. Sabol, Ph.D.
William P. Adams
Barbara Parthasarathy
Yan Yuan
The Urban Institute

--------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* 16% of the 215,263 offenders released from Federal prison
between 1986 and 1994 returned to Federal prison within 3 years
of release. 

* The proportion of offenders returning to Federal prison within
3 years increased from 11.4% of those released during 1986 to
18.6% of those released during 1994.

* 60% returned following a technical violation of release
conditions, 30% following a conviction for a new offense, and
10% for other violations.

* Of the 33,855 offenders returning to prison between 1986 and
1997, 54% returned within 1 year of being released; an
additional 34% returned within 2 years of being released.  About
12% returned after 2 to 3 years.

* Offenders convicted of a violent offense returned to prison at
a higher rate (32% of releases) than those convicted of a
property (17%), public-order (15%), or drug (13%) offense.

* Offenders who served 5 years or more in Federal prison were
more likely to return to Federal prison (25%) than those who
served terms of less than 5 years (15%).

* Offenders returning to prison for any reason served an
additional 16 months, on average, in prison.  Those committing
technical violations served 12 months, on average; those
convicted of a new offense, 25 months.

* Violent offenders returning to prison for any reason served an
additional 28 months; drug offenders, 20 months; property
offenders, 12 months; and public-order offenders, 11 months.
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Between 1986 and 1994, 215,263 offenders were released from
Federal prison for the first time.  Of those offenders, 16% (or
33,855) returned to Federal prison within 3 years. 
The proportion of offenders returning to prison increased from
11.4% of those released during 1986 to 18.6% of those released
during 1994.

Among offenders released between 1986 and 1992, the proportion
that returned to Federal prison within 3 years increased from
11.4% to 18.2%; of those released between 1992 and 1994, the
proportion increased from 18.2% to 18.6%.

Information is not available on offenders who, when released
from Federal prison, were subsequently imprisoned for a State
offense without an intervening Federal revocation.

During the 1980's Federal sentencing policy and practice
underwent a series of changes.  The Sentencing Reform Act of
1984 (SRA), which went into effect on November 1, 1987, in part,
established sentencing guidelines that abolished parole,
required a determinate prison term, reduced the amount of good
conduct time that Federal offenders could earn, and required
Federal offenders to serve the entire sentence imposed, less up
to 54 days of any good conduct time earned per year served.

Before implementation of the SRA, Federal offenders served about
58% of the sentence imposed, on average, in prison. ***Footnote 1: Time
Served in Prison by Federal Offenders, 1986-97, BJS Special
Report.  NCJ 171682, 1999.*** After serving a certain portion of
their sentence in prison, offenders could be paroled by the U.S.
Parole Commission and supervised in the community by Federal
probation officers.  The Parole Commission could reimprison
offenders violating the conditions of their parole or committing
new crimes for up to the unserved portion of their sentence. 
(If convicted of a subsequent crime, the offender could receive
a separate sentence  for the new crime.)  Parole guidelines,
however, provide for re-parole following revocation (see 28 CFR
Sec. 2.21).

Following implementation of the SRA, Federal offenders could
expect to serve approximately 87% of the sentence imposed,
assuming they earned all available good conduct time.  Following
release from prison, most of these offenders are required to
serve a term of "supervised release." 

Federal supervised release is similar to parole insofar as the
offender is required to abide by court-imposed conditions and
Federal probation officers monitor compliance with those
conditions.  Unlike parole, supervised release has a term that
must be established at the time of sentencing in accordance with
the Federal sentencing guidelines (see U.S.S.G., Chapter 7, Part
D).  Offenders on supervised release can be reincarcerated for
violations of release conditions or new crimes.  The prison term
imposed for the violation is in addition to any sentence
previously imposed and served for the original offense and any
sentence imposed for a subsequent crime.

During 1998, 98% of offenders sentenced to a term of
imprisonment were also sentenced to a term of supervised release
(not shown in a table).  The average term of supervised release
imposed during 1998 was 41 months.

Offenders released from prison during 1986 and 1987 were
sentenced under laws in effect prior to the implementation of
the Federal sentencing guidelines ("old law") and, therefore,
were eligible for parole.  The first cohort of 3,202 offenders
sentenced pursuant to the SRA ("new law") entered supervised
release during 1988.  By 1994, 90% of the offenders released
from Federal prison had been sentenced pursuant to the SRA and
were not eligible for parole (not shown in a table).



-------------------------Box on page 2--------------------------------

New-law offenders had higher return rates compared to old-law
offenders

Offenders sentenced pursuant to the Federal sentencing
guidelines returned to Federal prison at a greater rate than
other offenders.  Overall, 18% of the 103,686 new-law offenders
released from Federal prison between 1988 and 1994 returned
within 3 years of release (see figure below).  Of the 111,577
old-law offenders who were released between 1987 and 1994, 14%
returned.

For both new- and old-law offenders, the annual return rate
increased over time.  For new-law offenders the proportion
returning to Federal prison increased from 12% of those released
during 1988 to 19% of those released during 1994.  For old-law
offenders, the proportion who returned increased from 11% of
those released during 1986 to 16% of those released during 1994.

New-law offenders returned  at a greater rate for each offense
category than old-law offenders.  New-law offenders
convicted of fraud and weapons offenses were almost twice as
likely as old-law offenders to return to Federal prison within 3
years of release: 17.9% of new-law fraud offenders returned
compared to 9.2% of old-law offenders; and 31.3% of new-law
weapon offenders returned compared to 16.3% of old-law offenders
-------------------------End of box---------------------------------

Violent offenders returned to Federal prison at higher rates
than other offenders

Offenders originally convicted of violent offenses (such as
robbery) were more likely to return to Federal prison within 3
years of their release than offenders who had been convicted of
property, drug, or public-order offenses. About 32% of
violent offenders released from Federal prison during this
period returned within 3 years of release compared to 13% of
drug offenders.

Defendants convicted of robbery were among those most likely to
return to Federal prison:  36% of the 8,880 robbery offenders
released from prison between 1986 and 1994 returned within 3
years.  By contrast, about 13% of those convicted of either
fraud or drug offenses returned.  Within public-order offenses,
offenders convicted of weapon offenses returned to prison (24%)
at a higher rate than those convicted of immigration (15%) or
other public-order (11%) offenses.

Of the 10,354 offenders who returned to Federal prison for new
crimes committed while on parole or supervised release, 81%
committed the same type of offense for which they were
originally imprisoned (not shown in a table).

Violent offenders of all racial groups returned to prison at
about the same rate – about 33% returning within 3 years.  For
other offense categories,however, nonwhite offenders returned to
prison at a higher rate than whites.  For instance, among
property offenders, 26% of blacks and 19% of other nonwhites
returned to prison compared to 13% of whites.  Among
drug offenders, 22% of blacks and 15% of other nonwhites
returned compared to 11% of whites.


Men, blacks, and younger adults returned to Federal prison at
higher rates than other offenders; Hispanics at lower rates

Comprising about 10% of the 215,263 offenders released from
Federal prison between 1986 and 1994, women returned to prison
at a lower rate than men.  About 12% of the women
released from Federal prison returned within 3 years compared to
16% of the men.  Within each offense category, a higher
percentage of men than women returned to Federal prison.

Blacks comprised 19% of all offenders released between 1986 and
1994.  Overall, blacks and other nonwhite offenders returned to
Federal prison at a higher rate than white offenders:  24% of
black offenders and 22% of other nonwhite offenders returned,
compared to 13% of white offenders. 

Hispanics comprised 38% of offenders released.  Hispanic
offenders returned to Federal prison at a lower rate than did
non-Hispanics:  14% of Hispanic offenders and 17% of
non-Hispanics returned.  

More than half of the 81,093 Hispanic offenders released from
Federal prison were convicted of immigration offenses; about a
third, of drug offenses (not shown in a table).  About 15% of
those convicted of immigration offenses and 11% of those
convicted of drug offenses returned to Federal prison.	

Persons between ages 21 and 40  comprised 69% of offenders
released.  These offenders returned to prison at a higher rate
than offenders of other age groups: 18% of those age 21 to 40,
14% of those under age 21, and 11% of those older than 40 at the
time of release returned to Federal prison within 3 years.


Noncitizens, more than a third of offenders released from
Federal prison, returned to prison at a lower rate than citizens

Noncitizens comprised almost 38% (80,992) of the 215,263
offenders released from Federal prison.  Noncitizens returned to
prison at a lower rate than did U.S. citizens:  about 11% of
noncitizens returned to Federal prison within 3 years of release
compared to 19% of citizens.  

Except for immigration offenses, noncitizens were about half as
likely to return to Federal prison within 3 years as citizens
(not shown in a table).  Among violent offenders, 33% of
citizens returned to Federal prison compared to 15% of
noncitizens; among property offenders, 18% compared to 9%; and
among drug offenders, 17% compared to 6%.


Several factors account for noncitizens' lower rate of return

At least two factors unrelated to the behavior of offenders on
release contribute to a generally lower risk of return for
noncitizens than citizens.

Following release from prison, noncitizens may be deported or
detained pending deportation by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service.  Deported noncitizens are not under the
supervision of Federal probation officers and, therefore,
actions that would otherwise constitute violations do not lead
to reincarceration.  Similarly, noncitizens cannot be returned
for new crimes unless they reenter the United States, and that
reentry itself would constitute a new Federal offense.

Noncitizens were generally less likely to be released to
supervision than other prisoners.  Between 1986 and 1994, about
39% of noncitizens were released to post-incarceration
supervision compared to 74% of citizens (not shown in a table). 
Of those released to supervision, 9% returned to Federal prison
within 3 years.  Of those released without a supervision
requirement, 12% returned within 3 years.


Return rates for technical violations of post-release
supervision exceeded the return rates for new crimes

About 61% of the 215,263 offenders released from prison were
released to some form of post-incarceration supervision – either
parole (48%) or supervised release (52%).

Of the 33,885 offenders who returned to prison between 1986 and
1997, 60% violated their conditions of supervision; 30% returned
following a conviction for a new offense; and the remaining 10%
returned for other violations.  Eighteen percent of the
offenders released to supervision returned to prison, as
compared to 12% of those who were released without supervision.  

Of those released to supervision, 16% returned for technical
violations and 3% returned for new crimes.  Some of those
offenders who were identified as returning to prison for
technical violations may have actually committed new crimes.  A
condition of supervision is that offenders not commit any new
crimes.  Those who are arrested for new crimes are often
initially returned for technical violations.  About 3% of those
offenders whose records indicated a return for a technical
violation actually committed a new crime.  

Eight percent of offenders released without a supervision
requirement returned for new crimes and 4% returned for other
reasons.

Old-law offenders who were released to parole returned to prison
at a lower rate than new-law offenders on supervised release: 
16% of old-law offenders returned compared to 20% of new-law
offenders.  The difference in the rate of return for old-law and
new-law offenders was primarily due to differences in return
rates for technical violations.  Less than 14% of the old-law
offenders returned to prison for technical violations compared
to 17% of the new-law offenders (not shown in a table).


------------------------Box on p4---------------------------------

Technical violations of release conditions

Between 1992 and 1998, more than a third of offenders whose
supervision was terminated unsuccessfully for a technical
violation failed at least one drug test (Compendium of Federal
Justice Statistics, 1992-98, and Federal Offenders Under
Community Supervision, 1987-96).  Additionally, 17% failed to
keep scheduled appointments with their probation officer or make
scheduled court appearances.  Violent and weapons offenders were
more likely than other offenders to be returned for use of
controlled substances.

The remaining 45% of offenders had their supervision terminated
for other technical violations of release conditions.  While no
data are available to describe the nature of these violations,
they may include failure to comply with any of the standard
conditions of supervision such as having regular employment,
payment of fines and/or special assessments, and limiting
association with known felons (see U.S.S.G. Sec. 5B1.3).

---------------------End of box------------------------------------


As length of time served in prison increased, so did the rate of
return to prison

Imposed prison sentences reflect both the seriousness of the
offense committed and the risk that the offender will
recidivate, based on the offender's criminal history.  The rate
at which offenders returned to Federal prison increased with the
amount of time that they had served in Federal prison.  Overall,
offenders who served shorter prison terms were less likely to
return to Federal prison within 3 years of release than those
who served prison sentences of more than 5 years.  About 14% of
those who served less than 1 year in prison returned to Federal 
prison compared to 25% of those who served 5 or more years.

New-law offenders who served less than 3 years were more likely
to return to Federal prison than old-law offenders who served an
equal amount of time.  Between 1988 and 1997, 18% of the
released new-law offenders returned to prison compared to 11%
of old-law offenders.


Offenders released to supervision remained free longer than
other offenders

Offenders who returned to Federal prison remained free an
average of 15.5 months.  Generally the number of
months that returning offenders were free did not vary greatly
by offense category.  Violent offenders who returned were free
for an average of 14.7 months; property offenders, 15.4 months;
and public-order offenders, 14.1 months (not shown in a table). 
However, drug offenders who returned to Federal prison were free
for the longest (17.7 months).

Offenders who were released to supervision remained free longer
than those offenders who were not released to supervision. 
Offenders released to either parole or supervised release
returned to prison after being free 16 months, on average.  Of
these, offenders who returned for a new crime returned after
17.1 months, and those who returned for a technical violation
returned after an average 15.8 months.  By contrast, offenders
who were released without a supervision requirement, such as
old-law offenders who served their full term, were returned for
a new crime after 13.3 months.


Offenders returning to prison following revocation served an
additional 16 months in Federal prison

Old-law offenders returning to prison are eligible to serve that
portion of their original sentence that was not served in
prison.  Federal parole guidelines, however, base the revocation
term according to the type of violation: offenders committing
technical violations could be returned for up to 9 months;
offenders engaging in new crimes could be required to serve a
sentence corresponding to the parole guideline's offense
severity score (see 28 CFR Sec. 2.21).  

For instance, an offender returning for a lower-level drug
offense (involving 1 to 5 grams of cocaine) or a fraud offense
(involving up to $20,000) could be returned to Federal prison
for a minimum of 1 to 14 months.  By contrast, an offender
committing another robbery could be returned for a minimum of 24
to 36 months.

Because new-law offenders have served the entire sentence
imposed, those returning to prison as a result of a revocation
of supervision are sentenced to additional term of imprisonment
in accordance with the Federal sentencing guidelines (see,
generally, U.S.S.G. chapter 7).  Offenders whose supervision was
revoked for technical violations or misdemeanors received
shorter sentences upon revocation than those committing
felonies, generally, and violent or drug offenses, more
specifically (see U.S.S.G. Sec. 7B1.4).  

For instance, the minimum time an offender returning for a
technical violation or a misdemeanor crime could expect to serve
is 3 to 9 months.  Offenders returning for felonies other than
violent crimes or drug trafficking offenses could expect to
serve a minimum of 4 to 10 months.  Offenders returning for
violent crimes or drug offenses could expect to serve a minimum
of 12 to 18 months or 24 to 30 months, depending on the severity
of the original offense.

Pursuant to both the Federal parole and sentencing guidelines,
offenders with prior convictions would be eligible for longer
terms upon return than offenders for whom the current conviction
was their first.

Offenders who returned to Federal prison between 1986 and 1997
served an additional 16 months in prison, on average. 
Violent offenders served the longest (28 months) prison terms
upon return;  drug offenders served 20 months; property
offenders, 12 months; and public-order offenders, 11 months.  

Within all offense categories except immigration offenses,
offenders who returned for technical violations served fewer
months (12 months) than those who returned for new crimes (25
months).  Robbery offenders who returned for a new crime served
the longest additional terms (114 months), followed by returning
drug offenders (71 months).

Overall, new-law offenders who returned to prison served longer
terms than old-law offenders.  New-law offenders served about 17
months, on average, upon return compared to 15 months for
old-law offenders. 

For each offense type other than property, new-law offenders
served longer sentences following revocation than old-law
offenders.  For example,

* New-law violent offenders served 39 months upon return
compared to 21 months for old-law violent offenders.

* New-law drug offenders served 24 months upon return compared
to 15 months for old-law drug offenders.

New-law fraud offenders, however, served less time upon
revocation than old-law offenders:  11 months for new-law
offenders compared to the 14 months for old-law offenders.

New-law offenders who returned for new crimes served 26 months
as compared to 22 months for old-law offenders who returned for
new crimes.  New-law offenders who returned for
committing a technical violation served shorter terms than old-
law offenders.  New-law offenders who returned for technical
violations served 10 months compared to 14 months for old-law
offenders.


Methodology

Data sources

The primary source of the data for the tables presented in this
report is the extracts from the BJS Federal Justice Statistics
Program database, which is constructed from source data files
provided by the Executive Office for United States Attorneys,
the Administrative Office of the United States Courts, the
United States Sentencing Commission, and the Federal Bureau of
Prisons.  

The data for offenders "first released" from Federal prison are
limited to those inmates who served a term of imprisonment
resulting from a conviction in U.S. district court.  Arrestees,
boarders, and other detainees are excluded from the counts of
first releases.  Unless specified in the table, the data for
offenders returning to Federal prison include all offenders who
were returned for any reason, including those who entered prison
as the result of a supervision violation or conviction for a new
Federal offense. 


Scope of the analysis

This study counts the number of Federal prisoners who returned
to Federal prison after first release from a U.S. district court
commitment.  It therefore provides a limited measure of overall
recidivism by Federal offenders.  The measure excludes prisoners
who, after first release from Federal prison, subsequently enter
State prisons or jails.  To minimize the impact of limited data
on returns to prison, offenders released during 1994 represent
the final cohort included in the study.  By ending with the 1994
cohort, offenders can be tracked for at least 3 years following
release.


Identifying and counting "first returns" to prison

In this report, offenders released from Federal prison for the
first time between 1986 and 1994 are identified.  For each such
first release, the FJSP database on Federal prisoners was
searched from the date of release forward to find the next
record for a released offender.  Personal identifying
information such as names, register numbers, and other
individual information was used to link individual release
records with their first return record.  Data of return records
were inspected to ensure that they came after a release date;
other information was analyzed to ensure tht it was consistent
with the data in the first release record.

First returns were defined as returns to Federal prison that
occurred within 3 years of a first release.  Alternative
observation windows were selected to observe first returns.  A
1-year and a 2-year observation window provided shorter time
frames for analyzing returns to prison.  The 3-year window was
selected for two reasons: (1) to ensure consistency with prior
BJS publications on recidivism of State prisoners in which a
3-year window was used to measure recidivism; and (2) the return
rate increases with the length of the observation window.***Footnote 2:
See Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1983, BJS Special Report. 
NCJ 116261, 1989.*** However, as the difference between  the 2-
and 3-year rates is smaller than the difference between the 1-
and 2-year rates, the rate of increase in return rate decreases
with the length of the observation window.  This difference
diminishes further when comparing the 3- to 4-year return rate
(appendix figure 1).  Hence, the 3-year rate provides a tradeoff
between a marginal increase in the precision of the estimate of
the number of returns and the length of the period of time to
observe first releases from prison.

Unit of analysis

The unit of analysis in the study is a first release from
Federal prison.  Return rates are calculated based on the number
of first releases.  A person may be counted more than once if
that person has more than one first release.  For example, an
offender first released during 1986 may return to prison for a
violation of parole and subsequently be released for the second
time. If this person were to return to prison again but on a
U.S. district court commitment and then were released from this
commitment, this second episode of entry into prison would be
counted as a first release.  This particular offender would have
two first releases.  Were he/she to return on the second first
release, he/she would be counted a second time as a first return.

Conversely, if the offender returns to prison because of a
violation, is released from that return, and returns a second
time on another violation of supervision, that offender is
counted once as a first release and once as a first return. 
His/her release from the technical violation (his/her second
release) is not counted, nor is his/her return for the second
violation not counted.


Measuring time served upon return

For persons who returned to Federal prison, time served is the
number of months that an offender served before being released
from prison following revocation.  For offenders who were
released during the study period, time served is the number of
months they actually served.  For offenders still in prison,
time served is estimated as follows --

* For new-law offenders, time served is the difference between
the projected release date and the commitment date.  If the
projected release date is missing, time served is 87% of the
prison term imposed.

* For old-law offenders, time served is the difference between
the projected release date and the commitment date.  If the
projected release date is missing, time served is the product of
the proportion of the sentence served for the original
commitment and the term imposed for the second commitment.


Comparing returns to prisons with unsuccessful terminations of
supervision

Other BJS reports, such as the Compendium of Federal Justice
Statistics and Federal Offenders Under Community Supervision,
1987-96, provide data on the number of offenders terminating
supervision for technical violations or new crimes.  The data in
those reports are not directly comparable with the data in this
report for several reasons.

* This report describes returns to prison for annual cohorts of
offenders released from Federal prison for the first time from a
U.S. district court commitment.  Other reports use other data to
describe a different universe of offenders, the entire
population of offenders at risk of terminating
post-incarceration supervision.

* The population of offenders on which this report is based
includes offenders released from prison for the first time in a
given year, but other reports also include offenders who were
released from prison on other than their first release and
offenders released from prison during previous years.

* The methods for classifying the type of violation of
supervision differ between those used in this report and those
used in other reports.  In other reports, termination of
supervision by reason of a new crime includes offenders who
violated State laws and offenders who receive probation or a
fine for the new crime.  In this report, new crimes refer to
offenders who violated Federal statutes and returned to prison
for this reason.  

* In other reports, termination of supervision for technical
violations can result in the imposition of new conditions of
supervision.  In this report, terminations of supervision for
reason of technical violation refers only to those offenders who
returned to prison for this reason.

* Some offenders who return to prison for a new crime are
classified initially in the Federal Bureau of Prisons
information system as technical violators while they await a
hearing to determine if they violated conditions of supervision
or pending the outcome of their new trial.  After the final
disposition of their hearing or case, their records are updated
to reflect the technical violation or new crime as the reason
for commitment.


Definitions of concepts

First release. A first release is defined as the first release
from a U.S. district court commitment.

Technical violation or supervision violation.  A technical
violation is a violation of a particular condition of
supervision.  For serious or repeated violations of his
supervision conditions, an offender can be returned to prison.

New crime.  A new crime is the commission of a new criminal
offense, whether the offender is under supervision at the time
for a different offense, or when the offender is not under
supervision.

Data from the Federal Justice Statistics Program are compiled by
the Bureau of Justice Statistics from the source files of
several Federal agencies.  Data can be obtained on CD-ROM from
the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277,
or from the Federal Justice Statistics Resource Center located
on the Internet:

http://fjsrc.urban.org

The Resource Center, as well as the report and supporting
documentation, are also accessible through the BJS website:

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Data from the FBI's Uniform Crime Report program can be obtained
from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the
University of Michigan.  The National Archive is accessible
through the BJS website.  Recent editions of the FBI's annual
report Crime in the United States are accessible through the
FBI's website:

http://www.fbi.gov/ucr.htm

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific topic in depth from one
or more datasets that cover many topics.  

William J. Sabol, Ph.D., William P. Adams, Barbara
Parthasarathy, and Yan Yuan of The Urban Institute prepared the
report.  Gerry Gaes, Ph.D., of the Federal Bureau of Prisons
provided substantive review.  Tom Hester and Ellen Goldberg
produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared it for final
publication.

September 2000, NCJ 182991


End of file 
9/7/00 pm



