U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Status Report

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003

PREA Data Collection Activities, 2010

June 2010   NCJ 230448
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2292.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
https://ojprdcweb57/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=64
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA; P.L. 108-79)
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out, for
each calendar year, a comprehensive statistical review of the
incidence and effects of prison rape. The Act further specifies
that the review and analysis shall be based on a random sample, or
other scientifically appropriate sample of not less than 10
percent of all federal, state, and county prisons, and a
representative sample of municipal prisons. More than 8,700
facilities nationwide are covered by the Act. The Act requires the
Attorney General to submit a report, not later than June 30 of
each year, listing institutions in the sample and ranking them
according to the incidence of prison rape. BJS has developed a
multiple-measure, multiple-mode data collection strategy to fully
implement requirements under PREA.

Data collections during 2009 and 2010

National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) provided the first
facility-level estimates of youth reporting sexual victimization
in juvenile facilities, as required under PREA. The report, Sexual
Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2008-09,
was released in January 2010. It was based on 9,198 completed
interviews with adjudicated youth in 166 state facilities and 29
large locally or privately operated facilities. The data collected
represented approximately 26,550 adjudicated youth held
nationwide.

The data collection was complex, requiring review from dozens of
Institutional Review Boards at the state and local levels,
obtaining consent from either the sampled youths' parents or
guardians or in loco parentis from administrators of each
facility, ensuring youth understood the survey assent process,
providing appropriate services for youth should they request to
speak to someone outside the facility, and following individual
state laws on mandatory reporting of child abuse and neglect. 


Each interview was conducted in a private setting using audio
computer-assisted self-interview (ACASI) technology with a laptop
touchscreen and an audio feed to maximize respondent
confidentiality and minimize literacy issues. (See the report for
detailed methodology and definitions.)

Among the findings - 

*An estimated 12% of youth in state juvenile facilities and large
non-state facilities reported experiencing one or more incidents
of sexual victimization by another youth or facility staff in the
past 12 months or since admission, if less than 12 months.

*About 2.6% of youth reported an incident involving another youth,
and 10.3% reported an incident involving facility staff. 

*About 4.3% of youth reported having sex or sexual contact with
facility staff as a result of some type of force or threat of
force; 6.4% of youth reported sexual contact with facility staff
without any force, threat, or other explicit form of coercion. 

*Approximately 95% of all youth reporting staff sexual misconduct
said they had been victimized by female staff. In 2008, 42% of
staff in state juvenile facilities were female. An estimated 91%
of adjudicated youth in facilities represented by the survey were
male.

*Among youth victimized by another youth, 20% said they had been
physically injured; 5% reported they had sought medical attention
for their injuries. Among youth victimized by staff, 5% reported a
physical injury; fewer than 1% had sought medical attention. 

The NSYC methodology and instrument are under review for a second
round of data collection. In the coming months, BJS will be
soliciting feedback from juvenile administrators and other
stakeholders, revising survey questions to screen for sexual
assault, adding questions to measure the accuracy of self-reports,
developing methods to enhance response rates, and expanding the
sample to include youth housed in smaller private and locally
operated facilities and youth held for shorter periods of time.
These changes will be examined in a pretest in up to 10 facilities
in early 2011. 

National Inmate Survey (NIS) gathers data on the incidence of
sexual assault in adult prisons and local jail facilities as
reported by inmates, using ACASI technology with a laptop
touchscreen and an audio feed to maximize inmate confidentiality
and minimize literacy issues. The first NIS (NIS-1) was conducted
in 2007, and two reports were produced: Sexual Victimization in
State and Federal Prisons Reported by Inmates, 2007 and Sexual
Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 2007. 

*The second NIS (NIS-2) was modified to provide more in-depth data
on the number of incidents, the timing of sexual victimization
after entry to the facility, and the relationship of victimization
to pat downs and strip searches by staff.

*Between October 2008 and December 2009, BJS completed the NIS-2
in 167 state and federal prisons, 286 local jails, and 9 special
correctional facilities (operated by Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Indian tribes, or the U.S. Armed Services). A total
of 81,566 inmates participated in the survey, including 32,029
prison inmates, 48,066 local jail inmates, 957 Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) inmates, 399 inmates in facilities
operated by the U.S. Armed Services, and 115 inmates in Indian
country facilities. The data collected are representative of more
than 2.24 million inmates age 18 or older held on June 30, 2008.

*In July 2010 BJS expects to release the report entitled Sexual
Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008-09,
which will provide rankings of prison and jail facilities surveyed
in the NIS-2, as well as characteristics of victims and incidents. 

*The third NIS collection (NIS-3), which is under review by the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), has been modified to
include measures of mental and physical health and indicators of
facility safety and security. Field operations for the NIS-3,
including recruitment, Institutional Review Board processing, and
site visit planning, will begin following OMB clearance in July
2010.

Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) in Correctional Facilities
collects data annually on the incidents of sexual violence
reported to authorities in adult and juvenile correctional
facilities. This administrative records collection, the first of a
series of data collections implemented to meet PREA mandates,
began in 2004. The survey includes measures of four different
types of sexual violence and is administered to a sample of at
least 10% of the nearly 8,700 correctional facilities covered
under the Act. Additional detail is collected on the
characteristics of substantiated incidents of sexual violence.
Data have been collected in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009
(in progress).

The administrative records surveys provide a basis for the annual
statistical review required under the Act. The surveys include all
federal and state prison systems and facilities operated by the
U.S. Armed Services and ICE. The surveys also include
representative samples of jail jurisdictions, privately operated
adult prisons and jails, and jails in Indian country. Altogether,
the SSV included facilities housing nearly 2 million inmates, or
more than 80% of all inmates held in adult facilities in 2008.
Each year the SSV also included all state-operated juvenile
facilities and a representative sample of locally and privately
operated juvenile facilities.
 
Results of the 2007 and 2008 surveys are expected for adult
prisons and jails in August 2010 and for juvenile facilities in
November 2010.

Former Prisoner Survey (FPS) will provide a national estimate of
the incidence of sexual victimization based on reports of former
state prison inmates. Parole offices from across the nation were
sampled, and a selection of former inmates under active parole
supervision were interviewed using ACASI technology. The survey
collects data on the totality of the prior term of incarceration,
including any time in a local jail, state prison, or community
correctional facility prior to final discharge.

*The methodology of the FPS is not conducive to facility ranking
but will provide substantial data on the characteristics of sexual
victimization across facility types and over time, as well as
effects of victimization following release from prison. 

*Between January and November 2008, BJS completed the FPS in a
sample of 285 parole offices with nearly 18,000 former inmates,
representing 510,800 former state inmates under active parole
supervision nationwide. BJS received the final dataset in August
2009 and is currently working on a report expected to be released
in October 2010. 

Clinical Indicators of Sexual Violence in Custody (CISVC)   In
collaboration with the National Institute of Justice and BJS, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is conducting a
feasibility study using medical indicators and medical
surveillance methodologies. The study will measure the incidence
and prevalence of sexual assault in correctional facilities.

*The CISVC is designed to be conducted in the health care section
of each participating correctional facility. As part of routine
medical practice, medical staff will complete a surveillance form
for adult male inmates who either make an allegation of sexual
violence or display any of five clinical conditions (i.e.,
unexplained rectal bleeding; rectal or anal tears or fissures;
bruises, scratches, or abrasions on buttocks; genital bruising; or
nipple injuries).
 
*Data collected in the CISVC will include victim age, height,
weight, and race/Hispanic origin; a general injury assessment; a
mental health assessment; and follow-up information. 

*Data collection began on May 1, 2010, in 18 prisons and 11 jails
and will continue for a 12-month period. If the feasibility study
yields acceptable results, a formal pilot study in advance of
national implementation will be conducted to formalize recruitment
of facilities, data collection, and analytic methods.

Upcoming Reports and Statistical Tables in 2010

Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates,
2008-09 (July 2010)

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2007-08
(August 2010)

Sexual Victimization Reported by Former Inmates on Parole
Supervision, 2008 (October 2010)

Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities,
2007-08 (November 2010) 

Previously Released Reports

Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth,
2008-09, BJS Web, 7 January 2010.

Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 2007, BJS
Web, 25 June 2008.

Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities,
2005-2006, BJS Web, 31 July 2008.

Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons as Reported by
Inmates, 2007, BJS Web, 16 December 2007.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006, BJS
Web, 16 August 2007.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005, BJS
Web, 30 July 2006.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004, BJS
Web, 31 July 2005.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

TThe Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting 
director.

This Status Report was written by Allen J. Beck and 
Paige M. Harrison.

Doris J. James edited the report. Tina Dorsey produced the report, 
and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final printing under 
the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2010, NCJ 230448

------------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS World
Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2292>.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation . Partnerships . Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
----------------------------------------------------------------

6/10/2010/JER 8:40am