U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Selected Findings

Census of Public Defender Offices, 2007

Public Defender Offices, 2007  Statistical Tables

November 2009   NCJ 228538
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pdo07st.htm>

-------------------------------------------------------------

Public Defender Offices, 2007   Statistical Tables

Lynn Langton and Donald J. Farole, Jr.
BJS Statistician
                         
In 2007 a total of 957 public defender offices in 49 states
and the District of Columbia provided defense services for
indigent clients. (Indigent defense services were provided by
private attorneys in Maine.) The public defender
offices received more than 5.5 million cases in 2007,
employed more than 15,000 full-time equivalent litigating
attorneys, and reported operating expenditures of more than
$2.3 billion.

Highlights

*In 2007, 957 public defender offices across the nation
received more than 5.5 million indigent defense cases.

*Misdemeanor cases accounted for about 40% of all cases
received by state-based public defender offices and about 50%
of the cases received by county-based offices. 

*Half of all state-based public defender offices had formal
caseload limits in place in 2007. 

*Total expenditures in public defender offices exceeded $2.3
billion in 2007.

*More than 15,000 full-time equivalent litigating attorneys
were employed by public defender offices in 2007. State-based
public defender programs employed more than 4,000 full-time
equivalent litigating attorneys, with a median of 163 per
state-based program. County-based offices employed about
11,000 full-time equivalent litigating attorneys, with a
median of seven per office.

*In addition to attorneys, public defender offices nationwide
employed nearly 9,700 full-time equivalent support staff,
including investigators, paralegals, and administrative
staff.

*The average public defender office examined six criteria to
determine whether a client was indigent. The most commonly
used criteria in state-based programs were income level,
defendant receipt of public assistance, sworn defendant
application, and defendant's debt level. The most commonly
used criteria in county-based public defender offices were
income level, sworn defendant application, judge's
discretion, defendant residence in a public institution, and
defendant's debt level.

*The Census of Public Defender Offices collected data on
eight commonly referenced standards for operating a public
defender office. The most commonly reported standard in
public defender offices related to continuing legal education
for litigating attorneys.

*State-based public defender programs reported receiving a
median of 82 felony (non-capital) cases, 217 misdemeanor
cases, and two appeals case per full-time equivalent
litigating attorney. County-based public defender
offices reported receiving an average of 100 felony
(non-capital) cases and 146 misdemeanor cases per full-time
equivalent litigating attorney. The CPDO collected data only
on the number of cases received in 2007 and, therefore, was
unable to estimate the actual caseload (including ongoing
cases received prior to 2007) of litigating public defenders.

Errata: Public Defender Offices, 2007 Statistical Tables

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is re-issuing the report,
Public Defender Offices, 2007 Statistical Tables, originally
published on November 19, 2009, to correct errors recently
identified in the data. The revised report
corrects caseload data for one office, excludes caseload data
that was determined to be unreliable (out-of-range) for
another office, and excludes all data for seven additional
offices that were found to be ineligible (out-of-scope).
These changes affected data in the text and tables. 

The Census of Public Defender Offices (CPDO), 2007, collected
nationwide data on the caseloads, staffing, expenditure, and
policies for all primary, alternate, and conflict public
defender offices. It also collected data on specialty offices
that provided capital case representation. BJS restricted the
scope of the data analysis to offices that had indicated they
were the primary public defender office in their
jurisdiction, providing general criminal defense
representation. A subsequent office-by-office examination of
the data and comparison to secondary data sources revealed
that seven offices which reported that they were the primary
office in their jurisdiction were in fact providing
supplemental defense services. These offices were removed
from the analyses.

Also, we conducted a secondary validity assessment of the
reported felony capital caseload and found potential problems
with the data from two public defender offices . For one
office, we were able to independently verify and 
correct the caseload data.  For the other office we were
unable to independently verify the caseload data, and decided
to remove it from the report. The reported felonycapital
caseloads in the revised statistical tables reflect these
decisions.

Indigent defense representation is typically provided through
some combination of three methods: a public defender office,
an assigned counsel system, and a contract system. The Bureau
of Justice Statistics' 2007 Census of Public Defender Offices
(CPDO) data collection focused on public defender offices.
Public defender offices employ a salaried staff of full- or
part-time attorneys to represent indigent clients, as direct
government employees or through a public, nonprofit
organization. 

The CPDO collected data on public defender office caseloads,
staffing, expenditures, and adherence to accepted standards
and guidelines in offices found across 49 states and the
District of Columbia. It was the first systematic, nationwide
study of public defender offices.

Public defender offices are typically administered and funded
at the county or state level. In 2007, 22 states with
state-based programs administered and provided funding for
all public defender offices in their respective states. In
the remaining 27 states and the District of Columbia, public
defender offices were administered and funded at the county
level. States with county-based systems included 15 states
with public defender offices that were principally funded at
the county level, and 12 states with offices that
received some level of funding from the state government in
addition to county funding. The District of Columbia was
grouped with the county-funded public defender offices due to
its unique status outside of any state's jurisdiction. 

Methodology

The 2007 Census of Public Defender Offices (CPDO) collected
office-level data from approximately 1,050 publicly funded
public defender offices located across 49 states and the
District of Columbia. (Maine provided indigent defense
services through assignment to and contract services with
private attorneys.) The universe included all public defender
offices that were principally funded by state or local
governments and provided general criminal defense services,
conflict services, or capital case representation.
Federal public defender offices that provided primarily
contract or assigned counsel services with private attorneys
were excluded from the data collection. In addition, any
public defender offices that were privately or
principally funded by tribal government, or provided
primarily appellate or juvenile services were outside the
scope of the project and were also excluded. 

Questionnaires were sent to 1,046 public defender offices
identified in the United States. Approximately 97% of those
offices provided responses to at least some of the critical
items identified on the survey instrument. Offices that
primarily handled conflict of interest cases or specialized
in capital, appellate, or juvenile cases were outside of the
scope of the study. As a result, data presented in this
report describe 957 public defender offices. 

Organizational Structure of Public Defender Offices

The offices included in the census were administered and
funded at the county or state level. State-based programs
functioned entirely under the direction of a central
administrative office that funded and administered all
the public defender offices in the state. County-based
programs were administered at the local level and funded
principally by the county or through a combination of county
and state funds. These variations in public defender systems
dictated the manner by which the CPDO data collection
instrument was distributed. In the District of Columbia and
states with county-based public defender offices, each of 530
offices submitted one completed questionnaire via hardcopy or
online submission. The 22 states employing a central
state-based public defender program completed an
online questionnaire and responded to questions pertaining to
each of the local offices within the states. Because the
state-based public defenders often shared resources among the
local offices as needed, the state-based programs were given
the option of providing data on staffing, caseload, and
expenditures for either the entire state or for each
respective office. Six of the 22 state-based public defender
programs were able to provide information at the local office
level (covering 27% of the 427 local offices
in state-based public defender programs). Sixteen state-based
programs provided at least some of requested information at
the state level only.

Scope of Data Collection

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), the National Legal
Aid and Defender Association (NLADA), and a number of chief
defenders and other experts in the field of indigent defense
collaborated to develop the CPDO data collection instrument.
The instrument was additionally sent to the American
Bar Association's Standing Committee for Legal Aid and
Indigent Defense and the National Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers for review and comment. Data collection began
in April 2008 and was completed in March 2009. 

The CPDO data include information on caseload, staffing, and
expenditures of the public defender offices. The CPDO data do
not allow comparison of public defender statistics to those
for indigent defense services across the state and local
jurisdictions. Jurisdictions generally provide indigent
defense through some combination of a public defender,
assigned counsel, and contract attorney programs. While each
jurisdiction represented in the CPDO provided some indigent
defense through the public defender office, each also
provided varying levels of indigent defense through other
means. The level and type of indigent cases handled outside
of the public defender office varies from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction, as illustrated by the 1999 National Survey of
Indigent Defense Systems (NSIDS). According to 
State-Funded Indigent Defense Services, 1999,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/idslc99.pdf>, the
Massachusetts public defender program handled 3% of the
approximately 208,000 indigent
defense cases in the state in 1999; the remaining 97% were
handled by assigned counsel. 

In Connecticut that same year, 87% of the 64,500 indigent
defense cases were handled by the public defender offices,
while 1% were handled by assigned counsel and 11% by contract
attorneys. The CPDO data reflect operations of public
defender offices only.

Public Defender Offices, 2007 - Statistical Tables:

Table 1. Characteristics of public defender offices, 2007 

Table 2a. General characteristics of state-based public
defender programs, by state, 2007

Table 2b. General characteristics of county-based public
defender offices, by office type and caseload, 2007

Table 3a. Formal or written criteria used by state-based
programs to qualify a defendant for representation, by state,
2007

Table 3b. Formal or written criteria used by county-based
public defender offices to qualify a defendant for
representation, by office type and caseload, 2007

Table 4a. Formal standards or written guidelines used by
state-based public defender programs, by state, 2007

Table 4b. Formal standards or written guidelines used in the
county-based public defender offices, by office type and
caseload, 2007

Table 5a. Cases received in state-based public defender
programs, by state and type of case, 2007

Table 5b. Cases received in county-based public defender
offices, by office
type and caseload, 2007

Table 6a. Staff employed by state-based public defender
programs, by state and position title, 2007

Table 6b. Staff employed by county-based public defender
offices, by office type, caseload, and position title, 2007

Table 7a. State-based public defender programs with caseload
limits and authority to refuse appointments due to caseload,
by state, 2007

Table 7b. Local public defender offices with caseload limits
and authority to refuse appointments due to caseload, by
office type and caseload, 2007

----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

This Selected Findings was written by Lynn Langton and Donald
J. Farole, Jr. under the supervision of Duren Banks. Tracey
Kyckelhahn and Sean Rosenmerkel verified this report. Doris
J. James, Catherine Bird, and Jill Duncan edited the report,
and Tina Dorsey produced the report. Jayne E. Robinson
prepared the report for final printing. 

November 2009, NCJ 228538
-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pdo07st.htm>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------------------


6/22/2010/ JER/ 12:38