U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
                                                           

Prison Inmates at Midyear 2008  - Statistical Tables

March 2009, NCJ 225619           
    
--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pim08st.htm


This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to the http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#pim

----------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
----------------------------------------------------------

By Heather C. West, Ph.D. and William J. Sabol, Ph.D.

BJS Statisticians

Definitions

Average annual change--mean average annual change across a
specific time period. 

Total inmates in custody--includes inmates held in any public
facility run by a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
including halfway houses, camps, farms, training/treatment
centers, and hospitals. This number also includes the number
of inmates held in local jails as reported by correctional
authorities in the Annual Survey of Jails. Data for jails are
as of the last working day of June.

Imprisonment rate--the number of prisoners under state or
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than one year, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Total incarceration rate--the number of inmates held in the
custody of state or federal prisons or in local jails, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Inmates--individuals held in the custody of state and federal
prisons and in local jails. 

Jail--confinement facilities usually administered by a local
law enforcement agency, intended for adults but sometimes
holding juveniles before or after adjudication. Facilities
include jails and city/county correctional centers, special
jail facilities such as medical or treatment or release
centers, halfway houses, work farms, and temporary holding or
lockup facilities that are part of the jail's combined
function.  Inmates sentenced to jail facilities usually have
a sentence of 1 year or less. 

Jurisdiction--includes prisoners under state or federal
jurisdiction held in prison facilities (e.g.,prisons,
penitentiaries and correctional institutions; boot
camps; prison farms; reception, diagnostic, and
classification centers; release centers, halfway houses, and
road camps; forestry and conservation camps; vocational
training facilities; prison hospitals; and drug and alcohol
treatment facilities for prisoners).  This number also
includes inmates who are  temporarily absent (less than 30
days), out to court, or on work release; held in local jails,
private facilities, and other states' or federal facilities;
serving a sentence for two jurisdictions at the same time.
This count excludes inmates held in a state or federal
facility for another jurisdiction.

Non-U.S. citizen--any foreign born person that has not been
granted U.S. citizenship. This group can include, but is not
mutually exclusive to--individuals of alien status, lawful
permanent residents (green card holders), refugees, asylum
applicants (depending upon date asylum was pending or
approved), asylum grantees, diplomats, and foreign nationals
living in the United States on a temporary basis (e.g.,
tourism, medical treatment, business, temporary work, study,
or other, similar reasons). Definitions may vary by state.
See Jurisdiction notes for state specific information. 

Prisoners-- individuals under the jurisdiction of state and
federal correctional authorities.
 
Sentenced prisoner--a prisoner the jurisdiction of state and
federal correctional authorities sentenced to more than one
year.

Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The Census Bureau serves as
the data collection agent for Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS). BJS depends entirely on the voluntary participation by
state departments of corrections and the Federal Bureau of
Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal prison must hold that prisoner in one of
its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, a state
or federal prison must have legal authority over the
prisoner. Some states are unable to provide counts that
distinguish between custody and jurisdiction.

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities,including
prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway
houses, boot camps, farms, training/treatment centers, and
hospitals. They include prisoners who are--

*temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or on
work release

*housed in privately-operated facilities, local jails, or
other state or federal facilities

*serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional
authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
jurisdiction's facilities, including inmates housed for other
correctional authorities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and other facilities. With a few   
exceptions for several respondents, the NPS custody counts
exclude inmates held in privately-operated facilities.

Additionally, NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. NPS prisoner counts have excluded
prisoners held by the District of Columbia, which has
operated only a jail system since yearend 2001. Prisoners
sentenced under the District of Columbia criminal code are
housed in federal facilities.

Ratio estimates were used to generate the jurisdiction counts
for gender and sentenced individuals in Illinois during 2007
and 2008 using the data provided in 2006. (Yearend 2007 and
midyear 2008 data were not received from Illinois Department
of Corrections.) 

Nevada was not able to provide data for December 31, 2007.
Estimates were calculated using ratio estimates. All numbers
were reviewed and approved by individuals at the respective
departments of corrections.

For more information about the NPS data collection
instruments, see
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm#nps>.

Other inmate counts

Data on the number of inmates held in the custody of local
jails are from the BJS Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). The ASJ
provides data on inmates in custody at midyear. For more
information about the ASJ, see Methodology in Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2008 at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jim08.htm>.

Data on federal prisoners are obtained from the BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP). The FJSP obtains data from
the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP). These data include
individual-level records of prisoners in federal facilities
as of September 30. Specifically, the FJSP provides counts of
sentenced federal inmates by gender, race, Hispanic origin,
and offense.

Estimating age-specific incarceration rates

Estimates are provided for the number of inmates held in
custody in state and federal prisons or in local jails by
gender. Within the gender estimates, prisoners are
characterized by age group, race (non-Hispanic white and
non-Hispanic black), and Hispanic origin. The detailed race
and Hispanic origin categories exclude estimates of persons
identifying two or more races.

For 2000 and 2008 estimates were produced separately for
inmates held in the custody of state and federal prisons and
local jails and then combined to obtain a total estimated
population. State estimates were prepared by combining
information about the gender of prisoners from the NPS
with information on self-reported race and Hispanic origin
from the 2005 Survey of Inmates of State Correctional
Facilities.

To estimate federal prisoners, the distributions of FJSP
counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender, age, race,
and Hispanic origin on September 30, 2007, were applied to
the NPS counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender at
midyear 2008. 

Estimates of the U.S. resident population for July 1, 2008,
by age, gender, race, and Hispanic origin were generated by
applying the June 30, 2008, age distributions within gender,
race, and Hispanic origin groups to the July 1, 2008,
population estimates by gender. These population estimates
were provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. 

Age - specific rates of incarceration for each demographic
group were calculated by dividing the estimated number of 
inmates in custody within each age group by the estimated 
number of U.S. residents in each age group. That number 
was multiplied by 100,000 and then rounded to the nearest
whole number. Gender totals include all inmates and U.S.
residents regardless of race or Hispanic origin. 
Imprisonment rates for detailed race and Hispanic origin 
groups exclude persons identifying two or more races.

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alabama -- Between June 30, 2007, and December 31, 2007, the
Department of Corrections transferred prisoners into private 
facilities to relieve overcrowding. Prior to June 30, 2008,
these prisoners were transferred back to the state facilities
due to cost issues.

Alaska -- Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations housed in state 
and out of state. Jurisdictional counts exclude inmates held 
in local jails that are operated by communities. 

Arizona -- Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds.

California -- Jurisdiction counts include felons and
unsentenced inmates who are temporarily absent, i.e., 
housed in local jails, hospitals, etc.

Colorado -- Counts include 220 inmates in the Youthful
Offender System, which was established primarily for 
violent juvenile offenders. 

Connecticut -- Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Delaware -- Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Federal-- Custody counts include inmates housed in secure
facilities where the BOP contracted directly with a private 
operator or subcontracted with a private provider at a local 
government facility. Custody includes inmates held in 
non-secure privately-operated community corrections
centers, e.g., halfway houses and on home confinement. 

Georgia -- Counts are based on custody data.

Hawaii --Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Illinois --Data for 2008 were not received. All data for June
30, 2008, are based on ratio estimates using data submitted 
at midyear 2005 and 2006. Population counts are based on
jurisdiction data. Counts of prisoners with a sentence of
more than one year include an undetermined number of 
prisoners with a sentence of less than one year. These 
estimates will be updated upon receipt of data.

Iowa --Population counts are based on custody data.
Population counts for prisoners with a sentence of more 
than one year include an undetermined number of prisoners 
with a sentence of less than one year and unsentenced
prisoners. Iowa does not differentiate between these groups
in its data system. Due to a change in reporting in 2006,
out-of-state prisoners have been included in jurisdiction
counts.

Kansas --Population counts for prisoners with a sentence of
more than one year include an undetermined number of
prisoners with a sentence of less than one year and
unsentenced prisoners. 

Louisiana -- Custody and jurisdiction counts include evacuees
from Hurricane Katrina and other pre-trial offenders from
Orleans and Jefferson parish jails. Due to the effects of
Hurricane Katrina, Orleans and Jefferson parish prison
capacities are down; therefore, local jail population is down
from the 2004 counts. 

Maryland -- The number of prisoners listed with their race as
"unknown" has increased due to changes in the information
system.

Massachusetts -- By law, offenders may be sentenced to terms
of up to 2 years and 6 months in locally-operated jails and
correctional institutions. Such populations are included in 
counts and rates for local jails and correctional
institutions.  About 6,200 male inmates with sentences of
more than one year were held in local jails. Jurisdiction and
custody counts include an undetermined number of inmates who 
were remanded to court, transferred to the custody of
another state, federal, or locally-operated system, and
subsequently released. 

Michigan --The data recorded for Hispanic race are under
counted due to a new database conversion. The new database 
categorizes Hispanic individuals as white.

Montana -- Population counts include a small number of
prisoners with unknown sentence lengths. In 2006, the 
Department of Corrections changed the method of accounting
for community corrections offenders placed in residential
treatment programs. To track growth patterns, a new standard
process was applied to historic populations which resulted in
some changes to previous years' counts.

Nevada -- Due to a system conversion, data for December 31,
2007, were calculated with ratio estimates and are based on 
2006 numbers. All estimates were reviewed by individuals at
theNevada Department of Corrections. 

New Hampshire -- Due to a system conversion implemented in
June 2008, some information could not be exported from the
system. Therefore, counts may vary from those previously
published. 

New Jersey -- Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than
one year include an undetermined number of prisoners with 
sentences of one year. The Department of Corrections has no
jurisdiction over prisoners with sentences of less than one
year or over unsentenced prisoners. 

New York -- Juveniles refer to prisoners held in custody that
have not reached age 18 prior to June 30, 2008. Most of these 
prisoners committed their crime after age 16 and are
considered adult offenders in New York State. Juvenile
offenders are prisoners who committed certain serious,
violent offenses prior to turning age 16. Between ages 16 and
21 these prisoners were transferred from the juvenile system
to the adult system to complete their sentence.

Ohio -- Counts of prisoners with a sentence of more than one
year include an undetermined number of prisoners with
sentences of one year or less.

Oklahoma -- Population counts for prisoners with sentences of
less than one year consist mainly of offenders ordered by the
court to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults
pursuant to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3.

Oregon -- Counts include an undetermined number of prisoners
with sentences of one year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of prisoners.

Rhode Island -- Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Vermont -- Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Washington -- A recently revised law allows increasing
numbers of certain prisoners with sentences of less than 
one year to be housed in prison.

-------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is the 
acting director. 

The data were analyzed and tables were prepared by Heather C.
West, Ph.D. and William J.Sabol, Ph.D. James J. Stephan and
Todd D. Minton verified the report.

Joshua Giunta and Steve Simoncini carried out the data
collection and processing under the supervision of Jill
O'Brien, Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department
of Commerce. Duane H. Cavanaugh provided technical
assistance. 

Tina Dorsey produced the tables. Jayne E. Robinson prepared
the report for final printing under the supervision of Doris
J. James.

March 2009, NCJ 225619

---------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation . Partnerships . Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

---------------------------------------------------------------

3/31/2009/ JER