U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

State Court Processing Statistics

Profile of Intimate Partner Violence Cases 
in Large Urban Counties

October 2009, NCJ 228193
------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full
report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pipvcluc.htm
------------------------------------------------------------

Erica L. Smith and Donald J. Farole, Jr., Ph.D.

BJS Statisticians

In the state courts of 16 large urban counties, 3,750 cases
of intimate partner violence (IPV) were filed in May 2002.
These cases represent 83% of the 4,562 domestic violence
cases filed in the 16 counties.***Footnote 1 See appendix
table 1 for distribution of victim-offender relationships for
all 4,562 domestic violence cases in the study***. A case was
defined as intimate partner violence if it involved an
allegation of intentional physical violence committed,
attempted, or threatened between spouses, ex-spouses,
common-law spouses, boyfriends or girlfriends, present or
past. For more information on the definitions of domestic
violence and intimate partner violence used in this report,
see the Methodology. 

More than half of IPV defendants were convicted, and of those
convicted, more than 80% were sentenced to incarceration in
either prison or jail. This report examines the case
characteristics that are associated with an increased
likelihood of conviction.

This report is based on data collected in the study
Processing of Domestic Violence Cases in State Courts,
conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Findings
are based on information documented in prosecutor files and
court records of 3,750 intimate partner violence cases. Cases
were tracked for one year following the defendant's first
court appearance in May 2002.

Most cases of intimate partner violence involved a female
victim and a male defendant

Victims in intimate partner violence cases were generally
female (86%), while defendants were generally male (86%)
(table 1). The majority of IPV cases (84%) involved a male
defendant and a female victim. Twelve percent of cases
involved a female defendant and a male victim (not shown in
table). In 4% of IPV cases, the defendant and victim were of
the same gender.

Highlights

Among 3,750 cases of intimate partner violence filed in the
state courts of 16 large urban counties in May 2002:

*Most involved a female victim and a male defendant (84%).

*Most involved a charge of assault, either aggravated (12%)
or simple (78%); an additional 5% were charged with
intimidation, including stalking.

* Nearly half (46%) involved a defendant with a prior history
of abuse toward the same victim.

*Approximately 1 in 4 cases involved the use of a weapon,
such as a gun, a knife, or other blunt object. 

*Defendants charged with a felony (44%) were twice as likely
to have used a weapon as defendants charged with a
misdemeanor (22%).

*A witness to the incident was present in nearly half of
intimate partner violence cases; half of those witnesses were
children.

*A history of abuse between the victim and defendant, among
other characteristics, was associated with a higher
likelihood that the case resulted in a conviction.

IPV victims and defendants had similar race and ethnic
profiles. Roughly equal percentages of victims and defendants
were white, black, and Hispanic. This was comparable to the
distribution of race and Hispanic origin across all violent
felony defendants in the 16 counties in 2002. ***Footnote 2
See Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2002, February
2006, NCJ 210818, available at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fdluc02.htm. (Last
accessed September 24, 2009***.

Fifty-nine percent of defendants and 58% of victims in IPV
cases were between the ages of 18 and 34 at the time of the
incident. Intimate partner violence involving victims age 55
or older accounted for less than 3% of cases. Because these
cases were processed in adult courts, very few defendants
(0.2%) were under age 18.

The majority of IPV defendants were charged with a
misdemeanor

A misdemeanor was the most serious charge filed against the
majority of defendants in intimate partner violence cases.
Most misdemeanor charges (96%) were for simple assault (table
2). Intimidation made up most of the remaining misdemeanor
IPV charges.

Aggravated assault made up two-thirds (66%) of felony IPV
charges. About 9% of felony IPV charges were for rape or
sexual assault and about 1% were for murder. Together, 9 in
10 defendants in intimate partner violence cases were charged
with either simple (78%) or aggravated (12%) assault.

Most intimate partner violence incidents occurred in the
victim's residence

Prosecutor files indicated that 58% of IPV incidents occurred
in a residence shared by the victim and defendant (table 3).
Another 21% of IPV incidents occurred in a residence occupied
by the victim, but not by the defendant. A greater percentage
of misdemeanor (60%) than felony cases (49%) arose from
incidents that occurred in a shared residence. Less than 2%
of felony or misdemeanor cases occurred in the workplace.

A third of defendants in intimate partner violence cases were
using alcohol or drugs

Thirty-three percent (33%) of defendants in IPV cases were
using alcohol or drugs at the time of the incident. The
percentage did not vary by whether a defendant was charged
with a felony or a misdemeanor (table 4).

The majority of defendants using alcohol or drugs at the time
of the incident were under the influence of alcohol only.
Defendants charged with a felony (28%) IPV were as likely as
defendants charged with a misdemeanor (29%) to have been
under the influence of alcohol. 

Defendants used a weapon in 1 in 4 intimate partner violence
cases

A weapon was used by the defendant in 26% of IPV cases (table
5). Felony IPV (44%) was more likely to be characterized by
weapon use than misdemeanor IPV (22%). About 6% of the
defendants charged with a felony used a firearm, while about
15% used a knife or other sharp object.

Female defendants (41%) were more likely than male defendants
(24%) to use a weapon during an incident of intimate partner
violence (not shown in table). Additionally, female
defendants (12%) were twice as likely as male defendants (5%)
to use a knife or sharp object, and three times more likely
(17%) than male defendants (6%) to use a blunt object such as
a pipe or rock during an IPV incident. 

Prosecutor files indicated that about three-quarters (74%)of
IPV defendants did not use a weapon. These include cases in
which defendants may have used hands, fists, or feet as a
personal weapon.

Nearly 9 in 10 victims of IPV sustained an injury during the
incident; about 1 in 10 suffered a severe injury

Eighty-nine percent of IPV victims were injured as a result
of the incident (table 6). Most victims sustained injuries
that were of a less severe nature, such as minor cuts,
redness, bruises, and complaints of pain. Nine percent of
victims sustained more severe injuries, including gunshot and
stab wounds, rape or sexual assault, severe lacerations, and
broken bones.

The overall prevalence of any victim injury was comparable
between felony and misdemeanor cases; however, victims of
felony IPV (23%) were more likely than victims of misdemeanor
IPV (5%) to suffer more severe injuries. Nearly 3% of all
felony IPV victims suffered a gunshot or a stab wound, 8%
were raped or sexually assaulted, and 9% suffered severe
lacerations or burns.

A direct witness was present in more than 40% of intimate
partner violence cases; half of those witnesses were children

Half of intimate partner violence cases were witnessed by a
third party (table 7). The majority of those witnesses were
direct eyewitnesses to the violence.

Children were witnesses to the violence in 22% of IPV cases
(table 8). These child witnesses accounted for half of the
direct eyewitnesses to the violence (not shown in table). In
another 14% of IPV cases, a child was present at the time of
the incident, but did not directly witness the violence.

Physical evidence was obtained in about 7 in 10 intimate
partner violence cases

Physical evidence, such as photos, tapes of the 911 call, and
forensic evidence, was obtained in 68% of IPV cases (table
9). Photographic evidence and the tape of a 911 call were the
most common forms of physical evidence obtained. Physical
evidence was obtained in a higher percentage of felony (75%)
than misdemeanor (66%) cases. 

The types of evidence obtained differed slightly between
felony and misdemeanor IPV cases. Prosecutor files were more
likely to indicate that forensic evidence had been obtained
in felony intimate partner violence cases (10%) than in
misdemeanor IPV cases (2%). Felony cases were also more
likely to result in a weapon being recovered (11%) and
medical records being obtained (10%) than misdemeanor IPV
cases.

In addition to physical evidence, a statement was obtained
from a witness to the incident in just under half of IPV
cases. Felony cases were more likely than misdemeanor cases
to feature a witness statement. In about 1 in 10 cases of
IPV, the prosecution obtained a statement from the defendant. 

Nearly 1 in 4 intimate partner violence victims had reported
prior violence by the same defendant to police

One factor known to affect outcomes in criminal cases is a
defendant's prior criminal history. While the survey did not
collect information on a defendant's entire criminal history,
two measures of prior domestic violence were documented from
information recorded in prosecutor files: 1) history of abuse
between the victim and the defendant in the case, and 2)
whether the victim reported any prior violence to the police.

Forty-six percent of intimate partner violence cases involved
a defendant with a prior history of abuse toward the same
victim, and 24% of victims of IPV had reported prior violence
to police (table 10). These percentages were similar for both
felony and misdemeanor IPV.

Most convictions for intimate partner violence were for a
misdemeanor charge

Fifty-six percent of intimate partner violence cases filed
with the court in the 16 participating counties resulted in a
conviction (table 11). Most of those convictions were for a
misdemeanor. A third (33%) of the cases were discontinued by
the prosecution or dismissed by the court; less than 1% ended
in acquittal. Another 9% of defendants were in a pretrial
diversion or deferred adjudication status one year after
their initial appearance.***Footnote 3 Cases in pretrial
diversion or deferred adjudication status generally have not
reached a final adjudication outcome. Many defendants who
successfully complete the requirements of a diversion program
have their case dismissed. Defendants who do not complete
program requirements are generally convicted***.

The percentage of cases filed with the court that led to a
conviction varied across the 16 counties, ranging from a low
of 17% to a high of 89%. One factor contributing to
differences in conviction rates was the difference in case
filing practice utilized by prosecutors in the counties. In 9
of the 16 jurisdictions, prosecutors indicated they generally
screened cases to determine whether to pursue a conviction
prior to a defendant's initial court appearance. In the
remaining seven jurisdictions, the decision whether to pursue
a conviction was made after the case was filed in court. The
conviction rate was 72% among the nine jurisdictions that
screened cases prior to filing (See Methodology, table 17).
Comparatively, 37% of cases filed led to a conviction in
jurisdictions that did not screen before the initial filing.
For more information on case screening policies and
differences in case outcomes by jurisdiction, see the
Methodology.

Most convicted defendants in intimate partner violence cases
received a jail sentence

More than 80% of defendants convicted in intimate partner
violence cases received either a jail (75%) or prison (7%)
sentence (table 12). Forty-four percent of defendants
convicted of felony IPV were sentenced to prison for one year
or more. A jail sentence was imposed on 4 in 5 defendants
convicted of a misdemeanor and on about half of defendants
convicted of a felony. About 1 in 5 convicted defendants were
not incarcerated, receiving a probation sentence instead.
 
Cases resulting in a conviction were more likely to have a
third party witness the incident 

The characteristics of cases that resulted in a conviction
were compared to the characteristics of cases in which
prosecution was declined or that resulted in a dismissal or
acquittal. Excluded from the analysis were 1) cases that
resulted in pretrial diversion or deferred adjudication; 2)
cases for which the final outcome was unknown; and 3) cases
whose outcome was pending as of one year after the initial
court filing. A total of 409 cases were excluded from the
analysis.


A third party witnessed the incident in more than half (56%)
of the cases that resulted in a conviction, compared to 41%
of cases that were adjudicated by dismissal, acquittal, or
nolle prosequi (table 13). The prosecution obtained physical
evidence and a statement by the defendant in a slightly
larger percentage of cases that resulted in conviction than
those that did not. Cases that led to a conviction were also
more likely to have a history of abuse between the victim and
the defendant, as well as a child present at the time of the
incident. A somewhat higher percentage of convicted
defendants were using alcohol or drugs at the time of the
incident, compared to defendants who were not convicted.

Cases in which the defendant made a formal statement were
twice as likely to result in conviction

The survey collected information about the characteristics of
intimate partner violence cases that may influence the
likelihood that a case will result in conviction. Logistic
regression analysis was used to assess the unique
contribution of various case characteristics to the
probability of conviction (table 14). The analysis produced
estimates of the association between each independent
variable (the case characteristics) and the dependent
variable (the likelihood of conviction). See the Methodology
for more information about logistic regression techniques.

In general the logistic regression analysis yielded patterns
of influence on the probability of conviction similar to that
of the bivariate results. The presence of a statement from
the defendant was the case characteristic with the greatest
impact on the likelihood of conviction. The odds ratio
indicated that cases in which prosecutors obtained a
statement from the defendant were twice as likely to result
in conviction than cases in which there was no statement.
Additionally, the presence of a third-party witness to the
incident increased the likelihood of conviction by 1.7 times,
as did a documented history of abuse between the victim and
defendant. Whether physical evidence was obtained was also
positively, although less strongly, associated with the
likelihood of a conviction. Other case characteristics, such
as whether a child was present at the time of the incident
and whether the defendant used a weapon, had little
independent impact on the probability of a conviction.
***Footnote 4 Other factors potentially related to the
probability of conviction were also included in the logistic
regression model but are not reported in table 14. See the
Methodology for more detail***.

About 1 in 8 intimate partner violence cases involved a
female defendant and male victim; another 1 in 20 involved a
defendant and victim of the same gender

Some case characteristics differed based on the gender of the
defendant and victim. Cases with male defendants and female
victims were more likely than others to entail a history of
abuse between victim and defendant (table 15). A child was
also more likely to have witnessed the violence in these
cases. Defendant weapon use was more prevalent in cases with
female defendants and male victims than in other cases.

A larger percentage of cases with male defendants and female
victims resulted in conviction than cases with female
defendants and male victims or same-gender cases (table 16).
Female defendants convicted of IPV against male defendants
were relatively less likely to receive an incarceration
sentence.

Methodology

Data Collection

This report is based on data collected from the study
Processing of Domestic Violence Cases in State Courts,
conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. Data were
collected by the Pretrial Services Resource Center,
Washington, D.C., under grant 2002-BJ-CX-0001. State
prosecutors and courts in 40 of the 75 largest counties were
asked to participate in a pilot study examining how domestic
violence (DV) cases are handled by the justice system. These
counties were identified because they had participated in the
State Court Processing Statistics, 2002 data collection,
which collected case processing information on a sample of
felony cases filed in state courts. Of the counties asked to
participate in the study on domestic violence case
processing, prosecutors and courts in the following 16
counties agreed:
-----------------------------------------------------------
State               County
-----------------------------------------------------------
Arizona             Pima
California          Alameda, Orange, Riverside, San Diego,    
                    Santa Clara
Florida             Dade, Palm Beach, Pinellas
Georgia             Fulton
Indiana             Marion
Ohio                Franklin
Tennessee           Shelby
Texas               El Paso, Tarrant, Travis
------------------------------------------------------------
Note: See appendix table 2 for the distribution of intimate
partner violence cases by participating jurisdiction.  
------------------------------------------------------------

In each of the 16 counties, the prosecutor's office or the
court clerk's office compiled a list of domestic violence
cases filed in state court in May 2002. In 7 of the 16
counties, the case list was provided by a specialized DV
prosecution unit. In the remaining 9 counties, the case list
was generated by examining all cases opened in May 2002 to
identify those that contained a domestic violence charge. 

Domestic violence was defined as "intentional physical
violence committed, attempted, or threatened between family
members, intimate partners, or household cohabitants." Family
members included persons related by blood or marriage.
Intimate partners included marital relations, such as
spouses, ex-spouses, and common-law spouses, as well as
boyfriends or girlfriends, present or past. A case was
classified as domestic violence if 1) it met the above
definition, based on the relationship of the victim to the
defendant, and 2) the underlying charge was for a violent
offense or for a violation of a protection order. For a small
number of cases, the prosecutor's files either could not be
located or were not available for legal reasons, such as the
case was still pending at the time of data collection or the
case file was sealed to comply with statutory regulations.

State prosecutors and courts in the participating counties
provided data on 4,562 defendants whose most serious arrest
charge was a domestic violence offense (DV). Approximately
83% of the 4,562 identified DV cases, or 3,750 cases,
involved a victim and defendant who were intimate partners.
See appendix table 2 for the distribution of intimate partner
violence cases by participating jurisdiction. 

Data sources

Data on the 3,750 intimate partner violence cases (IPV) are
based on the information contained in both prosecutor files
and court records. Prosecutor files were the primary source
of information on characteristics of the violent incident,
including victim and defendant demographics, measures of the
severity of the incident, such as weapon use by the defendant
and whether the victim was injured, history of abuse between
the victim and defendant, and the presence of witnesses to
the incident. Court records were the primary source of
information on case processing data, such as charges filed
against the defendant, adjudication outcomes, and sentencing
information. Case processing data were documented for one
year following the defendant's first appearance in court in
May 2002. 

This study also captured information about the general case
screening practices employed by prosecutors at the time of
the data collection in the 16 participating jurisdictions.
Prosecutors in 9 of the 16 jurisdictions indicated that cases
were reviewed prior to a defendant's initial court appearance
to determine whether the case would be pursued for
prosecution. In the remaining seven jurisdictions, case
review by prosecutors did not occur until after the case was
filed with the court. State law in some of the seven
jurisdictions mandates case filing upon arrest. Counties in
which prosecutors review cases after initial filing have a
rate of dismissal (49%) that is nearly two and a half times
greater than the comparable rate in counties that screen
prior to court filing (21%) (table 17).

Multivariate statistical techniques

This report analyzes the characteristics and outcomes of
intimate partner violence cases through both bivariate and
multivariate statistical techniques. While bivariate
statistics provide a descriptive overview of intimate partner
violence case characteristics and outcomes, multivariate
analysis can help identify the impacts that specific case
characteristics, such as presence of a witness, evidence
obtained, and prior history of violence between victim and
defendant have on the probability of a conviction. A logistic
regression model was used to estimate the impact of case
characteristics on the probability of a conviction. 

Also included in the model were a defendant's race and
gender, whether the defendant was charged with a felony or
misdemeanor, and individual county-level effects. To account
for county-level effects, a model predicting the probability
of conviction was first run at the county level, and the
residuals produced from that analysis were added to the main
individual-level model. Incorporating the estimates of the
residuals, which were statistically significant, into the
model allowed for the ability to isolate the impact of case
characteristics on the likelihood of a conviction while
accounting for the independent county effects. 

The findings from this study are based on a complete
enumeration of the cases processed in the month of May in the
16 counties agreeing to participate in the study. Given this
approach to data collection, BJS did not compute confidence
intervals for the estimates, nor did BJS conduct statistical
significance tests to compare the estimates across different
subgroups and to evaluate the logistic regression analysis.
Findings in this report may not be representative of those
that would have been obtained by examining cases processed
throughout the entire year, or from other counties that did
not participate in the study.

The logistic regression analyses were limited and intended to
reflect the effects of selected factors that were available
in the data collected. Other factors could potentially be
related to the probability of conviction. For example,
information about whether the defendant was arrested at the
scene of the crime and the defendant's prior criminal history
was unavailable. If data on these variables were available,
the logistic regression results could be altered.

--------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

This Special Report was written by Erica L. Smith and Donald
J. Farole, Jr., Ph.D. Sean P. Rosenmerkel verified the
report.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina
Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared
the report for final printing, under the supervision of Doris
J. James.

October 2009, NCJ 228193
---------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pipvcluc.htm>.

-----------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

------------------------------------------------------

10/20/2009/8:15/JER