U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
                                                           
Special Report

-------------------------------------------------------------
Parents in Prison and Their Minor Children
August  2008,  NCJ 222984
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pptmc.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
By Lauren E. Glaze and Laura M. Maruschak
BJS Statisticians
-------------------------------------------------------------
     
An estimated 809,800 prisoners of the 1,518,535 held in 
the nation’s prisons at midyear 2007 were parents of minor 
children, or children under age 18. Parents held in the 
nation’s prisons—52% of state inmates and 63% of federal 
inmates—reported having an estimated 1,706,600 minor 
children, accounting for 2.3% of the U.S. resident popula-
tion under age 18. Unless otherwise specified in this report, 
the word parent refers to state and federal prisoners who 
reported having minor children. The word children refers to 
youth under age 18.

Between 1991 and midyear 2007, parents held in state and 
federal prisons increased by 79% (357,300 parents). Chil-
dren of incarcerated parents increased by 80% (761,000 
children), during this period (figure 1). The most rapid 
growth in the number of parents held in the nation’s prisons 
and their children occurred between 1991 and 1997 (both 
up 44%). From 1997 to midyear 2007, the number of par-
ents and children continued to grow, but at a slower pace 
(both up 25%).

The findings in this report are based on the latest data 
collected through personal interviews with prisoners partici-
pating in the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 2004 Sur-
vey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities 
(SISFCF), which is comprised of two separate surveys. 
One survey is conducted in state adult correctional
facilities and the other is conducted in federal correctional
facilities. Estimates presented in this report may not be comparable 
to previously published reports. See Incarcerated Parents 
and Their Minor Children at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/iptc.htm>.

Parents of minor children held in the nation’s prisons 
increased by 79% between 1991 and midyear 2007

Growth in the number of parents held in state and federal 
prisons was outpaced by the growth in the nation’s prison 
population between 1991 and midyear 2007. Parents incar-
cerated in state and federal prisons increased by 79% dur-
ing this period while the custody population grew by 92%.

Parents held in state prison increased from 413,100 in 
1991 to 686,000 at midyear 2007 (table 1). Children of par-
ents in state prison increased from 860,300 to 1,427,500 
during this period. The largest growth in the number of par-
ents (up 40%) held in state prison and their children (up 
42%) occurred between 1991 and 1997, compared to a 
19% increase for parents and a 17% increase for their chil-
dren between 1997 and midyear 2007. 

The number of children under age 18 with a mother in 
prison more than doubled since 1991

The nation’s prisons held approximately 744,200 fathers 
and 65,600 mothers at midyear 2007 (appendix table 1). 
Fathers in prison reported having 1,559,200 children; 
mothers reported 147,400. 

Since 1991, the number of children with a mother in prison 
has more than doubled, up 131%. The number of children 
with a father in prison has grown by 77%. This finding 
reflects a faster rate of growth in the number of mothers 
held in state and federal prisons (up 122%), compared to 
the number of fathers (up 76%) between 1991 and midyear 
2007.

Of the estimated 74 million children in the U.S. resident 
population who were under age 18 on July 1, 2007, 2.3% 
had a parent in prison (table 2). Black children (6.7%) were 
seven and a half times more likely than white children 
(0.9%) to have a parent in prison. Hispanic children (2.4%) 
were more than two and a half times more likely than white 
children to have a parent in prison.

More than 4 in 10 fathers in state or federal prisons 
were black; almost 5 in 10 mothers were white

Similar to men in the general prison population (93%), par-
ents held in the nation’s prisons at midyear 2007 were 
mostly male (92%) (not shown in table). More than 4 in 10 
fathers were black, about 3 in 10 were white, and about 2 in 
10 were Hispanic (appendix table 2). An estimated 
1,559,200 children had a father in prison at midyear 2007; 
nearly half (46%) were children of black fathers. 

Almost half (48%) of all mothers held in the nation’s prisons 
at midyear 2007 were white, 28% were black, and 17% 
were Hispanic. Of the estimated 147,400 children with a 
mother in prison, about 45% had a white mother. A smaller 
percentage of the children had a black (30%) or Hispanic 
(19%) mother.

The majority of prisoners reported having a minor 
child, a quarter of which were age 4 or younger

When interviewed during the 2004 survey, the majority of 
state (52%) and federal (63%) inmates reported having at 
least one child under age 18 (appendix table 3). Women in 
state prison (62%) were more likely than men (51%) to 
report being a parent. Among federal inmates, 63% of 
male inmates and 56% of female inmates reported being a 
parent.

Nearly 1 in 4 state (23%) and federal (24%) inmates 
reported having one child. Federal inmates (39%) were 
more likely than state inmates (29%) to report having multi-
ple children. Women (41%) in state prison were more likely 
than men (29%) to report having more than one child. Sim-
ilar percentages of women (36%) and men (39%) held in 
federal prison reported having multiple children. Parents in 
state and federal prisons reported having two children, on 
average (not shown in table). 

Twenty-two percent of the children of state inmates and 
16% of the children of federal inmates were age 4 or 
younger (table 3). For both state (53%) and federal (50%) 
inmates, about half their children were age 9 or younger. 
Children of female state inmates were slightly older than 
children reported by male state inmates. More than half 
(53%) of the children reported by women were between 
age 10 and 17, compared to 47% of the children reported 
by men. 

More than a third of minor children will reach age 18 
while their parent is incarcerated

Based on the number of adult children reported during the 
2004 survey, the total number of children affected by an 
incarcerated parent can be calculated by subtracting the 
amount of time served by the parent from their adult child’s 
age. Using this method, parents in prison had nearly 1.9 
million children at the time of admission (table 4). Of those 
children, an estimated 715,600 will reach age 18 while their 
parent is incarcerated.

Incarcerated parents of minor children most likely to 
be age 25 to 34

State inmates age 25 to 34 (64%) interviewed during the 
2004 survey were most likely to be parents of minor chil-
dren, followed by inmates age 35 to 44 and inmates age 24 
or younger (table 5). Thirty-one percent of inmates age 45 
to 54 reported being a parent. The likelihood of being a par-
ent in state prison was lowest among inmates age 55 or 
older (13%). Among state prisoners in all age categories 
except age 45 to 54, women were more likely than men to 
report being a parent. There was no difference in the preva-
lence of being a parent between men and women age 45 to 
54.

Federal inmates age 25 to 34 (74%) and age 35 to 44 
(72%) were more likely to report being a parent, compared 
to inmates in all other age categories. Forty-seven percent 
of inmates age 45 to 54 and 46% of inmates age 24 or 
younger reported being a parent. Federal inmates age 
55 or older were least likely to report that they had minor 
children. 

For men held in state prison, the likelihood of being a par-
ent varied across racial categories (appendix table 4). His-
panic (57%) and black (54%) men were more likely than 
white (45%) men to report being a parent. Findings were 
similar for men held in federal prison. White men (48%) in 
federal prison were the least likely of all male inmates to 
report having children. Black (70%) and Hispanic (69%) 
men were equally likely to be parents. The likelihood of 
being a parent for white, black, and Hispanic women held in 
state prison did not vary by race. In federal prison,
Hispanic women (63%) were more likely than white women (47%) to 
report being a parent. 

In state prison, the likelihood of being a parent was most 
common among married inmates (71%), compared to 
inmates who were separated (64%), divorced (55%), never 
married (45%), or widowed (36%). Among federal inmates, 
married inmates were more likely to report being a parent 
than inmates in all marital statuses except those inmates 
who were separated from their spouse. There was no dif-
ference in the prevalence of being a parent between mar-
ried federal inmates and separated federal inmates. The 
likelihood of being a parent varied little by education for 
both state and federal inmates. 

Drug and public-order offenders in state and federal 
prisons were more likely than violent offenders to have 
children

Among male state prisoners, violent (47%) and property 
(48%) offenders were less likely to report having children 
than public-order (60%) and drug (59%) offenders (table 6). 
For women held in state prison, violent (57%) offenders 
were less likely than drug (63%), property (65%), and pub-
lic-order (65%) offenders to be a mother.

The prevalence of being a parent differed by gender and 
offense for inmates held in state and federal prisons. For 
state inmates, female (65%) property offenders were more 
likely to be a parent than male (48%) property offenders. In 
federal prison, male (69%) drug offenders were more likely 
than female (55%) drug offenders to report having children.

Among men held in federal prison, drug offenders (69%) 
were more likely than property (54%) and violent (50%) 
offenders to report having children (appendix table 5). 
Public-order offenders (62%) were also more likely than 
violent offenders to report having children. For women in 
federal prison, the likelihood of being a mother did not
differ by offense.

Inmates in state and federal prisons with a criminal 
history were more likely to be parents of minor children 
than those with no criminal history 

The likelihood of being a parent in prison varied slightly 
based on criminal history, including prior probation, parole, 
and incarceration sentences. Prisoners with a criminal his-
tory were more likely to report being a parent than prison-
ers with no criminal history. In state prison, 53% of inmates 
with a criminal history reported having children, compared 
to 48% with no criminal history. Sixty-six percent of parents 
held in federal prison reported having a criminal history, 
compared to 57% of parents with no criminal history. 

In state prison, drug recidivists (62%)—offenders with a 
prior drug offense—had a higher likelihood of being a par-
ent than violent (52%) and other (54%) recidivists. For 
women in state prison, and both men and women in federal 
prison, the likelihood of being a parent did not vary by type 
of recidivist (appendix table 6).

Male (50%) and female (61%) inmates in state prison who 
reported no prior incarceration sentences were equally 
likely to be a parent as male (53%) and female (65%) 
inmates with 10 or more prior incarcerations. In federal 
prison, findings were similar for men while women with no 
prior incarceration sentences (54%) were less likely to be a 
mother than women who reported they had 10 or more 
prior incarcerations (81%).

Fewer than half of parents in state prison lived with 
their minor children either in the month before arrest or 
just prior to incarceration

Thirty-seven percent of parents held in state prison 
reported living with at least one of their children in the 
month before arrest, 44% reported just prior to incarcera-
tion, and 48% reported at either time (table 7). Mothers 
were more likely than fathers to report living with at least 
one child. More than half of mothers held in state prison 
reported living with at least one of their children in the 
month before arrest, compared to 36% of fathers. More 
than 6 in 10 mothers reported living with their children just 
prior to incarceration or at either time, compared to less 
than half of fathers. 

Parents held in federal prison were more likely than those 
held in state prison to report living with a child in the
month before arrest, just prior to incarceration, or at either time 
(appendix table 7). Mothers in federal prison were more 
likely than fathers to report living with a child. 

More than 4 in 10 mothers in state prison who had 
minor children were living in single-parent households 
in the month before arrest

Parents held in state prison were equally likely to report
living with their children in a single-parent household (19%) 
as they were to report living with their children in a two-
parent household (18%) in the month before arrest. Moth-
ers were three times more likely to report living in a
single-parent household (42%) than in a two-parent household 
(14%). Fathers reported similar percentages of living in sin-
gle or two-parent households in the month before their 
arrest. 

Parents held in federal prison were more likely overall to 
report having lived in two-parent versus single-parent 
households in the month before arrest. Mothers (52%) 
were more than two and a half times more likely than 
fathers (19%) to have lived in single-parent households.

Fathers living with their minor child relied heavily on 
someone to provide daily care 

Mothers and fathers in state prison responded differently 
when asked who provided most of the daily care for their 
minor children. Among parents in state prison who had 
lived with their minor children just prior to incarceration, 
mothers (77%) were almost three times more likely than 
fathers (26%) to report that they had provided most of the 
daily care for their children (appendix table 8). Sixty-three 
percent of fathers reported sharing the daily care, com-
pared to 18% of mothers. About 1 in 10 fathers relied on 
someone to provide daily care for their children, compared 
to 1 in 20 mothers. Similar results were found for mothers 
and fathers in federal prison. 

Fathers most commonly reported the child’s mother as 
current caregiver of their children, while mothers most 
commonly reported the child’s grandparents 

The other parent (84%) was the most commonly reported 
caregiver for children of parents in state prison, followed
by grandparents (15%), and other relatives (6%) (table 8). 
Three percent reported that their children were in the care 
of a foster home, agency, or institution. 

Mothers and fathers in state prison provided different 
responses about their children’s current caregivers. Eighty-
eight percent of fathers reported that at least one of their 
children was in the care of the child’s mother, compared to 
37% of mothers who reported the father as the child’s cur-
rent caregiver. 

Mothers in state prison most commonly identified the 
child’s grandmother (42%) as the current caregiver. Nearly 
a quarter (23%) identified other relatives as the current
caregivers of their children. The percentage of fathers in 
prison who reported that their children were in the care of a 
grandmother (12%) or other relative (5%) was much 
smaller. Mothers (11%) were 5 times more likely than 
fathers (2%) to report that their children were in the care
of a foster home, agency, or institution.

About half of parents in state prison provided the 
primary financial support for their minor children

Mothers (52%) and fathers (54%) in state prison were 
equally likely to report that they provided primary financial 
support for their minor children prior to their incarceration 
(appendix table 9). Three-quarters (75%) reported employ-
ment in the month prior to their arrest. Parents who sup-
ported their children financially were more likely to have 
been employed (80%) in the month prior to arrest and to 
report wages or salary (76%) as income. 

Of parents with minor children who did not provide primary 
financial support, 68% reported employment in the month 
before their arrest and 64% reported wages or salary as 
income. More than a third (36%) of mothers in state prison 
reported government transfers such as welfare, Social 
Security, or compensation payment as income. Mothers 
were more likely than fathers to report receiving govern-
ment transfers regardless of who provided the primary 
financial support for their children. The findings were simi-
lar for parents held in federal prison.

Parents in state prison who provided primary financial sup-
port were more likely to report that they lived with their
children in the month before arrest or just prior to
incarceration (table 9). Among parents in state prison who provided the 
primary financial support to their children, mothers (89%) 
were more likely than fathers (67%) to report that they had 
lived with their children. 

More than three-quarters of state prison inmates who 
were parents of minor children reported that they had 
some contact with their children since admission

Seventy percent of parents in state prison reported 
exchanging letters with their children, 53% had spoken with 
their children over the telephone, and 42% had a personal 
visit since admission (appendix table 10). *** Footnote 1: 
Question was asked about contact with any child, which could 
include children 18 years of age or older.*** Mothers were 
more likely than fathers to report having had any contact 
with their children. Mothers and fathers were equally likely
to report having had personal visits with their children. A 
higher percentage of parents in federal prison reported 
contact with their children. In federal prison, 85% reported 
telephone contact, 84% had exchanged letters, and 55% 
reported having had personal visits.

More than three-quarters of state prison inmates who were 
parents of minor children reported that they had some con-
tact with their children since admission (table 10). Thirty-
nine percent of fathers and 56% of mothers in state prison 
had at least weekly contact with their children since admis-
sion. Parents (86%) in state prison who reported living with 
their minor children in the month before arrest or just
before incarceration were more likely to report having contact with 
their children than parents (72%) who had not lived with 
their children. Mothers (62%) and fathers (49%) who had 
lived with their children were more likely to report they had 
at least weekly contact with their children than mothers 
(44%) and fathers (30%) who had not lived with their chil-
dren.

While the percent of parents in state prison who reported 
contact with their children varied little by expected release 
date, those having less time to serve reported more fre-
quent contact with their children. About half (47%) of par-
ents who expected to be released within six months 
reported at least weekly contact with their children, com-
pared to 39% who expected to be released in 12 to 59 
months, and 32% in 60 or more months. Among parents 
who did not expect to be released, 22% reported at least 
weekly contact with their children.

Half of parents in state prison reported that they had a 
family member who had been incarcerated

Mothers in state prison (58%) were more likely than fathers 
(49%) to report having a family member who had also been 
incarcerated (table 11). Parents in state prison most com-
monly reported a brother (34%), followed by a father (19%). 
Among mothers in state prison, 13% reported a sister and 
8% reported a spouse. Six percent of fathers reported hav-
ing a sister who had also been incarcerated; 2%, a spouse.

While growing up, 40% of parents in state prison reported 
living in a household that received public assistance, 14% 
reported living in a foster home, agency, or institution at 
some time during their youth, and 43% reported living with 
both parents most of the time (appendix table 11). Mothers 
(17%) held in state prison were more likely than fathers 
(14%) to report living in a foster home, agency, or
institution at some time during their youth. Parents in federal prison 
reported lower percentages of growing up in a household 
that received public assistance (31%) or living in a foster 
home, agency, or institution (7%). These characteristics 
varied little by gender for parents held in federal prison.

More than a third (34%) of parents in state prison reported 
that during their youth, their parents or guardians had 
abused alcohol or drugs. Mothers in state prison (43%) 
were more likely than fathers (33%) to have had this 
experience. Fewer parents (27%) in federal prison reported 
having a parent or a guardian who had abused alcohol or 
drugs. 

Mothers in state prison more likely than fathers to 
report homelessness, past physical or sexual abuse, 
and medical and mental health problems

Among parents in state prison, 9% reported homeless- 
ness in the year before arrest, 20% had a history of 
physical or sexual abuse, and 41% reported a current 
medical problem. Fifty-seven percent of parents in state 
prison met the criteria for a mental health problem and 67% 
met the criteria for substance dependence or abuse 
(appendix table 12). ***Footnote 2: *** Inmates met the 
criteria for a mental health problem if they had a recent 
history of a mental health problem in the year before arrest 
or since admission, or if they experienced, in the 12 months 
prior to the interview, symptoms of mental health disorders. 
See Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mhppji.htm>.*** In 
comparison, parents in federal prison reported lower
percentages of homelessness (4%) in the year before arrest,
past physical or sexual abuse (11%), current medical problems
(36%), mental health problems (43%), and substance dependence
or abuse (56%).

Mothers in state prison were two times more likely than 
fathers to report homelessness in the year before arrest, 
four times more likely to report past physical or sexual 
abuse, and almost one and half times more likely to have 
either a current medical or mental health problem. The 
comparison by gender among parents held in federal 
prison was similar to those held in state prison, with the 
exception of homelessness in the year before arrest. Both 
male and female parents held in federal prison had similar 
rates (4.0%) of homelessness in the year before arrest.

Reports from fathers in state prison that showed past phys-
ical or sexual abuse, current medical problems, mental 
health problems, and substance dependence or abuse did-
not vary overall by living arrangement (table 12). However, 
fathers who had not lived with their children were three 
times more likely than those who had lived with their chil-
dren to report homelessness in the year prior to arrest.

Mothers held in state prison who had not lived with their 
children were three times more likely to report homeless-
ness (29%) than those who had lived with their children 
(9%). Mothers who had not lived with their children were 
also more likely to report past physical and sexual abuse, 
current medical problems, and substance dependence or 
abuse than those who had lived with their children. 

More than 4 in 10 parents in the nation’s prisons who 
met the criteria for substance dependence or abuse 
had received treatment since admission

About 4 in 10 parents in state prison who met the criteria
for substance dependence or abuse reported ever receiving 
treatment for drug or alcohol abuse; 56% reported partici-
pating in other drug or alcohol abuse programs (appendix 
table 13). Forty-three percent of parents who met the crite-
ria reported treatment since admission. For fathers (10%) 
and mothers (14%), placement in a residential facility or 
unit for drug or alcohol abuse was the most common treat-
ment since admission. Parents held in federal prison who 
met the criteria for substance dependence or abuse 
reported similar percentages of alcohol or drug treatment 
and program participation. 

Of parents in state prison who had a mental health prob-
lem, 46% reported ever receiving treatment. About a third 
(31%) had been treated since admission. Prescription med-
ication was the most common treatment for both those who 
had reported ever having treatment (38%) and for those 
who had received treatment since admission (25%).

About a third (33%) of parents in state prison with a mental 
health problem reported that they had ever received ther-
apy and 18% reported they had ever had an overnight hos-
pital stay. A fifth (21%) of parents with a mental health
problem reported that they had received therapy since 
admission; 5% had an overnight hospital stay.

Mothers were more likely than fathers to report treatment 
for mental health problems either before or after admission 
to a state prison. In state prison, prescribed medication was 
the most common treatment for parents with a mental 
health problem. 

While parents in federal prison were less likely than those 
in state prison to report mental health treatment, the 
patterns by gender were similar for both. Participation in 
alcohol, drug, or mental health treatment did not vary by 
whether parents had lived with their children in the month 
before arrest or just prior to incarceration (table 13).

Among parents in state prison, two-thirds reported 
they had a work assignment; over half had attended 
self-help or improvement classes since admissions 

In state prison, about 7 in 10 mothers (70%) and fathers 
(67%) reported participating in work assignments since 
admission (appendix table 14). About two-thirds (65%) of 
mothers and more than half (57%) of fathers had attended 
self-help or improvement classes. While mothers and 
fathers were equally likely to report participating in
employment and educational programming, mothers (27%) were 
about two and a half times more likely than fathers (11%) to 
attend parenting or childrearing classes. Mothers and 
fathers (both 62%) were equally likely to report having a 
high school diploma or GED at admission. 

Parents held in federal prison reported participating in work 
assignments and self-help programs and having a high 
school diploma or GED more frequently than parents in 
state prison. More than 9 in 10 parents in federal prison 
reported participating in a work assignment. Since admis-
sion, more than 7 in 10 had attended self-help or improve-
ment classes. About 7 in 10 reported having a high school 
diploma or GED upon admission.

Similar percentages of participation in self-help or improve-
ment classes were found between mothers and fathers in 
state prison who had lived with their children and those who 
had not lived with their children prior to arrest or
incarceration (table 14). Mothers who had lived with their
children prior to arrest or incarceration (72%) were more
likely than mothers who had not lived with their children
(67%) to participate in work assignments.

Mothers in prison had served less time at time of 
interview and expected to be released in a shorter 
amount of time than fathers

Over half (52%) of parents in state prison had served 
between 12 and 59 months at the time of their interview 
(appendix table 15). A quarter (26%) had been in prison 60 
months or more. Mothers and fathers were equally likely to 
have been in prison for 12 to 59 months. For longer lengths 
of stay, mothers (13%) were less likely than fathers (27%) 
to have been in prison for 60 or more months. 

About 4 in 10 mothers in state prison expected to be 
released within 6 months. An additional 21% expected to 
be released in 6 to 11 months. Among fathers in state 
prison, a quarter expected to be released in less than 6 
months and 15% percent expected to be released in 6 to 11 
months. Compared to mothers in federal prison, fathers 
had served more of their sentence at the time of their inter-
views and expected to have a longer time remaining until 
their release. 

Time served and time expected until release varied little for 
fathers by whether they had lived with their children in the 
month before arrest or just prior to incarceration while dif-
ferences were found among women (table 15). Compared 
to mothers who had not lived with their children in the 
month before arrest or just prior incarceration (46%), moth-
ers who had lived with their children (39%) were less likely 
to expect to be released in less than 6 months.

Methodology

Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities

The Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities (SISFCF), 2004, is comprised of two separate 
surveys. One survey is conducted in state adult correc-
tional facilities and the other is conducted in federal
correctional facilities. The surveys provide nationally
representative data on state prison inmates and sentenced
federal inmates. Both surveys use the same questionnaire and
a stratified two-stage sample design where facilities are 
selected in the first stage and inmates to be interviewed in 
the second stage.

The state prison sample was selected from a universe of 
1,585 facilities that were either enumerated in the 2000 
Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities 
(CSFCF), or had opened between the completion of the 
Census and April 1, 2003. A total of 287 state prisons par-
ticipated in the survey; 2 state prisons refused, 11 were 
closed or had no inmates to survey, and 1 was erroneously 
included in the universe.

The federal prison sample was selected from 148 prisons 
and satellite facilities holding inmates on January 4, 2003. 
Thirty-nine of the 40 federal prisons selected participated
in the survey.

A total of 14,499 inmates in the state facilities were inter-
viewed; 1,653 inmates refused to participate, resulting in a 
second-stage nonresponse rate of 10.2%. A total of 3,686 
inmates in federal facilities were interviewed and 567 
refused to participate, for a second-stage nonresponse rate 
of 13.3%. After the initial sample of inmates, a secondary 
sample of 1 in 3 drug offenders was selected for participa-
tion in the federal survey. 

Accuracy of the estimates

The accuracy of the 2004 SISFCF depends on sampling 
and measurement errors. Sampling errors occur by chance 
because a sample rather than a complete enumeration of 
the population was conducted. Measurement error can be 
attributed to many sources, such as nonresponse, recall 
difficulties, differences in the interpretation of questions 
among inmates, and processing errors.

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated standard 
error, varies by the size of the estimate and the size of the 
base population. These standard errors may be used to 
construct confidence intervals around percentages. For 
example, the 95-percent confidence interval around the 
percentage of state inmates who reported being a parent is 
approximately 51.9% plus or minus 1.96 times 1.41% (or 
49.1% to 54.7%).

These standard errors may also be used to test the statisti-
cal significance of the difference between two sample sta-
tistics by pooling the standard errors of the two sample
estimates. For example, the standard error of the difference 
between male and female state inmate parents who lived 
with their children in the month before arrest or just prior
to incarceration would be 3.69% (or the square root of the 
sum of the squared standard errors for each group). The 
95% confidence interval around the difference would be 
1.96% times 3.69% (or 7.23%). Since the difference of 
17.7% (64.2% minus 46.5%) is greater than 7.2%, the dif-
ference would be considered statistically significant. Differ
ences discussed in this report were significant at the 95% 
confidence level.

Number of parents in prison who had minor children

To estimate the number of parents by gender in the 1991, 
1997, and 2004 SISFCF survey years, the distribution of 
parents from each of the survey years was applied to the 
prisoner custody population by gender for that specific 
year. In 1999 and 2007, the surveys were not conducted. 
To estimate the number of parents by gender in 1999, the 
distribution of parents from the 1997 SISFCF was applied 
to the prisoner custody population by gender in 1999. The 
distribution of parents by gender from the 2004 SISFCF 
was used to estimate the number of parents in prison at 
midyear 2007, by applying the distribution to the midyear 
2007 prisoner custody population by gender.

In 2007, 2004, and 1999, the total federal custody popula-
tion included inmates held in privately operated facilities 
and community corrections centers (30,379 in 2007; 
24,768 in 2004; and 3,828 in privately operated facilities in 
1999). In 1991 and 1997 the number of inmates in these 
facilities was not known.

The 2007 estimates of the number of parents by race and 
gender were calculated based on the 2004 SISFCF distri-
bution of parents, which was then applied to the midyear 
2007 custody population, by race and gender. The 2004 
estimates of the number of parents in prison by race and 
gender were calculated using the same method except the 
2004 SISFCF distribution was applied to the midyear 2004 
custody population, by race and gender.

Number of minor children of parents in prison

For this report, published estimates for 1991, 1997, and 
1999 were re-estimated to ensure comparability for the 
period covered. The 2004 SISFCF allowed prisoners 
to report a maximum of ten children. The 1997 SISFCF 
only allowed prisoners to report a maximum of six children 
and the 1991 SISFCF only allowed prisoners to report a 
maximum of five children.The 1997 distribution for six chil-
dren was used to estimate the number of prisoners with six 
children in 1991. The 2004 distribution for seven through 
ten children was used to estimate the number of prisoners 
with seven through ten children in both 1991 and 1997.

For each year, the estimated number of parents by gender was 
multiplied by the number of minor children reported by male 
and by female inmates. The estimates were then summed by
gender for each year and reported as the totals. Because this
estimation method was used, estimates presented in this
report may not be comparable to previously published BJS
reports. See Incarcerated Parents and Their Children at 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iptc.htm>. 

The 2007 estimates by race and gender for the number of minor 
children of parents in prison were calculated based on the
2004 Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional
Facilities (SISFCF) distribution of parents and the number of
minor children they reported. This distribution was then
applied to the midyear 2007 custody population by race and
gender. The estimated number of parents by race and gender
was multiplied by the number of minor children they reported.
The estimates were summed by race and gender for each year
and reported as the totals. The 2004 race and gender 
estimates for the number of minor children of parents in
prison were calculated using this same method except the 2004
SISFCF distribution was applied to the midyear 2004 custody
population, by race and gender.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Detailed information is available in appendix tables in the
online version of this report on the BJS Website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/pptmc.pdf>.
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is
director.

This Special Report was written by Lauren E. Glaze and Laura
M. Maruschak. William J. Sabol, Ph.D.and Christopher J.
Mumola provided statistical review. Lara E. Allen and
Margaret E. Noonan verified the report.

Georgette Walsh edited the report, Tina Dorsey produced the
report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

August 2008, NCJ 222984
-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables (includes 20 appendix
tables) are available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet
site: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pptmc.htm>.
-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov>.
------------------------------------------------------------- 

01/09/2008/tld
          