U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

State Court Processing Statistics, 1990-2004
Pretrial Release of Felony Defendants in State Courts

November 2007,  NCJ 214994
----------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/prfdsc.htm

-----------------------------------------------------------

By Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D.
and Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

------------------------------------------------------------

Between 1990 and 2004, 62% of felony defendants in State
courts in the 75 largest counties were released prior to the
disposition of their case. Beginning in 1998, financial
pretrial releases, requiring the posting of bail, were more
prevalent than non-financial releases. This increase in the
use of financial releases was mostly the result of a decrease
in the use of release on recognizance (ROR), coupled with an
increase in the use of commercial surety bonds. These
findings are from a multi-year analysis of felony cases from
the biennial State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS)
program, sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Among defendants detained until case disposition, 1 in 6 had
been denied bail and 5 in 6 had bail set with financial
conditions required for release that were not met. The higher
the bail amount set, the lower the probability of release.
About 7 in 10 defendants secured release when bail was set at
less than $5,000, but this proportion dropped to 1 in 10
when bail was set at $100,000 or more.

Murder defendants were the least likely to be released
pretrial. Defendants charged with rape, robbery, burglary,
and motor vehicle theft also had release rates lower than the
overall average. The highest release rate was for defendants
charged with fraud. 

Defendants were less likely to be released if they had a
prior arrest or conviction or an active criminal justice
status at the time of arrest (such as those on probation or
parole). A history of missed court appearances also reduced
the likelihood that a defendant would be released. 

About a third of released defendants were charged with one or
more types of pretrial misconduct. Nearly a fourth had a
bench warrant issued for failing to appear in court, and
about a sixth were arrested for a new offense. More than half
of these new arrests were for felonies. 

Logistic regression analyses that controlled for factors such
as offense and criminal history found that Hispanics were
less likely than non-Hispanic defendants to be released, and
males were less likely than females to be released. 

Logistic regression was also used to calculate the
probability of pretrial misconduct for defendants with a
given characteristic, independent of other factors.
Characteristics associated with a greater probability of
being rearrested while on pretrial release included being
under age 21, having a prior arrest record, having a prior
felony conviction, being released on an unsecured bond, or
being part of an emergency release to relieve jail crowding.
 
Compared to release on recognizance, defendants on financial
release were more likely to make all scheduled court
appearances. Defendants released on an unsecured bond or as
part of an emergency release were most likely to have a bench
warrant issued because they failed to appear in court. The
probability of failing to appear in court was higher among
defendants who were black or Hispanic, had an active criminal
justice status at the time of arrest, or had a prior failure
to appear. 

About 3 in 5 felony defendants in the 75 largest counties
were released prior to case disposition

From 1990 to 2004, an estimated 62% of State court felony
defendants in the 75 largest counties were released prior to
the disposition of their case (table 1). Defendants were
about as likely to be released on financial conditions
requiring the posting of bail (30%) as to be granted a
non-financial release (32%). Among the 38% of defendants
detained until case disposition, about 5 in 6 had a bail
amount set but did not post the financial bond required for
release.

From 1990 to 2004, surety bond (33%) and release on
recognizance (32%) each accounted for about a third of all
releases. Other release types that accounted for at least 5%
of releases during this period were conditional release
(12%), deposit bond (9%), unsecured bond (7%), and full cash
bond (5%). (See box on page 3 for definitions of release
types.) 

Since 1998 a majority of pretrial releases have included
financial conditions

Except for a decline to 57% in 2004, the percentage of
defendants released each year varied only slightly, from 62%
to 64%. A more pronounced trend was observed in the type of
release used (figure 1). From 1990 to 1998, the percentage of
released defendants under financial conditions rose from 24%
to 36%, while non-financial releases dropped from 40% to 28%.
 
Surety bond surpassed release on recognizance in 1998 as the
most common type of pretrial release 
 
The trend away from non-financial releases to financial
releases was accompanied by an increase in the use of surety
bonds and a decrease in the use of release on recognizance
(ROR) (figure 2). From 1990 through 1994, ROR accounted for 
41% of releases, compared to 24% for surety bond. In 2002 and 
2004, surety bonds were used for 42% of releases, compared to 
23% for ROR.

Two-thirds of defendants had financial conditions required
for release in 2004, compared to half in 1990

Including both released and detained defendants, the
percentage required to post bond to secure release rose from
53% in 1990 to 68% in 2004 (not shown in table). Overall,
about half (48%) of defendants required to post bail for
release did so. From 1998 through 2004, 51% posted bail,
compared to 45% in prior years.

The higher the bail amount the lower the probability 
of pretrial release

The median bail amount for detained defendants ($15,000) was
3 times that of released defendants ($5,000); the mean amount
was about 5 times higher ($58,400 versus $11,600) (not shown
in table). For all defendants, the median bail amount was
$9,000 and the mean was $35,800.

There was a direct relationship between the bail amount and
the probability of release. When the bail was under $10,000,
most defendants secured release, including 7 in 10 defendants
with bail under $5,000 (figure 3). The proportion released
declined as the bail amount increased, dropping to 1 in 10
when bail was $100,000 or higher.

Defendants arrested for violent offenses or who had a
criminal record were most likely to have a high bail 
amount or be denied bail

Courts typically use an offense-based schedule when setting
bail. After assessing the likelihood that a defendant, if
released, will not appear in court and assessing any danger
the defendant may present to the community, the court may
adjust the bail higher or lower. In the most serious cases,
the court may deny bail altogether. The use of a high bail
amount or the denial of bail was most evident in cases
involving serious violent offenses. Eighty percent of
defendants charged with murder had one of these conditions;
with rape, 34%; and with robbery, 30% (table 2). 

Defendants who had an active criminal justice status (13%)
were about 4 times as likely as other defendants (3%) to have
bail denied. Defendants with 1 or more prior felony
convictions (10%) were more than twice as likely as those
without such a conviction (4%) to have bail denied.

------------------------------------------------------------
Commercial bail and pretrial release

An estimated 14,000 commercial bail agents nationwide secure
the release of more than 2 million defendants annually,
according to the Professional Bail Agents of the United
States. (See Methodology for other sources on bail and
pretrial release.) Bond forfeiture regulations and procedures
vary by jurisdiction, but most States regulate commercial
bail and license bail agents through their departments of
insurance. Four States do not allow commercial bail:
Illinois, Kentucky, Oregon, and Wisconsin. Also, the District
of Columbia, Maine, and Nebraska have little commercial bail
activity.

Bail agents generally operate as independent contractors
using credentials of a surety company when posting appearance
bond for their client. For a fee, the surety company allows
the bail agent to use its financial standing and credit as
security on bonds. In turn, the bail agent charges the
defendant a fee (usually 10% of the bail amount) for
services. In addition, the bail agent often requires
collateral from the defendant.

A bail agent usually has an opportunity to recover a
defendant if they fail to appear. If the defendant is not
returned, the agent is liable to the court for the full bail
amount. Most jurisdictions permit revocation of the bond,
which allows the agent to return the defendant to custody
before the court date, freeing the agent from liability. The
agent may be required to refund the defendant's fee in such
cases. Courts can also set aside forfeiture judgments if good
cause is shown as to why a defendant did not appear.
 
Commercial bail has been a target of critics since the 1960s.
Some organizations, such as the American Bar Association and
the National District Attorney's Association, have
recommended its abolishment. Some critics have succeeded in
obtaining reforms in the release process, beginning with the
Manhattan Bail Project in 1961. 

This project showed that defendants could be successfully
released pretrial without the financial guarantee of a surety
bail agent if verified information concerning their stability
and community ties were presented to the court. 

The success of the Manhattan Bail Project resulted in a wide
range of pretrial reforms in the Federal system, culminating
in the Bail Reform Act of 1966. This Act created a
presumption in favor of release for most non-capital
defendants and led to the creation of non-surety release
options, such as refundable deposit bail and conditional
release. Many States followed the Federal system and created
such release options. The Bail Reform Act of 1984 set forth
new procedures which allowed the pretrial detention of
defendants believed to be a danger to the community in
addition to a flight risk.
-----------------------------------------------------------

Financial releases took longer on average than 
non-financial releases

About half of all pretrial releases occurred within 1 day of
arrest, and about three-fourths within 1 week. Non-financial
releases (59%) were more likely to occur within a day of
arrest than financial releases (45%). For all release types,
more than 90% occurred within 1 month of arrest. Among
defendants released under financial conditions, the amount of
time from arrest to release increased with bail amounts,
ranging from a mean of 8 days for those with a bail amount of
less than $5,000 to 22 days for bail amounts of $50,000 or
more (not shown in table).

About a quarter of released defendants had failed to appear
in court during a prior case
 
A majority (61%) of the defendants released into the
community to await disposition of their case had been
arrested previously (table 3). This included 27% who had
failed to appear in court during a prior case. About half had
1 or more prior convictions (48%), and nearly a third (30%)
had at least one prior felony conviction. About 1 in 4
released defendants had an active criminal justice status
from a prior case at the time of their arrest. 

-----------------------------------------------------------
The role of pretrial services programs in the release process

According to a BJA nationwide study, about 300 pretrial
services programs were operating in the U.S. during
2001.***Footnote: John Clark and D. Alan Henry, Pretrial
Services Programming at the Start of the 21st Century: A
Survey of Pretrial Services Programs, Washington D.C.: Bureau
of Justice Assistance, July 2003 (NCJ 199773)***. More than
two-thirds of the programs had begun since 1980 and nearly
half since 1990. The programs operated in a variety of
administrative settings,  including probation offices,
courts, sheriffs' offices, independent agencies, and private
non-profit organizations.

Pretrial programs play an important role in the release
process. Standards published by the American Bar Association
and the National Association of Pretrial Services Agencies
have specified core functions a model pretrial program should
provide. 

Information gathering and assessment 

An important function of a pretrial program is to conduct a
pretrial investigation to assist judicial officers in making
release decisions. Prior to the initial court appearance, the
pretrial program gathers information about the defendant,
primarily through voluntary interviews and records checks.
Some defendants may not be eligible for pretrial release
because of the severity of the charged offense or an existing
criminal justice status such as parole, probation, or an
outstanding warrant.

Information collected from the pretrial investigation
typically includes:

*residency 
*employment status
*community ties
*criminal record
*court appearance record
*criminal justice status
*mental health status
*indications of substance abuse

Often a risk assessment tool is used to incorporate the
information from the pretrial investigation into a score that
guides the release decision. Periodic validation of the
instrument ensures that it provides an accurate, unbiased
measure of a defendant's potential for misconduct if
released. 

Supervision and follow-up 

Pretrial services programs provide supervision and monitoring
of a defendant's compliance with release conditions, such as
testing for drug or alcohol use and electronic monitoring of
defendants confined to a restricted area. These programs also
assist with locating and returning defendants who fail to
appear in court. Such assistance may include providing
information to law enforcement officials or working directly
with defendants to persuade them to return. 

Pretrial programs may regularly review the status of detained
defendants for changes in their eligibility for release and
facilitate their release where appropriate.
--------------------------------------------------------

Prior criminal activity was more prevalent among pretrial
detainees. About half had a criminal justice status at the
time of arrest. A large majority had prior arrests (83%) and
convictions (75%). More than half (57%) had a prior felony
conviction, including 15% with a conviction for a violent
felony. Nearly half (44%) had a prior failure to appear.     

Many factors influence the pretrial release decision

SCPS collects information on some of the factors courts
consider when making pretrial release decisions, such as
arrest offenses, criminal justice status, prior arrests,
prior court appearance record, and prior convictions. It does
not collect data on residency, employment status, community
ties, mental health status, or substance abuse history.
 
The unique contribution of the factors collected in SCPS to
the release decision can be assessed using logistic
regression techniques. Logistic regression produces nonlinear
estimations for each independent variable which can be
transformed into predicted probabilities (table 4). In the
case of pretrial release, the logistic regression analyses
yielded patterns similar to that of the bivariate results.
(See Methodology for more information on the logistic
regression techniques).

Murder defendants (19%) had the lowest probability of being
released, followed by those charged with robbery (44%),
burglary (49%), motor vehicle theft (49%), or rape (53%).
Defendants charged with fraud (82%) were the most likely to
be released. 

Male and Hispanic defendants less likely to be released than
females and whites

Female defendants (74%) were more likely than males (60%) to
be released pretrial. By race and Hispanic origin,
non-Hispanic whites (68%) had a higher probability of release
than Hispanics (55%). Pretrial detention rates for Hispanics
may have been influenced by the use of immigration holds to
detain those illegally in the U.S.

Defendants with a prior criminal record less likely to be
released than those without a prior arrest

Defendants on parole (26%) or probation (43%) at the time of
their arrest for the current offense were less likely to be
released than those without an active criminal justice status
(70%). Defendants who had a prior arrest, whether they had
previously failed to appear in court (50%) or not (59%), had
a lower probability of release than those without a prior
arrest (79%). 

Defendants with a prior conviction (51%, not shown in table)
had a lower probability of being released than those without
a conviction (77%). This was true even if the prior
convictions were for misdemeanors only (63%). The effect of a
conviction record on release was more pronounced if the
defendant had at least one prior felony conviction (46%).

About 1 in 5 detained defendants eventually had their case
dismissed or were acquitted

Sixty percent of released defendants were eventually
convicted -- 46% of a felony and 14% of a misdemeanor (table
5). Conviction rates were higher for detained defendants,
with 78% convicted, including 69% of a felony. 

On average, released defendants waited nearly 3 times longer
than detainees for case adjudication 

Released defendants waited a median of 127 days from time of
arrest until adjudication, nearly 3 times as long as those
who were detained (45 days). For those released, the average
time from release to adjudication was nearly 1 month longer
for those on financial release (125 days) than for those
released under non-financial conditions (101 days) (table 6).
By specific release type, defendants released on recognizance
had the shortest wait (98 days), while those released on
property bond had the longest (140 days). 

Incidents of pretrial misconduct increased with length of
time in release status

The number of defendants charged with pretrial misconduct
increased with the length of time spent in a release status.
About a third (32%) of failure-to-appear bench warrants were
issued within a month of release and about two-thirds (68%)
within 3 months. The pattern was similar for rearrests, with
29% occurring within 1 month of release and 62% within 3
months.

A third of released defendants were charged with pretrial
misconduct within 1 year after release

From 1990 through 2004, 33% of defendants were charged with
committing one or more types of misconduct after being
released but prior to the disposition of their case (figure
4). A bench warrant for failure to appear in court was issued
for 23% of released defendants. An estimated 17% were
arrested for a new offense, including 11% for a felony. 

Pretrial misconduct rates stable from 1990-2004

Overall misconduct rates varied only slightly from 1990
through 2004, ranging from a high of 35% to a low of 31%
(figure 5). For failure to appear, the range was from 21% to
24%, and the fugitive rate ranged from 5% to 8%. Overall
rearrest rates ranged from 13% to 21%, and felony rearrest
rates from 10% to 13%.

Pretrial misconduct rates highest for emergency releases

About half (52%) of the 1% of defendants released under an
emergency order to relieve jail crowding were charged with
some type of misconduct (table 7). Pretrial misconduct rates
for other types of releases ranged from 27% to 36%. 

After emergency release (45%), the highest failure-to-appear
rate was for defendants released on unsecured bond (30%).
Property bond (14%), which also accounted for just 1% of
releases, had the lowest failure-to-appear rate followed by
surety bond (18%). 

About 1 in 4 defendants who failed to appear in court were
fugitives at end of a 1-year study period

By type of release, the percent of the defendants who were
fugitives after 1 year ranged from 10% for unsecured bond
releases to 3% of those released on surety bond. 

Overall, 28% of the defendants who failed to appear in court
and had a bench warrant issued for their arrest were still
fugitives at the end of a 1-year study period. This was 6% of
all defendants released pretrial (not shown in table).
Compared to the overall average, the percentage of absconded
defendants who remained a fugitive was lower for surety bond
releases (19%).

Likelihood of pretrial misconduct lower for defendants
released after being charged with murder or rape

Defendants released after being charged with murder (19%) or
rape (18%) had misconduct rates that were about half that for
defendants charged with motor vehicle theft (39%), drug
trafficking (39%), or burglary (37%).
 
Younger, male, black, and Hispanic defendants more likely to
be charged with pretrial misconduct 

Released defendants age 20 or younger (33%) had higher
misconduct rates than those age 40 or older (28%). This
pattern also existed for rearrest and failure-to-appear
rates. Male defendants (34%) had a higher misconduct rate
than females (28%). Black (36%) and Hispanic (34%) defendants
had a higher misconduct rate than whites (28%). 

Prior criminal activity associated with greater        
probability of pretrial misconduct 

Defendants who had an active criminal justice status at the
time of arrest -- such as pretrial release (48%), parole
(47%), or probation (44%) -- had a higher misconduct rate than
those who were not on a criminal justice status (27%). This
difference was observed for both failure to appear and
rearrest. 

Defendants with a prior failure to appear (49%) had a higher
misconduct rate than defendants who had previously made all
court appearances (30%) or had never been arrested (23%).
Defendants with a prior failure to appear (35%) were about
twice as likely to have a bench warrant issued for failing to
appear during the current case than other defendants (18%). 

Defendants with at least one prior felony conviction (43%)
had a higher rate of pretrial misconduct than defendants with
misdemeanor convictions only (34%) or no prior convictions
(27%).
-------------------------------------------------------- 

Logistic regression analysis of pretrial misconduct

Logistic regression was used to assess the impact of given
characteristics independent of other factors on the
probability of a released defendant being charged with
pretrial misconduct. The predicted probabilities generated
from these analyses are presented in the adjacent table. (See
Methodology for more information on logistic regression).

Type of release

Predicted overall misconduct rates were higher for unsecured
bond (42%) and emergency (56%) releases. This was also the
case for rearrest and failure to appear rates. Property
(17%), surety (20%), deposit (20%), and full cash (20%) bonds
all had lower predicted failure-to-appear rates than
recognizance (24%). The percent of released defendants
predicted to be fugitives after 1 year was lowest for
property (3%) and surety bonds (4%). Emergency release and
property bonds each accounted for 1% of all releases,
compared to about 30% each for surety bonds and recognizance.
(See table 7 for the number of defendants accounted for by
each type of pretrial release).

Arrest offense

Drug trafficking defendants (38%) had higher predicted rates
of overall misconduct, rearrest and failure-to-appear than
defendants charged with murder (19%), rape (21%), assault
(26%), fraud (29%), or a weapons offense (31%). 

Demographic characteristics

Defendants age 20 or younger (39%) had a higher predicted
misconduct rate than those ages 21 to 39 (35%) 
or age 40 or older (30%). This pattern held for rearrest, 
but for court appearance record only defendants age 40 
or older were predicted to perform better than those under
age 21.

Male defendants (35%) were predicted to have a higher
misconduct rate than females (32%). Hispanic (37%) and black
(36%) defendants were predicted to be charged with misconduct
more often than whites (32%). This difference also existed
for failure to appear, but not rearrest.

Criminal history

Defendants with an active criminal justice status at the time
of arrest, such as parole (42%), probation (39%), or pretrial
release (42%), had higher predicted misconduct rates than
those without such a status (33%). This difference was
observed for both failure to appear and rearrest. 

Compared to those without prior arrests (29%), defendants
with an arrest record were predicted to be charged with
misconduct more often, especially if they had previously
failed to appear in court (47%). This pattern was observed
for both failure to appear and rearrest. Defendants with
prior felony convictions (39%) had a higher predicted
misconduct rate than other defendants (33%). This pattern
also existed for rearrest, but not failure to appear.
-------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Data utilized

This report analyzed data from the State Court Processing
Statistics (SCPS) series, covering felony cases filed in May
of even-numbered years from 1990 through 2004. SCPS is a
biennial data collection series that examines felony cases
processed in a sample of 40 of the Nation's 75 most populous
counties. The counties included in the sample have varied
over time to account for changing national population
patterns. For a year-by-year summary of the counties
participating in SCPS, see Appendix table 1. For more
information on the SCPS methodology see the BJS report Felony
Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2002 at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fdluc02.htm>.

Each SCPS data collection tracks approximately 15,000 felony
cases for up to one year, with the exception of murder
defendants who are followed for up to two years. In addition
to defendant demographic characteristics and criminal
history, SCPS also obtains data on a variety of felony case
processing factors, including the types of arrest charges
filed, conditions of pretrial release such as bail amount and
type of release, and instances of pretrial misconduct
including failure to appear in court, rearrest while on
pretrial release, and other violations that resulted in the
revocation of release. Adjudication and sentencing outcomes
are also recorded. 

Using multivariate statistical techniques 

This report analyzes pretrial release and misconduct through
both bivariate and multivariate statistical techniques. While
the bivariate statistics provide a descriptive overview of
pretrial release and misconduct among felony defendants in
the 75 most populous counties, multivariate analysis can help
disentangle the impacts that independent variables such as
demographic characteristics, prior criminal history, severity
of arrest charges, and release type have on dependent
variables such as the probability of pretrial release and
misconduct. Logistic regression models were used to estimate
the probability of pretrial release and misconduct. This is
one widely accepted method for analyzing the effects of
multiple independent factors on dichotomous or binomial
outcomes. 

The regression analyses excluded data from 1990 because of
the large number of cases missing data on race or Hispanic
origin. The regression models also excluded cases that had
missing data on either the independent or dependent
variables. This resulted in reductions in the number of cases
analyzed. From 1992 through 2004, 99,899 felony defendants
were either released or detained, but when missing data were
excluded from the regression models, the number of cases
analyzed declined to 71,027. 

To determine the impact of missing data, logistic regression
models excluded certain independent factors to increase the
number of analyzed cases. Since the results from these
analyses did not differ appreciably from the full model,
missing data did not affect the results. 

SCPS data are drawn from a sample and weighted to represent
cases processed in the 75 most populous counties during the
month of May. When the regressions used these weighted data,
the large number of weighted cases resulted in statistical
significance for nearly all the variables in the model.
Effect weighting was employed to address this issue. Through
effect weighting, the SCPS data were weighted to the number
of cases actually sampled rather than the number of cases in
the universe represented by the sample.

Generalized estimating equation techniques

One primary assumption of binary logistic regression is that
all observations in the dataset are independent. This
assumption is not necessarily appropriate for the SCPS series
because the data are collected on a county basis. The
county-based nature of SCPS creates a presumption of
clustered data. In clustered datasets, "the data can be
grouped into natural or imposed clusters with observations in
the same clusters tending to be more alike than observations
in different clusters."*** Footnote: Paul D. Allison, 2001.
Logistic Regression Using the SAS System: Theory and
Application, Cary, N.C.: SAS Institute Inc., page 179***. The
clustered nature of the SCPS data was handled by utilizing
generalized estimating equation (GEE) techniques. Logistic
regression modeling with generalized estimating equation
(GEE) techniques provides for more efficient computation of
regression coefficients and more robust standard error
estimates.

Interpreting logistic regression probabilities

Logistic regression produces nonlinear estimations for each
independent variable that can be difficult to interpret. In
this report, the logistic regression coefficients are made
interpretable by transforming them into predicted
probabilities (see table 4 and box on page 10). The predicted
probabilities were calculated by setting all independent
variables to their mean levels, setting the independent
variable of interest to a value of one, multiplying the means
of each independent variable by their respective logistic
regression parameter estimates, taking the exponential
function of the summed product of means and parameter
estimates, and then calculating the probability of that
exponential function. 

Limitations of models

The logistic regression analyses were limited and intended to
reflect the effects of only selected factors that were
available in the SCPS data. Other factors could potentially
be related to pretrial release and misconduct. Examples of
these include: defendants' residence, employment status,
community ties, mental health status, and substance abuse. If
data on these variables were available, the logistic
regression results could be altered.

Additional sources on bail and pretrial release include:

Demuth, Stephen. 2003. "Racial and Ethnic Differences in
Pretrial Release Outcomes: A Comparison of Hispanic, Black,
and White Felony Arrestees." Criminology: 41(3): 873.

Feeley, Malcolm M., 1983. "Court Reform on Trial: Why Simple
Solutions Fail." New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc., pp. 40-79.

Goldkamp, John. 1985. "Danger and Detention: A Second
Generation of Bail Reform." Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology: 76:1.

Helland, Eric and Alexander Tabarrok, 2004. "Public versus
Private Law Enforcement: Evidence from Bail Jumping." Journal
of Law and Economics: (47): pp. 93-122.

Kennedy, Spurgeon and D. Alan Henry. 1996. Commercial Surety
Bail: Assessing Its Role in the Pretrial Release and
Detention Decision
<http://www.pretrial.org/publications.html>.

Watson, Jerry W. and L. Jay Labe, 2001. "Bail Bonds". The Law
of Miscellaneous and Commercial Surety Bonds, Chicago, IL:
American Bar Association, pp. 127-142.

-----------------------------------------------------------
     
-----------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is the
director.

This Special Report was written by Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D.,
and Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D. William J. Sabol, Ph.D. provided
technical assistance. Tracey Kyckelhahn provided
verification. Tina Dorsey produced and edited the report,
under the supervision of Doris J. James. Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for final printing.

November 2007, NCJ 214994

-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables  are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/prfdsc.htm>.

-----------------------------------------------------------
 

End of file
11/19/2007 JR
