U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Reporting Crime to the Police, 1992-2001


March 2003, NCJ 195710


-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tales.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/rcp00.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------

By Timothy C. Hart
and Callie Rennison, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

------------------------------------
Highlights

Reporting to the police of violent crime increased from an 
annual average of 43%, 1992-99, to 49% in 2000

*  In 2000, 39% of the 25.4 million violent and property
crimes were reported to the police according to  the National
Crime Victimization Survey. Violent crimes were reported at
a higher percentage than property crimes.  
  
*  Violence against females was more likely to be reported
than violence against males.  Higher percentages of violence
against older persons than younger persons were reported
to law enforcement. 

*  Overall violent crime was more likely to be reported to the
police if the victim perceived that the offender was under the
influence of drugs/alcohol.

*  When violent crime was committed by an armed offender,
it was more likely to be reported to the police. 

*  A higher percentage of violence in which the victim was
injured was reported to the police.  Ninety percent of violence
in which the victim was shot was reported to the police.  

*  Overall violent crime committed by strangers was reported
to police at a higher percentage than was violent crime
committed by nonstrangers.

*  Robbery was less likely to have been reported to the police
when the victim  thought the offender was a gang member
(46% for gang members and 59% for nongang members).

*  Violent crime was most often reported in an effort to
"prevent future violence,” “stop the offender," or to "protect
others."  

*  Violent crime was most often not reported to police
because it was deemed a "private/personal matter," was
considered "small/no loss," or because it was reported to
another official." 
------------------------------------

In 2000 about half the violent crimes -- rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and simple and aggravated assault -- committed
against persons age 12 or older were reported to the police,
according to the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS).  About a third of both property crimes -- burglary,
motor vehicle theft, and property theft -- and pocket pickings
or purse snatchings were also reported.  Thirty-nine percent
of the 25.4 million crimes estimated from victims' survey
responses were reported to law enforcement authorities.  
  
On average from 1992 through 2000, 57% of robberies and 55% of
aggravated assaults were reported to police.  Thirty-one percent 
of rapes/sexual assaults were brought to the attention of 
the police.

Overall violent crimes, rapes/sexual assaults, simple
assaults, and serious violent crimes were reported to the
police in higher percentages for 2000 than for the period
1992 through 1999. 
 
The reporting to police of violent crime victimizations overall
increased from an annual average 43%, 1992-99, to 49% for
2000.  The reporting of simple assaults increased from 37%
to 44%.

Data and definitions 

The NCVS collects data on nonfatal crimes against persons age 
12 or older, reported and not reported to the police, from a 
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. Because 
NCVS interviews persons about their victimizations, murder and
manslaughter cannot be included in NCVS estimates.

Overall violent victimization refers to rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault taken as a
whole.  Serious violent victimization refers to overall violent
crime without simple assault. Property crimes include household 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft.

Reporting crime to the police is often characterized and
thought of as an action of the victim of the crime. However,
violent crimes can come to the attention of police through
persons other than the victim.  Witnesses, relatives,
neighbors, or other household members can report crimes to
the police.  Any one of these people could have been the
source of information of reported crimes, unless otherwise
specified.  (See Third Party Involvement in Violent Crime,
1993-99, BJS Special Report, NCJ 189100.)

Reporting crime to the police, 2000

In 2000, 39% of the approximately 25.4 million violent and
property victimizations against persons age 12 or older were
reported to the police according to the NCVS.  Violent crime
was reported to the police at a higher percentage than
personal theft (pocket picking and purse snatching) and
property crime (49%, 36%, and 36% respectively). 

During 2000 robbery (60%) and aggravated assault (58%)
were reported to the police at percentages higher than
simple assault (44%).  Robbery was reported to the police at
percentages somewhat higher than rape/sexual assault
(48%).  Other apparent differences between the percentage
of rape/ sexual assault and other violent crimes reported to
the police were not statistically significant. (See the
discussion of significance, especially as it pertains to the
NCVS, in Criminal Victimization 2001: Changes 2000-01 with
Trends 1993-2001, NCJ 194610.)

-------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization Survey 

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source of information on
the frequency, characteristics, and consequences of criminal
victimization.  One of the largest continuous household
surveys conducted by the Federal Government, the NCVS
collects information about crimes both reported and not
reported to police.  The survey provides the largest national
forum for victims to describe their experiences of
victimization, the impact of crime, and the characteristics 
of violent offenders.

For the most current estimates of criminal victimization in 
the United States, see Criminal Victimization 2001: Changes
2000-01 with Trends 1993-2001 (NCJ 194610).
-------------------------------------

Motor vehicle theft (81%) was reported to the police at a
higher percentage than burglary (53%) and theft (29%). 
Burglary was reported to the police at a higher percentage
than theft during 2000.

------------------------------------
The victim reported about half of all violence known to
the police, 1992-2000
                                   
When the police learn about violent crimes, the knowledge
comes from a variety of sources.  Victims were more often
the source of reports to the police for rapes, sexual assaults,
and robberies, than for aggravated assaults. "Someone else," 
such as a bystander, a relative, or an acquaintance, informed 
the police in about a fifth of the aggravated assaults
and serious violent crimes.  Officials other than law
enforcement personnel, such as persons in authority at a
hospital or school, reported about 9% of the violence that
came to the attention of the police. 
------------------------------------

Victim characteristics and type of crime, 
1992-2000

Serious violent crime (53%), which excludes the verbal
threats and minor injuries (such as cuts and bruises) of
simple assault, was reported to the police at a higher
percentage than overall violent crime (43%).  Robbery (57%)
and aggravated assault (55%) were reported to the police at
higher percentages than simple assault (38%) and
rape/sexual assault (31%).

Gender of victim  Overall violence, robbery, aggravated
assault, simple assault, and serious violent crimes were
more likely to be reported to the police when the victim was
female.  Apparent differences in percentages of reporting of
rape/sexual assault for male and female victims were not
statistically significant.  

Race of victim  Overall violence against black victims (49%)
was reported at a significantly higher percentage than
violence against white victims (42%) and at a somewhat
higher percentage than violence against Asian victims (40%). 

Serious violent crime and aggravated assault against
blacks was reported in higher percentages than
comparable crimes against whites. Regardless of the type
of victimization, apparent differences in reporting
percentages among American Indians and all other racial
groups were not significant.

Hispanic origin of victim  Robbery of non-Hispanic victims
(58%) was reported to the police at a higher percentage than
robbery of Hispanics (48%).

Age of victim  The specific relationship between victims'
ages and the percentages of crime reported to the police
varied by the type of crime. For violent crime overall, 
adults were more likely than teenagers to have experienced 
crimes reported to the police.

Annual household income of victim  The relationship
between annual household income and the percentage of
violence reported to the police varied by the type of crime. 
In general, percentages of violence and simple assault
reported to police declined as victims’ annual household
incomes increased.

With one exception, reporting aggravated assault to the
police did not differ based on the victim’s annual household
income.  Victims in households with annual incomes of less
than $7,500 were slightly more likely to report aggravated
assaults than those in households with incomes between
$50,000 and $74,999.
  
Among the categories of annual household income considered, 
there were no differences in the percentages of rape/sexual 
assault, robbery, or serious violent crime reported to the 
police.

Marital status of victim  Overall violence, robbery,
aggravated assault, simple assault, and serious violent crime
against those who never married was reported to the police
at lower percentages than for such crimes against married
persons.

Residence of victim  Regardless of the type of violence, the
percentage of violence reported to the police did not differ
based on where the victim lived, with one exception.  A
higher percentage of overall violent crime against urban
residents (45%) was reported to the police than similar
crimes against suburbanites (42%).  

Injuries and treatment of victims, 
1992-2000

Crimes resulting in injuries are more likely to be reported to
police.  Fifty-six percent of victimizations in which the victim
was injured, compared to 40% of violence in which the victim
emerged uninjured, were reported to the police.  

Seventy-five percent of all violent victimizations in which the
victim was seriously injured and 90% of violence in which the
victim sustained a gunshot wound were reported to the police, 
1992-2000. 

All victims of completed rape are considered injured by NCVS 
definition. Thirty-two percent of victimizations in which
the victim was raped/sexually assaulted without additional
injury were reported to the police.  

Victimizations in which victims received treatment for their
injuries were reported to the police in a higher percentage
(70%) than those instances when treatment was not received
(46%).

Offender characteristics and type of crime, 
1992-2000   

As with victims, characteristics of the offender were related
to the likelihood that a violent victimization was reported to
the police. 

Gender of offender  Regardless of the type of crime
examined, the percentage of violent crime reported to the
police did not differ when the offender was male or female. 

Race of offender Higher percentages of overall violent
crime and serious violent crime were reported to police when
the crimes were committed by black offenders than by white
offenders.  Somewhat higher percentages of aggravated
assault were reported to police when committed by black
offenders than by white offenders.

Age of offender In general the younger the offender, the
lower the percentage of crime reported to police.  For
example, robbery, simple assault, and serious violent crime
committed by offenders age 12-14 were reported to police in
smaller percentages than similar crimes committed by older
offenders.  

Number of offenders  A significantly higher percentage of
violence was reported to the police when it was committed by
more than a single offender.  For example, 55% of overall
violence was reported to the police when committed by 2
offenders, compared to 42% committed by a single offender. 

Victim-offender relationship  With two exceptions, there
was no difference in the percentage of violence reported to
the police when committed by persons known to the victims
and when committed by strangers.  The two exceptions were
overall violent crime and rape/sexual assault.  When
committed by a stranger, the percentage reported to police
was higher for both types of crime.  For every type of
violence except rape/sexual assault, a higher percentage of
victimization by an intimate than by a friend/acquaintance
was reported to the police.

-----------------------------------------
National crime measures 

National measures of crime come from two sources of data:
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) and the
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR).  The UCR program collects
information on crimes and arrests reported by law
enforcement authorities to the FBI.

The figure, using data from <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
glance/cv2.htm>, shows that about half of all serious violent
crime is reported to police.  The three lines in the chart are
described below:

Total serious violent crime

The number of homicides recorded by police plus the number 
of rapes, robberies, and aggravated assaults from the 
victimization survey whether or not they were reported to
the police. 

Victimizations reported to police 

The number of homicides recorded by police plus the number 
of rapes, robberies, and aggravated assaults from the 
victimization survey that victims said were reported to the
police. 

Crimes recorded by police 

The number of homicides, forcible rapes, robberies, and
aggravated assaults included in the Uniform Crime Reports
of the FBI excluding commercial robberies and crimes that
involved victims under age 12.

Serious violent crime includes rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, and homicide. (For related data about homicide
trends, see Homicide Trends in the United States: 2000
Update, January 2003, NCJ 197064.)  The redesign of the
NCVS was put into place in 1993; prior year data are
adjusted to make them comparable with data collected
afterwards.  Post-redesign data are denoted by the darker
segments of the graph lines.

For more information, see U.S. Department of Justice,  The
Nation's Two Crime Measures, a statement by BJS and the
FBI, NCJ 122705, August 2002 version; Effects of the
Redesign on Victimization Estimates, BJS Technical Report,
NCJ 164381, April 1997; and "True Crime Stories? Accounting 
for Differences in Our National Crime Indicators," Chance 
Magazine, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2002.
-------------------------------------------

Offender's gang membership  Except for robbery the percentage 
of violent crime reported to the police did not differ based 
on whether the victim perceived the offender(s) to be gang 
members.  The rate of reporting a robbery to the police was 
lower for crimes perceived to have been committed by gang 
members (46% for gang members and 59% for nongang members).

Offender's drug/alcohol use  For all crimes except
rape/sexual assault and robbery, violent crimes were
reported to the police in higher percentages when the victim
believed the offender was under the influence of drugs/
alcohol. 

Presence of weapons  Violent crimes committed by armed
offenders were more likely to be reported to the police across
all types of crimes.  For example, 56% of all violent crimes
committed with a weapon present compared to 38% of those
committed by an unarmed offender were reported to the
police.  

Similarly, 49% of all rapes/sexual assaults committed by an
armed offender compared to 28% of those committed by an
unarmed offender were reported to the police. 

Except for rape/sexual assaults,  violent crimes committed by
an offender armed with a firearm were more likely to be
reported to police than violence by an offender armed with a
knife.  Apparent differences in the percentages of rapes/
sexual assaults reported to the police when the offender was 
armed with a firearm versus a knife were not significant.

Reasons violence was and was not reported to the
police, 1992-2000

NCVS asks crime victims why they reported or did not report
the crime to law enforcement authorities.  

Reasons for reporting violence In general, the most common 
reason for reporting violence to the police was to "prevent 
future violence" (19%), to “stop the offender" (17%), or to 
"protect others" (9%).  The most common reason for reporting 
robbery to the police was to "recover property" (16%).  

Reasons for not reporting violence The most common reasons for 
not reporting violence to the police were because it was a 
"private/personal matter" (20%), because the violence was 
considered "small/no loss" (17%), or because it was "reported 
to some other official" (14%). 

Survey methodology 

The NCVS collects data on nonfatal crimes against persons
age 12 or older, reported and not reported to the police, from
a nationally representative sample of households in the
United States.  Between 1992 and 2000 approximately 464,740 
households and 872,320 individuals age 12 or older were 
interviewed.  For the NCVS data presented, response rates 
varied between 93% and 96% of eligible households, and between 
89% and 94% of eligible individuals.

For discussions of standard errors and trend analysis, see
Criminal Victimization 2001: Changes 2000-01 with Trends
1993-2001 (NCJ 194610).

Other NCVS reports

Rape and Sexual Assault: Reporting to Police and Medical
Attention, 1992-2000, BJS Selected Findings, NCJ 194530, 
8/02.

Criminal Victimization 2001: Changes 2000-01 with Trends
1993-2001, BJS Bulletin, NCJ 194610, 9/02.

Hispanic Victims of Violence, 1993-2000/Victimas Hispanas
de Crimenes Violentos, 1993-2000, BJS Special Report, NCJ
191208, 4/02

---------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice.  Lawrence A. 
Greenfeld is director.

Timothy C. Hart and Callie M. Rennison wrote this report
under the supervision of Michael Rand. Cathy Maston
provided statistical review.  Tom Hester produced and edited
the report.  Jayne Robinson administered final production.

March 2003, NCJ 195710
-----------------------------------

-----------------------------------
This report and additional data, analyses, and graphs about
criminal victimization in the United States are available on
the Internet at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

For questions or comments about this or any BJS report,
e-mail to ASKBJS@ojp.usdoj.gov.

Data presented in this report can be obtained from the
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University 
of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960.  The archive can also be
accessed through the BJS Web site.  When at the archive
site, search for dataset ICPSR 3140.
------------------------------

End of file
01/30/03 ih