U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Technical Brief

Reporting by Prosecutors' Offices of
Repositories of Criminal History Records


April 2005, NCJ 205334


---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/rporchr.htm
----------------------------------------------------------------

Prepared by Peter Brien
Bureau of Justice Statistics

States maintained criminal history records on over 64
million individuals in 2001, but some of those records
had reduced usefulness because they were missing
crucial information. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
surveys find that in nearly every State, a proportion of
criminal history records lack a final disposition, which
indicates the outcome of an arrest. 

In the process that creates a criminal history record, 
the arresting agency, the prosecutor, the court, and the
correctional authority may provide the final disposition.
For this report, BJS examined whether State court
prosecutors ensure record completeness by regularly
providing final disposition information (such as their
declinations to prosecute) to State repositories. 

In 2003 the American Prosecutors Research Institute
(APRI) conducted a survey for BJS of chief prosecutors.
The survey was mailed to a representative sample of
308 State prosecutors. Of these, 141 (46%) responded.
The findings reported here are not statistically
representative of State prosecutors nationwide.

BJS' statutory mandate includes the responsibility to
provide for research and improvements in the completeness 
of criminal history record information and information 
systems. In response to this mandate, BJS commissioned 
APRI to accomplish two tasks: 

*  Assess the degree to which State court prosecutors
transmit final case dispositions to State repositories
*  Identify reasons why prosecutors do not transmit 
final dispositions.

Half of prosecutors report 
disposition information

Forty-seven percent of the 141 responding State court
prosecutors indicated that they regularly submit final
disposition information to a Federal, State, or local
agency maintaining criminal history records.

When prosecutors were asked to identify the reasons
why they did not provide final disposition information,
86% stated that another agency in the jurisdiction was
responsible for submitting the information. 

Additional reasons explained why prosecutors did not
report dispositions; however, none was dominant.
Approximately 10% of prosecutors indicated that a lack
of resources prevented them from providing disposition
information to the repository. Other reasons included
poor enforcement of disposition reporting requirements
(4%), unfamiliarity with the disposition reporting 
process (3%), State or local authorities have directed 
the prosecutors not to submit disposition information 
(3%), and the requirement that "cold" case files remain 
open indefinitely (3%). Prosecutors were allowed to select
more than one reason for not providing final dispositions
to State repositories.

Dispositions reported to many agencies

Although State repositories are most frequently the 
recipients of final dispositions from prosecutors, they 
are not the only recipients. In 2003 nearly 3 in 4 
prosecutors reported that they provide final case 
disposition information to the State's criminal history 
repository; nearly 2 in 4 prosecutors provide it to State 
or local police departments; 1 in 4 prosecutors provide 
it to local or county criminal history repositories; and 
1 in 6 provide it to the FBI.

Prosecutors more likely to report 
felony cases than misdemeanors

The type of case disposition reported most frequently to
the repository was a felony conviction (81% of respond-
ents), followed by a declination to prosecute (80%), the
dismissal of charges (76%), a felony acquittal (74%),
and a guilty plea (72%). When prosecutors report final
disposition information to repositories, half of them
report misdemeanor convictions, misdemeanor acquittals, 
or indictments.

Approximately a quarter of prosecutors who report final
dispositions provide information on parole or probation
violations, arrests, arrest warrants, court determinations
of mental status, commitments to a mental institution by
a court, imposition of protection orders, or requirements
for sex offender registration.

Declinations to prosecute take 20 
days on average to reach repositories

Prosecutors were asked about the amount of time between 
when the office learns of a case declination and the 
submission of the declination information to the State 
repository. According to responding prosecutors,
declinations took 20 days on average to be submitted to
the repository; however, some prosecutors transmitted
electronically in real time and others took a year to
transmit.

The most significant factor affecting the timely
transmission of declination information to the repository
is the volume of work confronting State court prosecutors. 
More than 4 out of 5 prosecutors cited a heavy workload 
as the primary impediment to reporting declinations. 
Forty percent of prosecutors cited the lack of adequate 
human resources, and 20% of prosecutors identified the 
lack of technology as impediments. Prosecutors were 
allowed to select more than one factor for not providing 
declinations to State repositories.

Most prosecutors (62%) reported that their office did not
audit the accuracy and completeness of case declination 
information sent to the repository. Eleven percent of 
prosecutors checked for accuracy and completeness on a 
regular basis, and 26% conducted audits as time and 
resources permitted.
 
Prosecutors reported that the transmission of declinations 
is generally handled by mailing or faxing paper records to 
the repository, rather than using electronic mail or the 
Internet. Just over 70% of the responding prosecutors 
relied on mail or fax to report declinations. E-mail or 
the Internet was used at about half that rate (by 38% of 
responding prosecutors). Other methods of transmission 
included metal tape (6%) and telephone (2%). 

For those State court prosecutors who regularly reported
their declinations to prosecute to criminal history
repositories, 35% reported them on a daily basis, 18%
reported weekly, 16% reported monthly, and 2% reported 
declinations annually. Nearly 30% of reporting prosecutors 
had no established time interval for reporting declinations 
and indicated that the information is provided as needed 
or as time permits.

Fewer than 1 in 5 prosecutors received formal training
from the FBI or other law enforcement agencies
regarding the submission of declination information to
criminal history repositories. Most prosecutors (53%)
received no training at all on this subject.

Other actions by prosecutors 
contribute to missing dispositions

APRI examined three events which may increase the
likelihood of a criminal charge being recorded without 
a final disposition recorded with it: cases may be
consolidated with other cases, pleas may cause certain
charges to be dropped, and cases may be placed on
hold until the prosecutor accumulates more compelling
evidence.

Case consolidations largely unreported 
to repositories

Criminal records may feature criminal charges that have
no dispositions attached because the charge was part of
one case that was consolidated into another case. When 
prosecutors consolidate charges from several cases into 
a single case, nearly all prosecutors (92%) report this 
consolidation to the courts, but only 40% report it to 
the criminal history repository.

Almost two-thirds of plea negotiation 
results reported to repositories

Criminal records may contain charges that lack
dispositions because the charge was eventually dropped
as part of a plea negotiation between the defendant and
the prosecutor. When plea negotiations result in charges
being disposed of, 85% of prosecutors report that the
charges were disposed of to the courts and 63% report
it to the repository.

Less than half the cases closed as 
"cold" reported to repositories

Criminal records may contain an arrest that has no
disposition because the case has become "cold" or
dormant due to insufficient evidence, unavailability 
of witnesses, or other reasons. Three-fourths of the
responding prosecutors have deferred the prosecution
of a case while awaiting the availability of evidence 
or witnesses. Nearly half of prosecutors operate under
procedures that may consider a "cold" case to be closed
under certain circumstances. When it is decided that a
cold case is officially closed, 28% of prosecutors report
this information to the court and 44% report it to the
repository.

Methodology

This brief summarizes the results of work performed
under BJS Cooperative Agreement 2002-RB-CX-K001
by the American Prosecutors Research Institute (APRI).
The findings and conclusions from this research do not
necessarily reflect the views and policies of BJS or 
the Department of Justice.

APRI administered questionnaires in May 2003 to a
nationally representative sample of 308 chief litigating
prosecutors in State court systems. Data collection
concluded in July 2003. APRI utilized a sampling frame
devised by BJS for the 1996 National Survey of
Prosecutors. A chief litigating prosecutor is an official,
usually locally elected and typically with the title of
district attorney or county attorney, who is in charge of
a prosecutorial district made up of one or more counties,
and who conducts or supervises the prosecution of felony 
cases in a State court system. Prosecutors in courts of 
limited jurisdiction, such as municipal prosecutors, were 
not included in the survey. 

Sample

APRI received 141 surveys from chief prosecutors'
offices for a response rate of 46%. The average
population of the jurisdictions represented by the
responding prosecutors was 782,344. The responding
chief prosecutors' offices averaged 73 full time
prosecutors, 4 part-time prosecutors, 18 full time
investigators, 83 other full time staff, and 6 part-time
staff. Chief prosecutors offices in the West contributed
23% of the completed surveys, the Midwest 24%, the
South 29%, and the East 24%.


End of file
04/26/05 ih



