U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

State Court Organization, 1987-2004

October 2007, NCJ 217996

----------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sco8704.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sco
-----------------------------------------------------------

Lynn Langton
Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

-----------------------------------------------------------

From 1987 to 2004, state courts nationwide experienced a
variety of structural and staffing changes, ranging from
increased judicial staffing levels to consolidated court
administration. These changes can be partially attributed to
growing caseload pressures at the trial and appellate court
levels. Over the 18-year period, total non-traffic case
filings in state appellate and trial courts increased by
almost 45%, from approximately 31.3 million in 1987 to 45.2
million in 2004.

In addition to caseload pressures, growing numbers of state
courts sought to consolidate and professionalize court
systems that were highly fragmented. In terms of organization
and structure, many state court systems traditionally had
multiple trial courts which evolved as local institutions at
the county or municipal level. Administratively, funding and
rule-making authority were either split between state and
local governments or fully assumed at the local level. 

The court reform movement, initiated early in the Twentieth
Century, was aimed at reducing the fragmentation and
disparity inherent in many state court systems. The movement
focused on consolidating state trial courts, creating
state-centralized court administrations for budgetary and
regulatory purposes, and increasing professionalism among
court judicial, clerical, and administrative staff.
***Footnote 1: Baum, Lawrence (2001), American Courts: Process
and Policy, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.***

These efforts produced gradual and modest changes in state
courts nationwide. By 2004, 10 states had consolidated their
court systems by merging general and limited jurisdiction
trial courts. Some of the responsibility for trial court
expenses was also shifted from the county to the state.

Since 1987 state courts have also become increasingly
professionalized. Over half of all states have mandated that
their trial court judges hold law degrees and take judicial
education classes during their time of service on the bench.

Some states have sought to professionalize the judicial
selection process by moving away from party-driven elections.
By 2004 four states at the appellate level and three states
at the trial court level were no longer using partisan
elections to retain judges.

Increasing difficulties with obtaining qualified jury pools
have also resulted in changes in state court regulations.
During the 18-year period, the number of states allowing jury
duty exemptions for professional, clerical, or governmental
reasons decreased by 12.

State court organization trend data examined

From 1987 to 2004, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and
the National Center for State Courts released four
comprehensive reports, State Court Organization, 1987, 1993,
1998, and 2004. These reports examined the organization and
operations of state court systems in all 50 states. ***Foot
note 2: BJS and the National Center for State Courts also
produced a State Court Organization report in 1980. Due to
changes in the data collection methodology, the 1980 data
were not included this report. Information on obtaining the
full text of each of the reports is available at <http://
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sco04.htm>.***
 They included within-year, state-level data, such as court
types in a state, jurisdictional levels of state courts,
number of judges and support staff, use of expedited
appellate procedures, funding sources, jury regulations,
judicial education standards, and procedures for selecting
judges.***Footnote 3: Throughout the report, the term "judge"
is used to encompass all judicial officers.***

These prior reports on state court organization do not
individually provide information on how state court systems
have changed over time. This report combines State Court
Organization data collected from 1987 to 2004 to examine
change and stability in state court systems on a national
level. It explores the major issues related to state court
organization, including growing caseloads, court
consolidation, increasing professionalism, the role of
politics in the selection of judges, and the need for
obtaining qualified jurors.

Caseloads increased in state court systems nationwide

State courts nationwide experienced increased caseloads over
the 18-year period.***Footnote 4: All caseload data were
provided by the National Center for State Courts, Courts
Statistics Project.*** Total trial court case filings
increased by approximately 45% in limited jurisdiction courts
and 43% in general jurisdiction courts (table 1). (See
adjacent box for definitions.) In limited jurisdiction
courts, domestic relations case filings nearly doubled from
1987 to 2004 while in general jurisdiction trial courts, the
largest increase was in criminal case filings (67%). Case
filings also increased 32% in appellate courts over the
18-year period.

State court judges and support staff increased

From 1987 to 2004, courts adapted to growing caseload
pressures by increasing staffing levels. State trial courts
increased judicial staffing by 11% overall, adding 2,600
judges in courts across the country (table 2). In
intermediate appellate courts, the number of judges grew by
25% or 195 judges. For courts of last resort, the number of
judges has remained relatively stable.

--------------------------------------------------------
Jurisdictional levels of state courts

The organization of state courts varies widely, but each
system combines some or all of the following four
jurisdictional levels.

Courts of Last Resort (COLR) --

Courts with final authority over all appeals. These courts
exercise both mandatory and discretionary review. Most states
have only one COLR. The exceptions are Oklahoma and Texas
which have one COLR for civil cases and one for criminal
cases.

Intermediate Appellate Courts (IAC) --

Courts that hear appeals from general jurisdiction and
limited jurisdiction trial courts as well as administrative
agencies. These courts exercise both mandatory and
discretionary review, depending on the state.

General Jurisdiction Trial Courts --

Major trial courts hearing serious criminal or civil cases.
Cases are designated to general jurisdiction courts based on
the severity of punishment or the allegation/dollar value of
the case.

Limited Jurisdiction Trial Courts --

Trial courts with primary jurisdiction over lesser criminal
and civil manners, including misdemeanors, small claims,
traffic, parking, and infractions. These courts can also
handle the preliminary stages of felony cases.
--------------------------------------------------------

Similar increases occurred among support staff for judges in
state appellate courts. About 700 additional law clerks were
employed in intermediate appellate courts in 2004, an
increase of 55% from 1987. In courts of last resort, the
number of law clerks increased by 27%.


Ratio of judges per 100,000 persons dropped slightly 

Despite increases, the number of state court judges has not
kept up with population growth. From 1987 to 2004, the ratio
of trial judges to the population nationwide decreased
slightly from 10 to 9 judges per 100,000 persons.

Use of specialized jurisdiction courts expanded

Specialty jurisdiction or problem-solving courts, such as
drug, family, mental health, and domestic violence courts,
became more common over the 18-year period. States developed
and expanded the use of these courts to address the large
populations of specific types of offenders revolving through
the courts and correctional institutions. These specialty
courts were designed to couple case-specific treatment
services with the administration of justice.

The drug court movement in particular spread across the
country. In 1989 Florida established the very first drug
court in the country. By 2004 every state except South Dakota
had created a specialized drug court treatment program.

Majority of state appellate courts embraced expedited
procedures

From 1993 to 2004, the percentage of state appellate courts
using expedited procedures increased. The percentage of
states using expedited procedures in courts of last resort
rose from 38% to 82% (table 3). The percentage using
expedited procedures in intermediate appellate courts
increased from 37% to 85%. Expedited procedures include
pre-argument settlement conferences, expedited briefing
procedures, oral arguments in lieu of full written briefs,
fast tracking, and submission on briefs alone. 

------------------------------------------------------
Intermediate appellate courts established to alleviate
caseload burdens on courts of last resort

A century ago about a third of state court systems included
an intermediate appellate court (IAC). The majority of states
had only one appellate court known as the Court of Last
Resort (COLR). As state court caseloads increased, state
legislatures began establishing a system of intermediate
appellate review to reduce the burden on COLRs.***Pound, 
Roscoe (1940), Organization of Courts, Boston: Little,
Brown and Company***.
                 
Nationwide the largest increase in the establishment of IACs
occurred between 1972 and 1980. During that time, the number
of courts increased by nearly 50%. Even though no new IACs
were created from 1998 to 2004, the number of IAC judges
increased by an average of seven judges per year during this
period.
------------------------------------------------------


-------------------------------------------------------
Illinois and New York: opposite ends of trial court
unification 
 
In 1964 Illinois was the first state court system to become
unified. All trial courts in Illinois were consolidated into
a unified circuit court with one chief judge overseeing the
operations and procedures in each division. In 2004 Illinois'
state court system included 1 court of last resort, 1
intermediate appellate court divided into 5 districts, and 1
court of general jurisdiction sectioned into 22 trial court
divisions. From 1987 to 2004 most trial court expenses in
Illinois were funded entirely at the state level. Counties
were responsible for funding at least part of the operating
and property expenses associated with the courthouse
buildings in their jurisdictions.

In contrast, New York's state court system in 2004 included 1
court of last resort, 2 intermediate appellate courts, 2
types of general jurisdiction trial courts divided into 69
divisions, and 8 types of limited jurisdiction trial courts
separated into 1,695 divisions. In New York's numerous Town
and Village Justice Courts most expenses, including salaries,
travel, building, and property expenses, were funded at the
county level.
------------------------------------------------------

Few states adopted unified court systems

The majority of state court systems remained nonunified from
1987 to 2004. The most substantial increase in state court
unification occurred during the mid-1990s when the number of
states with a unified court system rose from four to nine. By
2004, 10 states had court systems classified as unified:
California, Connecticut, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota,
Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.
***Footnote 5: No state court system actually meets all of 
the criteria for total unification. In some of the 10 states,
unification refers to consolidated trial courts while in
others it refers to centralized administration or funding.
States self-designated their court systems as unified or not
unified***.

Trial courts and judges shifted from limited to general
jurisdiction

Technically, a unified state court system has no limited
jurisdiction courts, one type of general jurisdiction court
with few jurisdictional divisions, and all trial court judges
serving in a general jurisdictional capacity. A nationwide
movement towards unification would involve a decrease in the
total number of court types and judges classified as limited
rather than general jurisdiction.

From 1987 to 2004, the number of court types decreased, as
did the percentage of courts classified as limited rather
than general jurisdiction (table 4). While the total number
of trial court judges increased from 1987 to 2004, a greater
portion of this increase occurred in the general jurisdiction
courts. In 1987, 33% of the approximately 24,000 total trial
court judges served in general jurisdiction courts, compared
to 39% out of about 27,000 total trial court judges in 2004.

-------------------------------------------------------------

California adopts a statewide system

In 1998 California passed a constitutional amendment
(Proposition 220) allowing counties to voluntarily merge
their general and limited jurisdiction courts into a single
superior court. Proponents of California's Proposition 220
convincingly argued that court unification could save the
state millions of dollars annually, increase judicial
efficiency, and improve court administration and record
keeping. By 2001 California's trial courts were fully unified
with all 58 counties operating as a single, statewide court
system. The unification of California's court system resulted
in municipal court judges becoming superior court judges.
This shift was responsible for the majority of the nationwide
increase in the percentage of general compared to limited
jurisdiction judges from 1998 to 2004
-----------------------------------------------------------

States slow to fully fund trial courts 

Historically, state trial court budgets have been funded at
the local level or through some combination of state and
local support. From 1987 to 2004, the number of states fully
funding both general and limited jurisdiction trial court
expenses increased. The largest increase was in the number of
states funding general operating expenses in general
jurisdiction courts, which increased from 15 to 22 states 
(table 5).

More states required judges to have law degrees

Increasing professionalism in state courts is illustrated by
the greater percentage of trial courts that required judges
to hold a law degree in 2004 compared to 1987. The increase
in the percentage of trial courts requiring all judges to
have graduated law school and passed the state bar exam was
most pronounced in the limited jurisdiction trial courts. In
1987, 44% of these courts required judges to have a law
degree compared to 52% in 2004.

Judicial pre-bench and continuing education requirements more
common in 2004

An increasing number of states established pre-bench and
continuing education requirements for appellate and trial
court judges. These requirements refer to any training
courses, beyond general state bar membership requirements,
that are specifically mandated for judges before taking
office (pre-bench) or during their tenure (continuing
education). Judicial training typically covers topics such as
rules of evidence, criminal law and procedure, ethics,
judicial responsibilities, and court and trial management.

From 1993 to 2004, the number of states that instituted
pre-bench education requirements for appellate judges rose
from five to nine (table 6). For trial court judges, six
additional states at the limited jurisdiction level and seven
at the general jurisdiction level established pre-bench
education requirements during the 18-year period. The largest
increase in continuing education requirements was among the
appellate courts where 10 additional states began mandating
periodic training for judges already serving on the bench.

Use of active sentencing commissions fluctuated

State sentencing commissions are created by statute and have
authority to establish and review sentencing policies and
practices.***Footnote 6: Additional information on state
sentencing commissions is available at
<http://www.ussc.gov/STATES.htm>***. From 1987 to 2004 the
number of states with active sentencing commissions
fluctuated. At the lowest point, 15 states had active
sentencing commissions in 1987. The number peaked in 1993
when 25 states had these commissions.

Increased use of judicial nominating committees to select
judges 

Over the 18-year period, an increased number of states used
judicial nominating committees, or "merit selection," to
select judges. Judicial nominating committees are nonpartisan
groups of public officials, attorneys, and private citizens
tasked with developing a short list of qualified candidates
to fill an open judicial position. The judicial appointing
body must then select a judge from the list provided by the
committee.

By 2004, 36 states had incorporated judicial nominating
committees into the judicial selection process.

Large proportion of appellate and trial judges were appointed
to fill initial terms

From 1987 to 2004 over half of all states appointed appellate
judges to their initial full term on the bench (table 7).
Forty percent of states also appointed general jurisdiction
trial court judges.

-------------------------------------------------------------
                                          
Methods of judicial selection and retention

Methods of judicial selection vary from state to state and
can vary within a state from trial to appellate judges.
States have historically used one or more of the following
methods to select judges.

Appointment--

Judges can be appointed by the governor, the legislature, or
by the chief justice/judge of the court of last resort. In an
increasing number of states, a judicial nominating committee
provides the appointing body with a limited number of
judicial candidates from which to choose.

Partisan election --

The judge runs for office in a contested election with a
party's endorsement and name entered on the ballot. 

Nonpartisan election --

The judge runs in a contested election but no political party
is declared or entered on the ballot.

Retention election --

A judge who has been serving on the bench is entered on the
ballot at the end of the term. The judge does not face an
opponent and voters simply vote on whether the judge should
be retained in office. If a majority vote "yes," the judge is
retained.
------------------------------------------------------------

Majority of judges seeking to retain post had to run for
election

Approximately 38 states used an election, either partisan,
nonpartisan, or retention, to select appellate and trial
court judges for retention terms (table 8). Throughout the
18-year period, the most prominent form of election for
appellate judges appeared to be retention election. For trial
court judges, nonpartisan election was the leading method for
retention.

The greatest change in the process for retaining appellate
judges was the decline in the number of states using partisan
elections, from eight in 1987 to four in 2004. At the trial
court level, the number of states using partisan elections
decreased from 11 to 8, while the number using nonpartisan
elections for judicial retention increased from 16 to 20.

Majority of states continued to use a 12-person, unanimous
jury for felony trials

In the 1970s, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in two separate
cases that a jury could be comprised of as few as six jurors
without violating a defendant's right to a fair and impartial
jury.***Footnote 7: Williams v. Florida, 399 U.S. 78 (1970);
Colgrove v. Battin, 413 U.S. 149 (1973)***. The majority of
states permit less than a 12-member jury for misdemeanor
cases.***Footnote 8: Bureau of Justice Statistics, State Court
Organization, 2004 <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/sco04.pdf>***. However, the number
of states adhering to a 12-person jury requirement for all
felony cases in general jurisdiction trial courts remained
unchanged at 45 (table 9). Nearly all states from 1987 to
2004 required a unanimous jury decision in felony cases.

Fewer persons exempted from jury duty

Jury duty exemptions have historically been allowed for
professions, such as doctor, lawyer, elected official,
clergymen, and active military personnel. Exemptions were
also given for medical or child care reasons. To expand the
jury pool, 12 states eliminated exemptions from 1987 to 2004.
By 2004 less than half of the states acknowledged any grounds
for jury duty exemption.

------------------------------------------------------------
Judicial terms of office

The term of office for which a judge is being selected can
dictate the method of selection used. There are three main
judicial terms of office, but not all states have all three
terms.

Unexpired term --

When a judicial seat becomes vacant prior to the official end
of term, a replacement must be selected to serve the
remainder of the term. In almost all states that fill
unexpired terms, judges are appointed to the position. In
several states, the term ends when the judge departs the
bench, leaving no unexpired terms.

Initial/full term --

Depending on the state, a judge serves the first full term
either upon initial selection or upon retention following the
completion of an unexpired term. Judicial term lengths vary
from two years to life depending on the state and whether the
judge serves in an appellate or trial court.

Retention term --

Except in the three states appointing judges to serve until
age 70 or for life (Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode
Island), a judge must be retained on the bench at the end of
each full term. This can be done through either election or
appointment.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

BJS, in conjunction with the National Center for State Courts
(NCSC), has produced five State Court Organization reports,
covering the years 1980, 1987, 1993, 1998, and 2004. The
1987-2004 reports contain similar information and provide a
comprehensive picture of each state's court system. All four
reports include data on court system structure, number of
judges and support staff, judicial selection and service,
funding, jurisdiction of the courts, and jury trial
regulations.
 
For these reports, data were collected through several
surveys mailed to state court administrators in all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. One data
collection was an administrative survey that addressed
aspects of court organization and operation. A separate
survey was specifically designed to collect descriptive
information about the appellate courts. Most of the
information in the surveys was self-reported by each state
system. Researchers at the NCSC compiled the data on
statewide laws and legal procedure. After all of the tables
were completed, state court administrators verified that all
data for their state were accurate. 

This report uses the standardized 1987-2004 data to describe
the changes and consistencies in state courts over the
18-year period. It presents nationwide trend information on
the general areas covered by the four previous reports, as
well as state court caseload data collected through the
NCSC's annual companion series to State Court Organization,
State Court Caseload Statistics. The variables compiled for
the trend study reflect each of the sections in State Court
Organization and reference some of the long-standing issues
for state court systems. The District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico were excluded from this study.

The State Court Organization reports for 1998 and 2004 are
available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/courts.htm>. For
information on obtaining paper copies of any of the reports,
visit the BJS web site at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>.
Additional information and report links can be found on the
National Center for State Courts web site at
<http://www.ncsconline.org/index.html>.

The Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Science Research (ICPSR) also warehouses several datasets for
the individual 1998 and 2004 State Court Organization
reports. These datasets can be downloaded for an in-depth
nationwide analysis of state court organization for the
individual years 1998 and 2004. The ICPSR web site on State
Court Organization also contains the data collection surveys
mailed to the state court administrators and appellate court
clerks. The State Court Organization reports, datasets, and
data collection surveys can be accessed at the ICPSR web site
at <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/>.

-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site: <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sco8704.htm>. 

-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is the
director.

This Special Report was written by Lynn Langton and Thomas H.
Cohen, Ph.D., under the supervision of Steven K. Smith. The
multi-year dataset was compiled by Joanna S. Bradford, BJS
statistical assistant. Steven W. Perry and Tracey Kyckelhahn
verified the report. Neil LaFountain, William E. Raftery,
Richard Schauffler, and Shauna M. Strickland of the National
Center for State Courts Court Statistics provided comments,
and Shauna M. Strickland provided data assistance.

Joanna S. Bradford and Carolyn Williams produced and edited
the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared it for final
printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James.
October 2007, NCJ 217996

-------------------------------------------------------------




End of file
10/31/2007 RK