U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

State Court Processing of Domestic Violence Cases

February 2008, NCJ 214993

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available 
from: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/scpdvc.htm

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
By Erica L. Smith
Matthew R. Durose
and Patrick A. Langan, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians
-------------------------------------------------------------

In state courts of 15 large urban counties, 2,629 violent 
felony cases were filed in May 2002. In nearly 7 in 10 of 
these cases, sexual assault or aggravated assault was the 
most serious charge. A third of these felony sexual or 
aggravated assault charges were classified as domestic 
violence (DV); the remainder were classified as non-domestic 
violence (non-DV) charges. Domestic violence includes 
violence between family members, intimate partners, and 
household cohabitants.

The findings in this report are based on a study of DV cases 
in the 15 counties' state courts. The study was conducted by 
the Bureau of Justice Statistics to examine how domestic 
violence cases were handled by the justice system. Persons 
charged with domestic or non-domestic violence were tracked 
in court records from May 2002, when charges were filed, 
through final court disposition. The 15 counties in the study 
are located in 8 states.
   
State          County

Arizona        Pima
California     Alameda, Orange, Riverside, San Diego, 
            Santa Clara
Florida        Dade, Palm Beach, Pinellas
Georgia        Fulton
Indiana        Marion
Ohio      Franklin
Tennessee Shelby
Texas          El Paso, Travis


This study compared domestic and non-domestic sexual assault 
and domestic and non-domestic aggravated assault on 11 
prosecution, conviction, and sentencing outcome measures. On 
7 of the 11 measures, no differences were found between DV 
and non-DV sexual assault case processing. On the other four 
case processing measures, DV sexual assault defendants had a 
higher prosecution rate (89% versus 73%); higher overall 
conviction rate (98% versus 87%); higher felony sexual 
assault conviction rate (80% versus 63%); and a longer 
average incarceration sentence (6 years versus 3¼ years).

Like sexual assault defendants, no differences were found on 
7 of 11 measures of case processing between DV and non-DV 
aggravated assault defendants. On the other four measures, DV 
aggravated assault defendants had a higher overall conviction 
rate (87% versus 78%); higher violent felony conviction rate 
(61% versus 52%); higher aggravated assault conviction rate 
(54% versus 45%); and higher misdemeanor conviction rate (22% 
versus 16%).

Overall, the study found that the case processing outcomes 
for DV cases were the same as or more serious than the 
outcomes for non-DV cases. The 15-county study also found 
that DV aggravated assault defendants were less likely to be 
granted pretrial release than non-DV aggravated assault 
defendants. Of those granted pretrial release, courts were 
also more likely to issue a protection order against DV 
aggravated assault defendants.

A third of violent felony defendants were charged with 
domestic violence

In state courts of 15 large urban counties, 2,629 violent 
felony cases were filed in May 2002. In nearly 7 in 10 of 
these cases, sexual assault (10%) or aggravated assault 
(58.5%) was the most serious charge (table 1). A third of 
these felony sexual or aggravated assault charges were 
classified as domestic violence (DV); the remainder were 
classified as non-domestic violence (non-DV). In this report, 
domestic violence comprises violence between family members, 
intimate partners, and household cohabitants.

The 15-county study focuses on defendants charged with felony 
sexual or aggravated assault because limiting the scope in 
this way reduced the possibility that differences in case 
processing could be attributed to differences in offense 
seriousness. The Methodology section contains more 
information on the selection of cases for analysis.

Felony cases in state courts in which the most serious charge 
was sexual or aggravated assault were tracked in court 
records from the time that charges were filed in May 2002 
through final court disposition. The court records were used 
to examine the way DV and non-DV cases were processed by the 
justice system. This report compared DV and non-DV cases on 
11 prosecution, conviction, and sentencing outcome measures. 
The 11 measures consisted of 1 prosecution rate, 7 conviction 
rates, 2 incarceration rates, and 1 measure of incarceration 
sentence length. Other factors were also examined that may 
explain the differences between DV and non-DV case 
processing.

11 measures of case processing outcomes*

1.Prosecution rate
2.Overall conviction rate
3.Felony conviction rate
4.Violent felony conviction rate
5.Felony sexual assault/aggravated assault conviction rate
6.Misdemeanor conviction rate
7.Violent misdemeanor conviction rate
8.Misdemeanor sexual assault/aggravated assault conviction
rate
9.Prison incarceration rate
10.Jail incarceration rate
11.Average incarceration sentence length

*See Methodology for detailed definitions of these outcome
measures.      



Prosecution rate was not lower in felony DV cases

Domestic sexual assault defendants were more likely to be 
prosecuted (89%) than non-domestic sexual assault defendants 
(73%) (table 2). Domestic aggravated assault defendants were 
as likely to be prosecuted (66%) as non-domestic aggravated 
assault defendants (67%).

Of domestic sexual and aggravated assault cases not 
prosecuted, 78% were dismissed or declined for prosecution 
because victims would not cooperate (not in a table). 
Comparable information was not available for non-DV cases.

Conviction rate was not lower in felony DV cases

Prosecuted domestic and non-domestic sexual assault 
defendants differed on two of the seven conviction rates. 
Domestic sexual assault defendants had a higher overall 
conviction rate (98%) than non-domestic defendants (87%) 
(table 3). They were also more likely (80% versus 63%) to be 
convicted of the same offense as the arrest charge (felony 
sexual assault). For the other five conviction rates, no 
significant differences were found.

Prosecuted domestic and non-domestic aggravated assault 
defendants differed on four of the seven conviction rates. On 
all four, domestic aggravated assault defendants had a higher 
conviction rate: higher overall conviction rate (87% versus 
78%), higher violent felony conviction rate (61% versus 52%), 
higher aggravated assault conviction rate (54% versus 45%), 
and higher misdemeanor conviction rate (22% versus 16%). For 
the other three conviction rates, no significant differences 
were found.

Prosecutors across the nation have adopted no-drop policies 
aimed at vigorously prosecuting DV defendants. The no-drop 
policies are linked to higher prosecution and conviction 
rates for DV defendants. They are also linked to lower rates 
at which prosecutors divert DV defendants from prosecution 
(prosecutorial diversion) or temporarily suspend prosecution 
on the condition that the DV defendant abide by certain 
conditions (deferred adjudication).

Prosecuted DV defendants had relatively high conviction rates 
and low prosecutorial diversion/deferred adjudication rates 
compared to non-DV defendants. For example, the overall 
conviction rate was 87% for prosecuted DV aggravated assault 
cases compared to 78% for non-DV cases. The prosecutorial 
diversion/deferred adjudication rate was 12% for prosecuted 
DV aggravated assault cases compared to 20% for non-DV cases.

Incarceration rates were not lower in felony DV cases and 
incarceration sentence lengths were not shorter

Defendants convicted of domestic sexual assault did not 
differ significantly from those convicted of non-domestic 
sexual assault on either their prison incarceration rate (58% 
and 52%, respectively) or their jail incarceration rate (36% 
and 37%, respectively) (table 4). Also, defendants convicted 
of domestic aggravated assault did not differ significantly 
from those convicted of non-domestic aggravated assault on 
either of the two incarceration rates.

On average, defendants sentenced to incarceration (prison or 
jail) for felony domestic sexual assault received a longer 
sentence than those sentenced for felony non-domestic sexual 
assault: 6 years versus 3¼ years (table 5). About 15% of DV 
sexual assault defendants had a sentence of more than 10 
years, while none of the non-DV sexual assault defendants had 
a sentence that long (not in table).

Average incarceration sentence length did not differ 
significantly between sentenced domestic (2¼ years) and non-
domestic (2 years, 1 month) aggravated assault offenders. 

The mode of conviction (guilty plea versus trial conviction) 
could explain the difference in incarceration sentences 
between domestic and non-domestic sexual assault cases. Trial 
convictions are typically associated with a greater 
likelihood of incarceration and longer sentences. In the 15-
county study, similar percentages of domestic sexual assault 
convictions and non-domestic sexual assault convictions were 
attained through a guilty plea (97%), indicating that the 
mode of conviction did not necessarily explain the longer 
incarceration sentences of domestic sexual assault offenders 
(table 6).

Protection orders were more likely to be issued against DV 
defendants

A court-issued protection order is one tool available to 
prosecutors and judges to try to 
protect victims. Protection orders can also help prosecutors 
gain the cooperation of victims and witnesses who are 
reluctant to assist prosecutors because they fear reprisal or 
worry about their own or others' safety. The 15-county study 
found that, of the defendants granted pretrial release, 
protection orders were issued against 47% of all domestic 
aggravated assault defendants compared to 4% of all non-
domestic aggravated assault defendants (table 7). Protection 
orders were included in the sentences of 41% of convicted 
domestic aggravated assault defendants compared to 12% of 
non-domestic aggravated assault defendants (table 8).

Other factors may explain differences in the processing of DV 
and non-DV cases

Overall, the 15-county study found domestic violence 
defendants were not less likely than non-domestic violence 
defendants to be prosecuted, convicted, or incarcerated. 
Among the outcome measures analyzed in this study, the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics found either no differences in the 
processing of domestic and non-domestic violence cases, or 
that domestic violence cases were handled more seriously. 
Several possible explanations follow.

DV aggravated assault defendants were more likely to have an 
active criminal justice status at time of arrest

A prior criminal record is typically associated with a 
greater likelihood of prosecution, conviction, a prison 
sentence, and a longer incarceration sentence. In the 15-
county study database, the one available measure of prior 
record came from a variable describing the criminal justice 
status of the defendant at the time of arrest. A comparison 
of the criminal justice status at the time of arrest of 
sexual assault defendants showed a similar percentage of DV 
and non-DV defendants were on probation, on parole, or had 
some other active criminal justice status (table 9). However, 
about 26% of domestic aggravated assault defendants had an 
active criminal justice status at the time of arrest, 
compared to 18% of non-domestic aggravated assault 
defendants. This difference could have influenced how these 
cases were handled. 

DV aggravated assault defendants had higher rates of pretrial 
detention

Pretrial detention is typically associated with higher 
conviction rates. DV aggravated assault defendants (46%) were 
more likely than non-DV aggravated assault defendants (38%) 
to be detained pretrial (table 10). These higher rates of 
pretrial detention among DV defendants could be linked to 
higher conviction rates. 

Larger percentage of non-DV aggravated assault defendants
were 
under age 25

Courts and prosecutors sometimes consider the age of an 
offender in handling cases. Among sexual assault defendants, 
the percentage of persons under age 25 did not differ 
significantly between domestic and non-domestic defendants. 
However, the percentage varied between domestic (22%) and 
non-domestic aggravated assault defendants (41%) (table 11). 
This difference may be another reason non-domestic aggravated 
assault cases resulted in less serious outcomes than domestic 
aggravated assault cases.

Impact of offense seriousness on DV and non-DV case 
processing was mixed

In general, more serious offenses increase the likelihood of 
prosecution, of a prison sentence if convicted, and of a 
longer sentence length. The impact of offense seriousness on 
differences of case processing outcomes between DV and non-DV 
defendants could not be extensively investigated with the 15-
county database because of limited data. 

The FBI's National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) 
provided two measures of offense seriousness for a comparison 
between DV and non-DV offenses: the percentage of cases
involving a firearm and the percentage of cases involving a child
victim under age 13. NIBRS includes data reported by police
departments in 29 
states on persons arrested. (See Methodology for more 
information on NIBRS data.) 

NIBRS data showed a higher percentage of non-domestic 
aggravated assaults involved a firearm (20%) than domestic 
aggravated assaults (10%) (table 12). However, the percentage 
of DV sexual assault cases (46%) involving a child victim under age 13 was
higher than the 
corresponding percentage for non-DV sexual assault cases 
(28%) (table 13). 

Methodology

Data collection

State prosecutors and courts in 40 of the 75 largest counties 
in the nation were asked to participate in a study of how 
domestic violence cases are handled by the justice system. Of 
those asked to participate, 16 agreed. One of the 
participating counties was excluded from the analysis in this 
report because data were not available on felony cases. 

In total, state prosecutors and courts in 15 large urban 
counties provided data on 940 DV defendants and 2,313 non-DV 
defendants charged with a violent felony offense in May 2002. 
Data were compiled on all 940 DV defendants and on a 
systematically drawn sample of 1,019 non-DV defendants for a 
total of 1,959 defendants. The study database documents the 
adjudication outcomes for a 1-year period from the time of 
initial court filing. Initial filing refers to the 
defendant's first appearance in court. In counties that have 
lower and upper courts, initial filing refers to the first 
appearance in the lower court. For defendants not adjudicated 
within the 1-year period, information on adjudication outcome 
was generally not documented in the database. 

This report is based on those defendants who were adjudicated 
within the 1-year period: 836 DV defendants and 806 non-DV 
defendants (representing 1,793 non-DV defendants). BJS and 
the Pretrial Services Resource Center (under grant 2002-BJS-
CX-0001) collected the data. 

Significance testing

In comparisons described in this report, an explicit or 
implied difference indicates a test of significance was 
conducted, and the difference was significant at the .05 
level. The report also indicates that some comparisons were 
not different, meaning the difference between the two 
estimates was not significant at the .05 level.

Selection of sexual and aggravated assault cases for analysis

This report compares justice system processing of DV and non-
DV defendants who were charged with either of two types of 
violent felonies: sexual assault and aggravated assault.

Analysis of differences in processing DV and non-DV cases 
required that the cases be alike in seriousness because the 
justice system handles offenses differently depending on 
their seriousness. An impediment to using the 15-county data 
for the analysis was a major difference in seriousness 
between DV and non-DV cases. Most notably, murder and 
robbery-two of the more serious offenses -made up 2% of all 
DV cases, but 26% of all non-DV cases. The risk of ignoring 
this fact is that any difference found in case processing 
between all DV and all non-DV cases might be wrongly 
attributed to discretion on the part of prosecutors and 
judges when the actual reason might be the serious nature of 
the cases. 

To address the differences in offense seriousness, the study 
did not compare all DV to all non-DV cases, but instead 
compared domestic sexual assault to non-domestic sexual 
assault, and domestic aggravated assault to non-domestic 
aggravated assault. Limiting the scope in this way eliminated 
the possibility that differences in case processing could be 
attributed to differences in offense seriousness as defined 
by offense mix. Nevertheless, these comparisons would not 
necessarily rule out other possible explanations, such as the 
possibility that differences in case processing could be 
explained by differences in other measures of offense 
seriousness.

Comparisons between DV and non-DV were also limited to sexual 
assault and aggravated assault because too few unweighted 
cases were available for other offense categories (8 charged 
with domestic murder; 20 with non-domestic murder; 8 with 
domestic robbery; 18 with non-domestic intimidation) to 
support reliable comparisons.

Selection of NIBRS database for comparisons of offense 
seriousness

Measures of offense seriousness included the percentage of 
cases involving a firearm and the percentage 
of cases involving a child victim under 
age 13. However, the 15-county study database contained 
information on these indicators only for domestic violence 
cases. In order to compare DV and non-DV cases, BJS used the 
FBI's National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS).

The NIBRS database contains information about persons 
arrested by police in 2004 in participating jurisdictions 
from 29 states. NIBRS was selected over other databases for a 
variety of reasons. Similar to defendants in the 15-county 
study database, NIBRS data included arrestees in multiple 
counties and states whose victims were of all ages. Also, 
information on offense seriousness was available in the NIBRS 
database on both DV and non-DV. In addition, the stage of 
justice system processing represented by NIBRS data (the 
arrest stage) is relatively close to the stage represented by 
data in the 15-county study (the court-filing stage), making 
NIBRS arrestees relatively similar to defendants in the 15-
county study database.

Definitions of 11 outcome measures for the 15-county study

1. Prosecution rate - the percentage of defendants who were 
prosecuted. All defendants were classified as having been 
prosecuted except those labeled in court records as 
"dismissed" or "nolle prosequi," both of which signify the 
decision not to prosecute a case. Cases screened out by 
prosecutors prior to court filing could not be included in 
the calculation of the prosecution rate because that 
information was not collected in the 15-county study.
2. Overall conviction rate - the percentage of prosecuted 
defendants convicted of either a felony or misdemeanor 
offense.
3. Felony conviction rate - the percentage of prosecuted 
defendants convicted of a felony offense.
4. Violent felony conviction rate - the percentage of 
prosecuted defendants convicted of a violent felony offense.
5. Felony sexual assault/aggravated assault conviction rate - 
the percentage of prosecuted sexual assault and aggravated 
assault defendants who were convicted as charged. 
6. Misdemeanor conviction rate - the percentage of prosecuted 
defendants convicted of a misdemeanor.
7. Violent misdemeanor conviction rate - the percentage of 
prosecuted defendants convicted of a violent misdemeanor.
8. Misdemeanor sexual assault/misdemeanor assault conviction 
rate - the percentage of prosecuted sexual assault defendants 
convicted of misdemeanor sexual assault, and percentage of 
prosecuted aggravated assault defendants convicted of 
misdemeanor assault.
9. Prison incarceration rate - the percentage of convicted 
defendants sentenced to a state prison.
10. Jail incarceration rate - the percentage of convicted 
defendants sentenced to a local jail.
11. Average incarceration length - the average incarceration 
sentence imposed by the court. Both prison and jail sentences 
were used to calculate the average incarceration sentence 
length. Separate prison and jail sentence length could not be 
reliably compared between domestic and non-domestic violent 
offenders because of small samples.

Other definitions

Domestic violence (DV) - intentional physical violence 
committed, attempted, or threatened between family members, 
intimate partners, or household cohabitants. Family members 
include persons related by blood or marriage. Marital 
relations include spouses, ex-spouses, and common-law 
spouses. Intimate partners include boyfriends or girlfriends, 
present or past.

Non-domestic violence (non-DV) - intentional physical 
violence committed, attempted, or threatened between non-
family members or non-intimate partners. Non-domestic 
relationships include persons who are strangers to one 
another, persons known by sight only, acquaintances, or close 
friends.  
 
Sexual assault - all forms of violent sexual offenses 
(including forcible rape). "Violent" means the offender used, 
attempted, or threatened force in the commission of the 
sexual act, or while not actually using force, did not have 
the victim's factual or legal consent.

Aggravated assault - (1) intentionally and without legal 
justification causing serious bodily injury, with or without 
a deadly weapon or (2) using a deadly or dangerous weapon to 
threaten, attempt, or cause bodily injury, regardless of the 
degree of injury. The most serious form of aggravated assault 
is attempted murder.

Pretrial release or detention - The decision by a court to 
release or detain a defendant before the case is disposed. By 
posting bail or agreeing to non-financial conditions, a 
defendant can be allowed to return to the community to await 
trial.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is the 
director.
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
This Special Report was written by Erica L. Smith, Matthew R. 
Durose, and Patrick A. Langan, BJS Statisticians. Grant 
LaFarge, BJS Intern, provided verification. Catherine Bird 
edited the report, Tina Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne 
E. Robinson prepared the report for final printing under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

February 2008, NCJ 214993
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its 
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS 
World Wide Web Internet site: 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/scpdvc.htm>.
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation o Partnerships o Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
3/13/2008/tld
