U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report


Substance Dependence, Abuse, and Treatment of 
Jail Inmates, 2002


July 2005, NCJ 209588


-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdatji02.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------

By Jennifer C. Karberg
and Doris J. James
BJS Statisticians
                     
---------------------------------------------------
Highlights
                     
In 2002, 68% of jail inmates reported symptoms in 
the year before their admission to jail that met 
substance dependence or abuse criteria

*  52% of female jail inmates were found to be 
dependent on alcohol or drugs, compared to 44% 
of male inmates.

in 4 convicted property or drug offenders met 
substance dependence or abuse criteria, compared 
to 2 in 3 violent or public-order offenders

*  Half of all convicted jail inmates were under 
the influence of drugs or alcohol at the time of 
offense.

*  In 2002, 16% of convicted jail inmates said they 
committed their offense to get money for drugs, 
compared to 15% in 1996.

*  Inmates who met substance dependence/abuse 
criteria were twice as likely as other inmates to 
have three or more prior probation or incarceration 
sentences.

63% of inmates who met substance dependence or 
abuse criteria had participated in substance abuse 
treatment or other programs in the past

*  47% of jail inmates who met the criteria for 
substance dependence or abuse had participated in 
substance abuse treatment or other programs while 
under correctional supervision. 

*  About a fifth of convicted jail inmates who met 
the criteria for substance dependence or abuse had 
participated in substance abuse treatment or other 
programs after their admission to jail.
------------------------------------------------------

In 2002 more than two-thirds of jail inmates were 
found to be dependent on or to abuse alcohol or 
drugs, based on data from the Survey of Inmates in 
Local Jails, 2002. Two in five inmates were dependent 
on alcohol or drugs, while nearly 1 in 4 abused 
alcohol or drugs, but were not dependent on them. 
Estimates of substance dependence or abuse were based 
on criteria specified in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition (DSM-IV).
 
Jail inmates who met the criteria for substance 
dependence or abuse (70%) were more likely than other 
inmates (46%) to have a criminal record. They were 
nearly twice as likely as other inmates to have been
homeless in the year before their offense (16% 
compared to 9%) or to have grown up with a parent or 
guardian who abused alcohol or drugs (37% compared 
to 17%). 

Nearly two-thirds of jail inmates who met the criteria 
for substance dependence or abuse had participated in 
substance abuse treatment or other alcohol or drug 
programs in the past. More than half of the inmates who 
had used alcohol or drugs at the time of their offense 
had ever received treatment or participated in other 
substance abuse programs while under correctional 
supervision.

68% of jail inmates met substance dependence 
or abuse criteria

More than two-thirds of jail inmates were dependent on 
or abused alcohol or drugs, based on symptoms for 
diagnosing substance dependence or abuse in the DSM-IV. 
In collaboration with the National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism, the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) included a series of questions associated with the
DSM-IV criteria for measuring dependence or abuse in the 
2002 Survey of Inmates in Local Jails. The questions 
addressed problems or symptoms related to alcohol or 
drug use in the 12 months prior to the inmates' 
admission to jail.

The questions about substance abuse were grouped into 
four categories and those on dependence into seven 
categories, in accordance with the DSM-IV. For a diagnosis 
of dependence jail inmates had to report at least 3 of 7 
dependence symptoms. A diagnosis of abuse required 
offenders to have at least 1 of 4 abuse symptoms. Because 
a diagnosis of substance dependence preempts a diagnosis 
of abuse, inmates who met the criteria for both
dependence and abuse (44%) or dependence only 
(1.0%) were classified as dependent.

-------------------------------------
Prevalence of substance dependence or abuse 
symptoms among jail inmates, 2002

The Survey of Inmates in Local Jails, 2002, 
included a series of questions to form a 
measure of the prevalence of substance
dependence or abuse as defined in the DSM-IV. 
These estimates are not comparable to findings 
reported from previous jail inmate surveys.

Abuse symptoms included repeated use of alcohol 
or drugs in hazardous situations or recurrent 
occupational, educational, legal or social 
problems related to alcohol or drug use. The most 
common abuse criteria reported by jail inmates 
were recurrent social problems because of alcohol 
(40%), drugs (43%), and the combination of alcohol 
or drugs (58%). 

The dependence criteria covered a range of 
symptoms, including behavioral, cognitive, and 
physiological problems. The criteria most often 
cited by inmates were impaired control (44%)and 
continued use despite problems (45%). 

Overall, a third of jail inmates reported no abuse 
symptoms. Sixteen percent had one abuse symptom, 
while 17% cited all four abuse symptoms. Forty-six 
percent of jail inmates reported three or more
symptoms of substance dependence, including 18% who 
reported all seven symptoms. About 38% reported no 
dependence symptoms.
------------------------------------------

Jail inmates classified as abusers met at least 
one of the abuse criteria (23%) without dependence. 

By specific type of substance, 53% of jail inmates 
were dependent on or abused drugs, compared to 47% 
for alcohol. About 36% of jail inmates were found 
to be dependent on drugs, and 18% abused drugs. 
Twenty-three percent of jail inmates were dependent 
on alcohol, and nearly 24% abused alcohol. An 
estimated 32% of inmates did not meet the criteria 
for substance dependence or abuse.

Over half of all female jail inmates reported 
substance dependence

There was little difference in the overall prevalence 
of substance dependence or abuse between men (68%) 
and women (69%) in local jails. When substance 
dependence or abuse was estimated separately, female 
jail inmates had higher rates of substance dependence 
than male inmates. Nearly 52% of female inmates were
found to be dependent on alcohol or drugs, compared to 
44% of male inmates. Men (24%) had higher rates of 
substance abuse (without dependence) than women 
(17%).

--------------------------------------
Fewer than 1 in 10 persons in the general population 
met the criteria for substance dependence or abuse 

*  In 2002, 9% of the U.S. resident population age 
12 or older (or 22 million persons) were found to be 
dependent on or to abuse alcohol or drugs, according 
to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2002.

*  Unlike men and women in local jails who had nearly 
the same rate of substance dependence/abuse (around 69%), 
in the general population the rate for men (13%) was 
twice that for women (6%).
------------------------------------------

White and middle age inmates 
had relatively higher rates of 
substance dependence or abuse 

Substance dependence or abuse among jail inmates 
varied by racial or ethnic groups. White inmates 
had significantly higher levels of substance 
dependence or abuse (78%), relative to black inmates
(64%) and Hispanic inmates (59%). A larger proportion 
of white inmates (55%) than blacks (40%) or Hispanics 
(36%) also were dependent on alcohol or drugs.

A similar rate of substance abuse(without dependence) 
existed among racial or ethnic categories. Around a 
quarter of black (24%)and Hispanic (23%) inmates were 
found to abuse alcohol or drugs, compared to 22% of 
white inmates. 

White females comprised a slightly higher proportion 
of women who met the criteria for substance dependence 
or abuse than their representation in the overall 
female jail population. White females were 43% of 
women in jail, but 48% of women who were dependent
on or abused alcohol or drugs. Similarly, white males 
represented 35% of men in jail, but about 40% of men 
who met the conditions for substance dependence or 
abuse.

The rate of substance dependence or abuse varied 
significantly by age of inmates. Jail inmates 
between ages 25 and 44 had the highest rate of 
substance dependence or abuse (7 in 10 inmates). 
Those age 55 or older had the lowest rate (nearly 
5 in 10 inmates).

When the rate of dependence was estimated separately 
from abuse only, inmates age 55 or older reported the 
same levels of dependence (23%) or abuse only (23%). 
All other age groups had higher levels of substance 
dependence. Half of jail inmates ages 35-44 were
dependent on alcohol or drugs, while a fifth abused 
alcohol or drugs. 

Substance dependence or abuse more 
prevalent among drug or property offenders 

Overall, jail inmates whose most serious 
charge was a drug or property offense were more 
likely to have met the substance dependence or 
abuse criteria than other offenders. More than 
70% of drug or property offenders were dependent 
on or had abused a substance, compared to over 60% 
of violent and public-order offenders. An estimated 
half of drug or property offenders were dependent 
on alcohol or drugs; over a fifth reported an 
abuse (without dependence) criterion. 

Half of inmates who met criteria of dependence or 
abuse had a family member who had served time 

Jail inmates who met the conditions for substance 
dependence or abuse (16%) were more likely to have 
been homeless in the year before their admission to 
jail than other inmates (9%). They were twice as 
likely as other inmates to have lived in a foster 
home, agency, or institution.  An estimated 14% 
said they had lived in a foster home, agency, or 
institution, compared to 7% of other inmates.

Over a fifth of jail inmates who met the criteria 
for substance dependence or abuse said they had 
been physically or sexually abused in the past. An 
eighth of other jail inmates reported past physical 
or sexual abuse.

Substance dependent or abusing jail inmates were 
twice as likely as other jail inmates to have had 
a parent or guardian who abused drugs or alcohol. 
About 2 in 5 jail inmates who met the criteria for 
substance dependence or abuse said a parent or 
guardian had abused alcohol, drugs, or both while 
they were growing up. Among other inmates, about 1 
in 6 said a parent or guardian abused alcohol, 
drugs, or both.

Inmates who were dependent on or abused alcohol or 
drugs (50%) were more likely than other inmates(38%) 
to have had a family member who had been incarcerated. 
Twenty-one percent had a father who had been 
incarcerated in the past, compared to 14% of other
inmates. A third of inmates who met the conditions 
for substance dependence or abuse had a brother who 
had served time in prison or jail, compared to over 
a fourth of other jail inmates.

Prior criminal record linked to substance 
dependence or abuse 

Jail inmates who were dependent on or abused alcohol 
or drugs were more likely to have had a prior criminal 
record than other inmates. Fifty-seven percent of the 
substance dependent or abusing inmates were on some 
criminal justice status at the time of their arrest,
including 36% who were on probation. About 44% of 
other jail inmates were on a criminal justice 
status at arrest. 

An estimated 8 in 10 jail inmates who met the 
criteria for substance dependence or abuse had a 
prior sentence to probation or incarceration, 
compared to about 6 in 10 other jail inmates. The
substance dependent or abusing inmates (47%) were 
also twice as likely as other inmates (22%) to 
have had three or more prior probation or 
incarceration sentences. 

Alcohol use at offense declined between 
1996 and 2002

In 2002, 40% of all jail inmates said they had 
participated in binge drinking in the past, 
unchanged from 1996. Binge drinking is defined
as having consumed a fifth of liquor in a single 
day, or the equivalent of 20 drinks, 3 bottles of 
wine, or 3 six-packs of beer.

The proportion of convicted inmates who had been 
drinking at the time of the offense declined to 
33% in 2002, from 41% in 1996.

Regular drug use rose between 1996 and 2002; 
use at offense declined

While the overall percentage of jail inmates who 
reported having ever used drugs remained stable 
(82%) between 1996 and 2002, regular drug use rose 
to 69% in 2002 from 64% in 1996. Regular use was
defined as drug use at least once a week for at 
least a month. Among convicted jail inmates, drug 
use at the time of the offense dropped to 29% from 
35% during that period. In each year, over half of 
convicted jail inmates said they had used drugs in 
the month before their offense.

There was little change in the types of drugs used 
between 1996 and 2002. Marijuana and cocaine/crack 
cocaine were the most common drugs inmates said 
they used regularly, in the month before the offense, 
or at the time of the offense. About 59% of all jail 
inmates said they used marijuana regularly, up from 
55% in 1996. In each year, the fraction of inmates 
who said they regularly used cocaine/crack (31%),
heroin/other opiates (12%), depressants (10%), and 
stimulants (17%)was relatively unchanged.   

Nearly 14% of convicted jail inmates had used 
marijuana at the time of the offense in 2002, a 
slight decrease from 18% in 1996. Eleven percent 
had used cocaine/crack in 2002, down from 14% in 
1996. 

Women and white inmates more likely to 
have used drugs at offense 

Among convicted jail inmates, there were significant 
differences in the type of substances used at the 
time of the offense and in the substances they 
were dependent on or abused. About 29% of
convicted inmates said they had used drugs at the 
time of the offense, compared to 33% who reported 
using alcohol. More than half of convicted jail 
inmates were dependent on or abused drugs, while just
under half were dependent on or abused alcohol.

Convicted women offenders were more likely to have 
been under the influence of drugs (34%) than alcohol 
(22%) at the time of the offense. Over a third of 
convicted men said they had used alcohol at the time 
of the offense, compared to over a fourth who had 
used drugs. 

Both male and female jail inmates were more likely 
to have met the conditions for dependence or abuse 
of drugs than alcohol. However, women were 
significantly more likely to have met the criteria 
for dependence or abuse of drugs (61%) than alcohol 
(39%). By contrast, men were only slightly more 
likely to have met the criteria for dependence or 
abuse of drugs (54%) than alcohol (50%).

Among convicted inmates considered by race or ethnic 
origin, white inmates had the highest rate of having 
used either drugs or alcohol at the time of their 
most serious offense. About 39% of white inmates
had used alcohol at the time of the offense, 
followed by 30% of Hispanic and 29% of black inmates. 
A third of white inmates and a fourth of black and 
Hispanic inmates were under the influence of drugs 
at the time of the offense.  

White inmates also had the highest prevalence of 
dependence or abuse regardless of the substance. 
About 59% of whites, 43% of blacks, and 42% of 
Hispanic inmates were dependent on or abused
alcohol. The rate of dependence or abuse for drugs 
was 62% for whites, 54% for blacks, and 45% for 
Hispanic inmates.

Younger inmates had higher rates of dependence 
or abuse of drugs; middle-age inmates, of alcohol

Older offenders were most likely to have used alcohol 
at the time of the offense. Forty percent of inmates 
age 35 or older had used alcohol at the time of the 
offense, compared to 33% of inmates ages 25-34 and 24% 
of inmates age 24 or younger. Nearly a third of 
offenders age 34 or younger had used drugs at the 
time of their offense. Only a small portion (6%) of 
inmates age 55 or older had used drugs when they
committed their offense.

Fifty-two percent of convicted inmates ages 25-34 and 
35-44 were found to be dependent on or to abuse 
alcohol, the largest percentage among all age 
categories. Inmates age 55 or older had the lowest 
rate of alcohol dependence or abuse (38%), followed by 
inmates ages 45-54, at 44%, and inmates age 24 or 
younger, at 46%. 

Jail inmates age 24 or younger had the highest rate 
of drug dependence or abuse. About 61% were dependent 
on or abused drugs, compared to about 56% of jail 
inmates ages 25-44. Similar to alcohol dependence or 
abuse, the lowest rate of drug dependence or abuse 
(16%) occurred among inmates age 55 or older.

Over half of inmates convicted of robbery, 
burglary, or drug offenses were under the 
influence at offense

Overall, 50% of convicted jail inmates reported being 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time 
of the offense. Inmates convicted of robbery (56%), 
weapons violations (56%), burglary (55%), or motor 
vehicle theft (55%) were more likely than inmates 
convicted of other types of offenses to have used a 
substance at the time of the offense. The least 
likely of all offenders to have used alcohol or drugs
at offense were those convicted of public-order 
offenses (37%) or fraud (39%).

Violent offenders were more likely to have used alcohol 
at the time of the offense (38%) than inmates who 
committed property (29%), drug (22%), or public-order 
offenses (26%).  However, violent offenders were less 
likely than other offenders to have used drugs at the 
time of the offense. About a fifth of violent offenders, 
a third of property, and two-fifths of drug offenders 
had used drugs at the time of the offense. Less than a 
fifth of public-order offenders used drugs at offense. 

16% of convicted jail inmates committed the 
offense to get money for drugs

In 2002, 16% of convicted jail inmates said they 
committed their offense to get money for drugs, a 
slight increase from 15% in 1996. Around a quarter 
of property and drug offenders said they committed
their offense to get money for drugs, compared to 
under a tenth of violent and public-order offenders. 

Between 1996 and 2002, the proportion of drug, 
property, and public-order offenders who said they 
committed their offense to get money for drugs 
increased by two percentage points, while that 
of violent offenders was relatively unchanged.

Three-quarters of inmates in jail for drug 
or property offenses met dependence or 
abuse criteria

Seven in ten convicted jail inmates were found to be 
dependent on or to abuse alcohol or drugs, a slightly 
larger proportion than the 6 in 10 of the entire jail 
population. Overall, substance dependence or abuse
was more prevalent among convicted drug and property 
offenders. Nearly three-quarters of inmates in jail 
for drug or property offenses met the criteria for 
substance dependence or abuse, compared to two-
thirds of jail inmates who committed violent or 
public-order offenses.

Jail inmates convicted of burglary had the highest 
rate of substance dependence or abuse (85%), followed 
by  DWI/DUI (81%), weapons violations (79%), and 
drug possession (75%). The lowest rate of substance 
dependence or abuse was among inmates convicted of
sexual assault (50%). 

Convicted violent offenders were the most likely to 
be dependent on or abusing alcohol (52%), followed 
by property (48%), and public-order (46%) offenders. 
Drug offenders (40%) were least likely to be
dependent on or to abuse alcohol. 

By specific offenses, DWI/DUI offenders were the most 
likely to have met the criteria for alcohol dependence 
or abuse (78%), followed by inmates convicted of assault 
(58%), burglary (54%), and robbery (53%). Jail inmates 
who committed sexual assault (37%) were the least 
likely of the different types of offenders to be 
dependent on or to abuse alcohol.

The highest percentage of drug dependence or abuse 
occurred among drug offenders, with 67% meeting the 
conditions for dependence or abuse. Property 
offenders were next with 62% having met the conditions. 

Specifically, jail inmates convicted of burglary (74%), 
drug possession (71%), and robbery (64%) had the 
highest rates of drug dependence or abuse. Offenders 
convicted of homicide (30%) and sexual assault (33%) 
were least likely to be dependent on or to abuse drugs.

6 in 10 substance dependent or abusing 
inmates had participated in substance 
treatment or programs 

Sixty-three percent of jail inmates who met the 
criteria for substance dependence or abuse said 
they had participated in substance treatment or 
other alcohol or drug programs in the past. 

The most common activity among dependent or abusing 
inmates was participation in alcohol or drug programs 
which included self-help programs (such as Alcoholics 
Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous), peer counseling, 
or education or awareness programs. Forty-six percent 
of dependent or abusing inmates had participated in 
these programs, compared to 44% who had received 
treatment. Substance treatment included time spent in 
a residential facility or a detoxification unit, 
professional counseling, or use of a maintenance drug. 

Participation in substance treatment or 
programs linked to dependence

Jail inmates who were dependent on alcohol or drugs had 
the highest rate of participation in substance treatment 
or other alcohol or drug programs. Over two-thirds of 
dependent inmates said they had participated in 
treatment or programs in the past, compared to over
half of inmates who abused drugs or alcohol.

Dependent inmates (53%) were more likely to have 
participated in treatment or programs while under 
correctional supervision than inmates who abused 
alcohol or drugs (37%). Over a third of dependent 
inmates had received treatment while incarcerated 
or on probation or parole. Nearly a fifth of inmates 
who abused alcohol or drugs had received treatment. 
Forty percent of dependent and 28% of abusing inmates 
reported they had participated in other alcohol or 
drug programs while under correctional supervision. 

Regardless of a diagnosis of dependence or abuse, 
inmates were more likely to have received treatment 
or participated in program while on probation or 
parole rather than in prison or jail. Over 1 in 4
dependent inmates had received treatment while in 
the community, and 1 in 5 had treatment while 
incarcerated.

Participation in treatment or other programs 
while under correctional supervision rose 
between 1996 and 2002 

The largest increase in substance treatment or other 
programs occurred among inmates who said they had 
used alcohol or drugs at the time of offense -- up 
from 43% in 1996 to 52% in 2002. Among inmates who 
had been using alcohol or drugs in the month before 
the offense, the proportion who reported ever having 
participated in treatment or programs while under 
correctional supervision rose from 39% in 1996 to 
47% in 2002. 

Participation in treatment or other programs after 
admission to jail also increased among all prior 
alcohol or drug users. In 2002, 20% of convicted 
inmates who were under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs at the time of the offense had participated in 
treatment/ programs after entering jail, up from 17% 
in 1996. In each year, participation in self-help 
programs (13%) was the most common activity, 
followed by education programs (over 5%).

The rate of participation in treatment or programs 
since entering jail for convicted inmates who used 
alcohol or drugs in the month before the offense  
rose to 17% in 2002, up from 14% in 1996. Treatment
specifically rose from 4% to 6% between 1996 to 2002, 
and participation in other programs grew from 13% to 
14%, respectively.

1 in 6 inmates using alcohol at the time of 
the offense participated in treatment/programs 
after admission 

In 2002 an estimated 17% of jail inmates who ever 
participated in binge drinking and inmates who met 
the criteria for alcohol dependence or abuse had 
received treatment or participated in other 
programs after admission to jail. Around 16% of 
inmates using alcohol at the time of the offense 
had participated in treatment or programs after 
admission. 

The level of participation in specific  types of 
substance abuse treatment or programs varied little 
among inmates who were dependent on or abused 
alcohol, who had used alcohol at the time of the 
offense, or who reported ever having a binge drinking 
experience. Three percent of inmates in each category 
had received treatment in a special facility after 
admission. Between 2% and 3% had also received
professional counseling and 1% had been in a 
detoxification unit. 

Twelve percent of inmates who reported binge drinking 
had participated in self-help or peer counseling, 
followed by 11% of inmates who met the criteria for 
alcohol dependence or abuse, and 10% of inmates who 
were using alcohol at the time of the offense. Around 
5% of each group had participated in alcohol abuse 
education or awareness programs. 

1 in 5 inmates who used drugs at time of the 
offense participated in treatment or programs 
after admission 

A fifth of convicted jail inmates who reported drug 
use at the time of their offense had participated in 
treatment or programs after admission to jail, a 
larger proportion than any other group of drug users. 
About 14% of convicted inmates who reported past drug 
use ever, 17% of those who used drugs in the month 
before the offense, and 18% of inmates who met the 
conditions for drug dependence or abuse had received 
treatment or participated in other programs after 
entering jail.

Self-help or peer group counseling and placement in a 
residential unit or special facility were the most 
common types of activities. More than 11% of convicted 
inmates who had used drugs in the month before the
offense, at the time of the offense, or met the drug 
dependence or abuse criteria had participated in self-
help or peer group counseling programs. 

Around 9% of convicted inmates who used drugs at the 
time of the offense had received treatment in a special 
unit or residential facility since entering jail. 
Nearly 7% of inmates who reported drug use in the
month before the offense and those dependent on or 
abusing drugs had treatment in a special unit or 
facility. 

Substance dependent or abusing women, 
whites more likely to participate in 
treatment or programs

Female inmates (68%) who met the criteria for substance 
dependence or abuse were more likely than male inmates 
(64%) to have ever received any type of substance 
treatment or program. This pattern continued across all 
types of treatment or programs. Fifty-three percent of 
women who met substance dependence or abuse criteria
had received some type of treatment, compared to 44% 
of men.

--------------------------------------------
8 in 10 convicted jail inmates were involved 
with drugs/alcohol in 2002

In the comparable data for 1996 and 2002, three-
quarters of convicted jail inmates were involved 
with drugs or alcohol. When substance dependence or
abuse and positive drug test results were included 
in 2002, 85% of convicted jail inmates were found 
to be drug/alcohol-involved.
-----------------------------------------------

White jail inmates (72%) who were found to be dependent 
on or to abuse alcohol or drugs had the highest rate of 
participation in treatment or other programs, followed 
by 58% of both blacks and Hispanics.

Four in ten white inmates who met the conditions for 
dependence or abuse had received treatment under 
correctional supervision, compared to fewer than 3 in 
10 black and Hispanic inmates. White inmates (23%)were 
also nearly twice as likely as Hispanic inmates (12%) 
to have received treatment in prison or jail. 

Forty-five percent of white inmates who met the criteria 
for substance dependence or abuse had participated in 
other alcohol or drug programs while under correctional 
supervision, compared to 37% of Hispanics and 32% of 
black inmates who met the criteria. White inmates also 
had the highest level of participation in other programs
since entering jail -- whites (18%), blacks (13%), and 
Hispanics (13%).

Methodology

The findings in this report are based on information in 
the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ), conducted 
from January through April, 2002. SILJ was a stratified 
two-stage sample survey in which jails were selected at 
the first stage and inmates to be interviewed at the 
second stage. The jails were selected from a universe of 
3,365 jails and grouped into 6 strata based on the size 
of the male, female, and juvenile (both male and female) 
populations. Each jail within a stratum had an equal 
probability of selection.

Overall, 465 jails were selected, and interviews were 
held in 417 jails; 39 jails refused or were excluded 
for administrative reasons; and 9 were closed or had 
no inmates. 

In the second sampling stage, inter-viewers from the 
Census Bureau visited each selected facility and 
systematically selected a sample of male and female 
inmates. A total of  6,982 inmates were interviewed,
using computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI). 
A total of 768 inmates refused to participate, for a 
second stage nonresponse of 9.9%.  
 
Based on the completed interviews, estimates for the 
entire jail population were developed using weighting 
factors derived from the original probability of 
selection in the sample. These factors were adjusted 
for variable rates of nonresponse across strata and 
inmate characteristics. Further adjustments were made 
to control the survey estimates to counts of jail 
inmates obtained from the 1999 Census of Jails and 
the 2001 Annual Survey of Jails.

The accuracy of the jail inmates survey depends on 
sampling and measurement errors. Sampling errors occur 
by chance because a sample rather than a complete 
enumeration of the population was conducted. 
Measurement error can be attributed to many sources,
such as nonresponse, recall difficulties, differences 
in the interpretation of questions among inmates, and 
data processing errors. 

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated standard 
error, varies by the size of the estimate and the size 
of the base population. Estimates of the standard errors 
for selected characteristics have been calculated for the 
2002 Survey. Standard error tables are available on the 
BJS website <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdatji02.htm>.

These standard errors may be used to construct confidence 
intervals around percentages. For example, the 95% 
confidence interval around the percentage of inmates in 
2002 who were dependent on or abused alcohol or drugs is 
approximately 68% plus or minus 1.96 times .72%
(or 66.6% to 69.4%). 

In this report, the definition of a convicted jail 
inmate differs from other previously published reports. 
Trend comparisons between data in this report and 
reports based on data from previous jail inmate surveys 
(or the Annual Survey of Jails) are affected by the 
revised definition of convicted and unconvicted inmates. 
Other revisions to the questionnaire will also affect 
comparisons across surveys.

---------------------------------------
References

Allen, John P., and Veronica B. Wilson, eds., 
Assessing Alcohol Problems: A Guide for Clinicians 
and Researchers, 2nd ed., U. S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute on Alcohol, Abuse and 
Alcoholism, revised 2003, Bethesda, Maryland.

American Psychological Association, Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth 
edition (DSM-IV), 1994.

Compton, Wilson M., and others, "Prevalence of 
Marijuana Use Disorders in the United States, 
1991-1992 and 2001-2002," Journal of the American 
Medical Association, May 5, 2002, vol. 291, no.17.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2002, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration, Office of 
Applied Studies, Rockville, Maryland.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National
Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related 
Conditions, 2002, National Institutes of Health, 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
---------------------------------------

The 2002 SILJ is the first BJS survey to measure the 
prevalence of substance dependence or abuse in the 
correctional population based on the DSM-IV. These 
estimates are not comparable to findings reported 
from previous jail inmate surveys.

Other national surveys that used the DSM-IV to measure 
substance abuse and dependence in the general population 
include the National Epidemiological Survey of Alcohol 
and Related Conditions, 2002, (NESARC), sponsored by 
the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
and the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2002, 
(NSDUH), SAMSHA.

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence 
A. Greenfeld is director.

Jennifer C. Karberg and Doris J. James wrote this 
report, under the supervision of Allen J. Beck. 
Laura M. Maruschak and Todd D. Minton verified the 
report, and Rebecca Medway provided statistical 
assistance. Tom Hester edited it, assisted by Tina 
Dorsey. 

Doris J. James, under the supervision of Allen J. 
Beck, designed the survey, developed the questionnaire, 
and monitored data collection, data processing, and 
production of weights. 

Stephen M. Bittner and Tammy Anderson, Demographic 
Surveys Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of 
Commerce, carried out questionnaire design and 
monitored data collection and processing under the 
supervision of Marilyn M. Monahan and Gertrude Odom. 

Bridget F. Grant, Ph.D., assisted BJS in the development 
of the inmate survey questions associated with the 
DSM-IV criteria for measuring dependence or abuse. Dr. 
Grant is Chief of Laboratory of Epidemiology and 
Biometry, Division of Intramural Clinical and
Biological Research, National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services. 

July 2005, NCJ 209588

Office of Justice Programs
Partnerships for Safer Communities

Http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
---------------------------------------------

End of file
07/08/05 ih