Bureau of Justice Statistics
Office of Justice Program
U.S. Department of Justice

Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, 2001 

------------------------------------------------------------
This Bulletin is one in a series. More recent editions may 
be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#dna

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdnacl01.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------

January 2002, NCJ 191191


By Greg W. Steadman
BJS Statistician

--------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* In 2000 DNA crime laboratories received about 31,000 subject
cases, an increase from almost 21,000 cases in 1999.  Cases with
identified suspects accounted for almost three-quarters of the
total in both 1999 and 2000.

* The DNA crime laboratories analyzed almost 16,000  subject
cases in 1999 and 25,000 cases in 2000. About 80% of the cases
analyzed in both 1999 and 2000 were known subject cases.

* At the beginning of 2001, 81% of DNA crime laboratories had
backlogs totaling 16,081 subject cases and 265,329 convicted
offender samples.

* The number of full-time staff in DNA laboratories ranged from
1 to 60 with a median staff of 6.  A majority of full-time
employees (88%) were on the technical staff.

* All DNA laboratories received DNA case samples from local
police and sheriffs' offices.  About half received samples from
State police (56%) and medical examiners (48%).

* Forty-five percent of laboratories reported contracting a
private laboratory to do forensic DNA testing in 2000. They
contracted 944 subject cases and 204,359 convicted offender
samples.

* A third of the DNA laboratories that contracted with private
facilities, reported private lab backlogs at the start of 2001
totaling 918 subject cases and 100,706 convicted offender
samples.

--------------------------------------------------------------

In calendar year 2000 publicly operated forensic crime
laboratories that perform DNA analyses reported analyzing almost
25,000 cases which involved DNA evidence and over 148,000 DNA
samples collected from persons convicted of a crime. These are
increases over the approximately 14,000 cases and 45,000
convicted offender samples reported analyzed in 1997. 

As of January 2001, 81% of DNA crime laboratories reported DNA
analyses backlogs totaling 16,081 subject cases and 265,329
convicted offender samples.  To complete DNA case and convicted
offender sample analyses, 45% of the crime laboratories surveyed
contracted private laboratories. Those private laboratories had
a reported backlog of 918 subject cases and 100,706 convicted
offender samples.

These findings come from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
2001 National Study of DNA Laboratories, the second national
survey of publicly operated forensic crime laboratories that
perform DNA testing.  Information from the initial survey was
reported in 2000.  ** Footnote. Survey of DNA Crime
Laboratories, 1998, February 2000, NCJ 179104.
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdnacl98.htm>**

This follow-up to the initial survey obtained data from 110 of 
the approximately 120 known public forensic DNA laboratories. As
part of their DNA Laboratory Improvement Program, the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ) funded the initial 1998 survey to
help identify workload and technology issues.  ** Footnote. For
more information on NIJ programs related to forensic science see
their website at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/sciencetech/invest.htm>
**

 Between 1997 and 2000 the workload for the Nation's DNA crime
laboratories increased substantially.  During this period DNA
labs recorded a more than 50% increase in subject cases and
convicted offender samples received.  In that same time the
total number of full-time employees working at DNA crime
laboratories increased by a third, the number of subject cases
analyzed increased by 73%, and the number of convicted offender
samples analyzed more than tripled. 

The increases in work received and analyzed between 1997 and
2000 resulted in casework backlogs reported by DNA crime
laboratories increasing by 135% while reported convicted
offender backlogs decreased by 7%.

Forensic Laboratory Survey

While the technology available for analyzing deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) for criminal justice purposes has been progressing
rapidly, the U.S. Department of Justice has undertaken several
initiatives to assist forensic laboratories in improving their
DNA analysis capabilities.  This survey was conducted to collect
current information about publicly funded forensic crime
laboratories performing DNA testing across the Nation.  That
information can be compared to the baseline information
collected in 1999.

The survey was sent to 135 forensic laboratories, and 124
responses were received from individual public laboratories and
headquarters for statewide forensic crime laboratory systems. 
The responses included 110 publicly funded forensic laboratories
that perform DNA testing in 47 States.  (See a description of
the agencies at the end of the report.)

About half of the forensic laboratories (49%) were part of a
Statewide laboratory system.  For most of these forensic crime
laboratories, DNA analysis was just one of several forensic 
analyses the labs performed.  About 90% of DNA crime
laboratories were also responsible for controlled substance
analysis and firearms/toolmark/footwear/tireprint analysis.

Sixty-five percent of DNA crime laboratories also performed
crime scene investigation, blood alcohol testing, fire debris
analyses, and trace analyses.

An aspect of the laboratories' ability to perform accurate,
consistent analyses and to have those analyses used and defended
in court is the adherence to accepted procedures and guidelines.
One indication that a laboratory successfully follows the
forensic community's standards is accreditation by a recognized
forensic organization.

As of January 1, 2001, 63% of laboratories were accredited by an
official organization, and 19% had applied for accreditation or
had a pre-accreditation inspection by an accredited laboratory.  
Most of the accredited laboratories (87%) had been
accredited by the American Society of Crime Lab
Directors-Laboratory Accreditation Board (ASCLD-LAB).

Standards for performing DNA testing involve the selection of
markers, the number of tests required, and what procedures
should be followed.  Such standards have been developed by a
working group of forensic experts which includes representatives
from the State and Federal crime laboratories, academia, and the
FBI. ** Footnote. Group developing standards for DNA testing was
called the Technical Working Group on DNA Analysis and
Methodology (TWGDAM) which is now known as the Scientific
Working Group on DNA Analysis and Methodology (SWGDAM).**  

Congress required the FBI to establish the DNA Advisory Board
(DAB) to develop benchmarks for laboratories doing forensic DNA
analysis. The final DAB report was completed in February 1997
and forwarded to the Director of the FBI.  The FBI has since
used the DAB recommendations to issue Quality Assurance
Guidelines that are statutorily required.  Adherence to those
standards is a benchmark for court acceptance of the results of
DNA analysis as evidence.

Every laboratory doing DNA analysis reported following some
standard procedural guidelines.  All the laboratories followed
either the Quality Assurance Guidelines of the FBI or the SWGDAM
standards or both.  FBI guidelines and SWGDAM standards do not
cover all the same areas of laboratory operations and
procedures; however, they are similar because the FBI
incorporated many of the SWGDAM standards into its guidelines. 
A small percentage of laboratories (9%) also followed their own
in-house standards.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Crime laboratory budgets


               Number of   Annual laboratory budgets
               budgets     (in thousands)
               reported    Mean     Minimum  Maximum

Total forensic
laboratory 
    1999          71       $2,952      $60  $13,000
    2000          77        3,091       45   15,500

DNA laboratory
    1999          44         $410      $15   $1,800
    2000          49          464        5    1,950


Crime laboratory budgets are sometimes administered by the
agency or department responsible for the operation of the
laboratory.  In many cases that is a State or local law
enforcement department. Consequently, some laboratories have
only partial budget or no budget information available.  Most
forensic DNA laboratories are part of a larger crime laboratory
responsible for many different types of evidence analyses.  In
this study, 62% of DNA laboratories provided information on the
entire forensic laboratory's annual budget for 1999, and 68% for
the 2000 budget.

The laboratories that did report had a wide range of budgets. 
In 1999 the reported budgets for entire forensic laboratories
ranged from $60,000 to $13 million, in fiscal year 2000 they
ranged from $45,000 to $15.5 million.  

Depending on the organization of the laboratories, the costs of
DNA analyses may not be identifiable.  About half (52%) of the
laboratories performing DNA analyses reported that they could
identify budget amounts used for DNA testing.

Of the laboratories that reported budget amounts for DNA work,
the annual DNA budget ranged from $15,000 to $1.8  million in
fiscal year 1999 and from $5,000 to $1.95 million in fiscal year
2000.

Laboratory budgets may change drastically from year to year
during a period of changing technologies and shifting demands. 
For example, if new equipment purchases and/or capital
improvements are included in a single year of a laboratory's
budget, that year will not be representative of the ongoing cost
of running the laboratory.  This study did not attempt to
identify how much of each laboratory budget could be classified
as one-time expenditures versus recurring expenses.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Staffing

The median number of full-time staff members working in DNA
laboratories as of January 2001 was 6.  The DNA laboratories
full-time staffs ranged from 1 employee to a staff of 60
employees. The 110 laboratories employed a total of 893
full-time DNA employees.  A majority of those full-time
employees were on the technical staff (88%) with most of them
having the primary duty of a DNA examiner/analyst.

In many instances a single staff member has responsibility for
more than one position.  This survey counted each employee only
once, using his/her primary duty.  Therefore, even though a
laboratory may have had someone responsible for managing
laboratory administration or managing the laboratory's Combined
DNA Indexing System (CODIS), they may not have classified any
person as primarily an administrative manager or a CODIS manager.

Workload

Laboratories received DNA samples for analysis from several
different sources.  All DNA laboratories reported receiving DNA
samples from local police and sheriffs' offices.  About half of
the laboratories received samples from State police (58%) and
medical examiners (50%).  Nineteen percent of laboratories
reported "other agencies," including Federal agencies,
submitting DNA for analysis.

A single criminal incident can involve one or more victims, one
or more suspects, multiple pieces of evidence, and multiple
biological samples for testing.  Therefore, a single incident
can have a few, to potentially hundreds of possible samples for
testing, and laboratories use different counting methods to
measure workload.

Almost all laboratories (95%) reported counting workload by
case, defined as a single criminal incident or event, which may
have multiple pieces of evidence and multiple samples.  Nine
percent of laboratories counted workload by sample and 8% count
by pieces of evidence.

Unit by which         Labs performing
laboratories count    DNA analyses
casework              Number Percent

Total                  106       100%

Case                   101        95
Evidence                 9         8
Sample                  10         9
Other                    5         5

Note:  Cells do not add to total because of multiple responses. 
Data are missing for 4 laboratories.

In 2000 DNA laboratories received about 31,000 known and unknown
subject cases, an increase from almost 25,000 cases in 1999.  
Known subject cases accounted for about three-quarters of the 
total casework in 1999 and 2000 just as they did in the previous 
survey of years 1996 and 1997.  The DNA laboratories analyzed 
almost 16,000 cases in 1999 and 25,000 cases in 2000.  About 80% 
of the cases analyzed in both 1999 and 2000 were known subject 
cases.

The median number of known and unknown subject cases received by 
all laboratories in 2000 was 244: the median number of cases
analyzed was 176.  During the previous year, half of the
laboratories received 186 or more known and unknown subject
cases and analyzed 110 or more cases.

DNA laboratories also received 177,000 convicted offender
samples in 2000 and analyzed about 148,000. That was an 
increase from 100,000 convicted offender samples received 
and 61,000 samples analyzed in 1999.

Forty-five percent of all laboratories reported contracting a
private laboratory to do DNA testing in 2000 (not shown in a
table).  The laboratories reported a total of 798 known and
unknown subject DNA cases and 32,510 convicted offender samples
contracted to private laboratories in 1999.  In 2000 they
contracted 944 subject cases and 204,359 convicted offender
samples.

The number of cases and convicted offender samples received and
analyzed varied by the size of the laboratory.  In 2000 the
median number of known and unknown subject cases received by
laboratories with fewer than 10 full-time staff members was 196.
 These smaller laboratories analyzed a median of 101 cases in
2000.  Less than half of small laboratories reported receiving
or analyzing any convicted offender samples.  In general only
State operated laboratories process convicted offender samples.

DNA laboratories with 10 or more full-time staff received a
median of 480 known and unknown subject cases and half those
laboratories analyzed 377 or more cases in 2000.  Half of these
larger laboratories also reported  receiving 2019 or more
convicted offender samples and analyzing 868 or more samples.

Case backlog

Eighty-one percent of DNA laboratories reported having a backlog
of known or unknown subject cases, or a backlog of convicted
offender samples, as of January 1, 2001.  The survey defined a
case as backlogged if it had complete sets of samples ready for
analysis in the laboratory for more than 15 days, and convicted
offender samples as backlogged if the sample was in the
laboratory more than 10 days.  

The laboratories and State headquarters reported backlogs
totaling 16,081 known and unknown subject cases and 265,000
convicted offender samples.  To help alleviate the backlog of
convicted offender samples, as of September 30, 2000, the
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) began awarding grants
through the DNA Backlog Reduction Program 2001 to fund-in- house
and contracted private laboratory analyses of backlogged samples.

--------------------------------------------------------------

State court prosecutors' offices use of DNA evidence

In the 2001 National Survey of Prosecutors, all the prosecutors'
offices serving large districts reported using DNA evidence. 
The survey collected data from more than 100 chief prosecutors
that handled felony cases in State courts of general
jurisdiction and served districts with a population over
500,000. 

Nearly 90% of these large offices reported having used DNA
evidence during plea negotiations and all offices reported
having used DNA evidence during felony trials.  Three-quarters
of the offices received DNA analyses from State-operated
forensic laboratories.


The most common problem with the use of DNA evidence by
prosecutors' offices were excessive delay in getting laboratory
results, reported by 70% of offices. The next most common
complaint, reported by 43% of offices, was inconclusive results.

Source:  State Court Prosecutors in Large Districts, 2001,
December 2001, NCJ 191206.

--------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------
Types of DNA work received by forensic crime laboratories

Forensic crime laboratories receive biological samples for DNA
analysis from a variety of sources for different types of
analyses.  For purposes of this study, the DNA analyses that
crime laboratories perform are categorized into two general
types: casework and convicted offender samples.

Casework

Casework refers to cases received by forensic crime laboratories
which involve a criminal incident under investigation.  Each
case may involve multiple pieces of evidence retrieved from a
crime scene, and each piece of evidence may have multiple
samples for testing.  Casework may involve many different types
of biological samples (such as blood, semen, saliva, and hair)
which must be identified, selected for analysis, and sampled
from crime scene evidence.  Casework is generally more difficult
and time consuming than analysis of convicted offender samples.

Because each case may also have a subject or subjects identified
as suspects, casework can be further divided into "suspect
cases" and "nonsuspect cases."  This distinction can change. 
For example, if testing eliminates all suspects, the case can be
recategorized as a "nonsuspect case."  For the purposes of this
study, suspect and nonsuspect cases refer to whether there were
any suspects at the time the case was originally received.

Convicted offender samples

Convicted offender samples are DNA samples collected from
persons convicted of a crime, normally a violent crime or
felony.  The samples  are to be analyzed, and the results are to
be included in a DNA database.

Convicted offender samples are usually blood or saliva.

The DNA Identification Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14132) authorizes
the FBI to establish DNA indexes for --

* persons convicted of crimes
* samples recovered from crime scenes, and
* samples recovered from unidentified human remains.

As of June 1998, legislation in all 50 States and the District
of Columbia requires convicted offenders to provide samples for
DNA databases.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Data processing

Almost three-quarters of the laboratories (72%) waited until an
analytical report was complete before reporting DNA test
results, while nearly a quarter of labs reported results as soon
as all laboratory testing was completed.  A small number of labs
specified that a technical report must also have been done
before results were released (not shown in a table).

When the laboratories reported subject case results, over half
said they regularly reported to the agency or office that
submitted the case (59%) and regularly reported to the
prosecutor's office (57%).  Nearly as many (45%) also reported
test results to an investigating office. After being analyzed,
convicted offender samples were most frequently reported to a
CODIS office.  Seven laboratories also reported convicted
offender sample analyses to other offices and agencies such as a
sexual offender registry.

Over three-quarters of laboratories reported that they maintain
a local DNA database of some type, such as the Local DNA
Indexing System (LDIS), the community level part of the CODIS
program.  Access to the local DNA databases is limited to
personnel only at each of those laboratories.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Comparisons with "Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, 1998"


This report is a follow-up to the report "Survey of DNA Crime
Laboratories, 1998," published in February 2000. Data in the
earlier report were collected primarily for 1997 and 1998.  So
that comparisons could be made, data were collected in this
study primarily for 1999 and 2000.

Of 120 laboratories responding to the 1998 survey, 108 reported
performing DNA analysis.  Of the 124 laboratories responding in
2001, 110 reported performing DNA analysis.

In 1998, 56% of DNA laboratories were accredited by an official
organization, and 99% of DNA laboratories used DNA Advisory
Board (DAB) or Technical Working Group on DNA Analysis and
Methodology (TWGDAM) standard guidelines to perform DNA
analyses.  In 2001, 63% of DNA laboratories were accredited, and
100% of DNA laboratories used Quality Assurance Guidelines of
the FBI or Scientific Working Group on DNA Analysis and
Methodology (SWGDAM) standard guidelines.

Laboratories continue to receive cases primarily from law
enforcement sources. In 1998 and 2001, 98% and 96% of
laboratories received cases from local police and sheriff's
departments.

In 1997 DNA laboratories received nearly 21,000 subject cases
and 116,000 convicted offender samples.  By 2000 the labs were
receiving 31,000 subject cases and 265,000 convicted offender
samples.  The number of cases analyzed also increased from
14,000 subject cases in 1997 to nearly 25,000 in 2000, and from
45,000 to 148,000 convicted offender samples analyzed.

At yearend 1998, 69% of labs reported having a backlog totaling
6,800 subject cases and 287,000 convicted offender samples. As
of January 1, 2001, 81% of labs reported having a backlog
totaling 16,000 subject cases and 265,000 convicted offender
samples.

The number of full-time staff members increased from a total of
672 (with the largest staff including 47) in 1998 
to a total of 897, with the largest staff including 60 in 2000.

Processing policies and procedures 

To help control the flow of cases through DNA labs, a majority
of laboratories had policies for the acceptance and processing
of casework. Nearly all the laboratories, 97%, reported a policy
for acceptance of DNA case submissions. While 79% of the
laboratories said they accept any criminal cases, 14% of the
laboratories had some restrictions on the known subject cases or
unknown subject cases they accept.

To further control DNA case processing, 91% of laboratories
reported having a system for prioritizing how cases are assigned
for analysis. Seventy percent of laboratories assigned cases for
analysis according to cases' court dates. Over half of
laboratories started cases based on prosecutor requests, and 41%
started analysis of cases in the order cases were received by
the laboratory.

Eighty-three percent of DNA laboratories also had a program for
looking at inactive, closed, or previously analyzed cases. 
Eighty-two percent of the laboratories that analyzed these types
of old cases did so when requested by the agency that submitted
the case's evidence.  Nearly half of the laboratories
reanalyzing cases had a program that analyzed cases when DNA
testing was not previously done, and over 40% reanalyzed cases
when DNA was tested with an earlier method.

For casework evidence, over half (53%) of the DNA laboratories
had a policy to minimize the number of samples taken per case,
such as taking only the most probative samples and encouraging
discussions between laboratory personnel and investigator
offices.

Storage of DNA

Most laboratories, (85%), reported storing samples of DNA in
case there was a need to reanalyze the DNA evidence in the
future.  Seventy-eight percent of laboratories had a written
policy regarding sample disposition. Many of these policies
specified what form of DNA was stored, for how long, and what
evidence was returned or destroyed.

Eighty-one percent of the laboratories that stored DNA stored it
frozen, and 18% stored it ultra-frozen. The laboratories'
capacity to store DNA ranged from 500 to 710,000 samples.

Equipment/supplies 

As the techniques for performing DNA analysis have advanced, the
equipment used by laboratories has needed to be updated.  The
types of DNA analysis that can be done and the number of DNA
samples that can be analyzed are directly dependent on the
equipment the laboratory has available.  For example, a genetic
analyzer commonly found in DNA laboratories in 2001 has an
advertised standard-mode throughput of 5,220 basecalls per day,
while a newer model made by the same company has a standard-mode
throughput of 90,720 basecalls per day.

Laboratories reported owning a total of 391 thermocyclers,
mainly the various Perkin-Elmer models. There was a median of 3
thermocyclers per DNA lab.

The DNA labs reported owning a total of 284 analyzers. The most
commonly owned analyzer was the ABI310, making up three-quarters
of all the analyzers.  The next most common analyzers were the
ABI377 (12%) and the Hitachi/FMBIO (10%).  Each DNA lab owned
from 0 to 20 analyzers, with a median of 2 analyzers per lab.

While 19% of responding laboratories reported that they planned
to use robotics or some type of automated processing in their
DNA analyses in the next 2 years, only 8 laboratories reported
currently using automation. Four of those laboratories reported
using automation in spotting/aliquoting, in the extraction of
DNA , and in the separation and analysis. Three laboratories
reported using automation for PCR reaction set up.

The forensic community has been moving away from Restricted
Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) testing as the newer
technology of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) has been
implemented in laboratories. The results of this survey
demonstrate that change when compared to the previous DNA crime
laboratory study.  In 1998, 43 DNA laboratories reported using
RFLP for casework and 14 for convicted offender samples.  In
2001 one laboratory reported using RFLP for casework, and none
used it for convicted offender samples.

The test kits most commonly used by laboratories for DNA typing
of casework evidence at the start of 2001 were CoFiler, by 82
labs, and Profiler Plus, by 79 labs. The Polymarker and DQ Alpha
kits were also used for casework analyses by 23 and 22
laboratories respectively.  The Profiler Plus and CoFiler were
also the most often used kits for DNA typing of convicted
offender samples by the laboratories with 20 using Profiler Plus
and 21 using CoFiler.

Work contracted to private laboratories used similar test kits
for DNA typing.  Contract laboratories used the Profiler Plus
and CoFiler most often for both casework and convicted offender
samples.  When contracting with private laboratories a lab can
identify the information required in a completed analysis
without having to specify which test kit(s) need to be used in
the DNA typing.  Four laboratories reported not knowing what
test kits were used by contracted private laboratories. 

--------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) -- Combined DNA Index
System (CODIS)  

CODIS enables State and local law enforcement crime laboratories
to exchange and compare DNA information electronically, thereby
linking serial violent crimes to each other and to known violent 
offenders. 

All 50 States and the District of Columbia have passed
legislation requiring offenders convicted of certain crimes,
determined by each State, to provide DNA samples for databasing.
 Analysis of those DNA samples reveals a set of genetic
characteristics, a DNA profile, unique to each individual. 
Those DNA profiles are then entered into the convicted offender
index of CODIS.

DNA profiles developed from crime scene evidence, such as semen
stains or blood spatters are entered into the forensic index of
CODIS.

CODIS uses the two indexes to generate investigative leads in
crimes where biological evidence is recovered from the crime
scene. CODIS software searches the two indexes 
for matching DNA profiles.

The FBI has provided CODIS software, together with installation,
training, and user support, free of charge to any State or local
law enforcement laboratories performing DNA analysis. 

For more information about the FBI and the CODIS program see
their website at <www.fbi.gov>. 

--------------------------------------------------------------

Study population and number of respondents

To begin this study BJS created a list of publicly funded crime
laboratories that we believed had performed DNA analyses. The
list of laboratories was drawn from several sources, primarily
respondents from the initial survey of DNA crime laboratories,
laboratories that applied for grants from NIJ, and laboratories
participating in CODIS. Verification of laboratories contacts
and addresses was done by telephone for a small number of these
laboratories before the first mailing of the survey.

In February 2001, surveys were mailed to 135 forensic crime
laboratories and state laboratory system headquarters.  An
electronic version of the survey, on a BJS website, was also
made available to the laboratories so they could provide
information using the Internet.

Laboratories were given until mid- March to return the surveys. 
Follow-up to the initial mailing continued for four months with
a second mailing, phone calls, and faxes to laboratories that
had not responded. 

When data collection was stopped we had received 124 responses. 
Of those respondents, 110 reported that they currently performed
DNA analyses. The respondents that did not test DNA included
State headquarters, laboratories in the process of setting up
DNA analysis capability, and one lab that screened for presence
of DNA but did not perform analyses.

We do not have information from the 13 laboratories that did not
respond, but we are confident that a majority of those
nonrespondents perform some level of DNA analysis.  Including
those with the 110 DNA laboratories that did respond, we
estimate that approximately 120 forensic crime laboratories in
the United States currently perform DNA analyses.

--------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld is acting
director.

Greg W. Steadman wrote this Bulletin under the supervision of
Steven K. Smith.  Lisa Forman and Anjali Swienton, of the
National Institute of Justice provided assistance on technical
issues and project development.  Marika Litras provided
statistical assistance and review.  Tom Hester and Tina Dorsey
edited the report.  Jayne Robinson prepared the report for
publication.

January 2002, NCJ 191191

--------------------------------------------------------------

1/30/02 th


