U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

February 2000, NCJ 179104

Survey of DNA 
Crime Laboratories, 1998

------------------------------------------------------------
This Bulletin is one in a series. More recent editions may 
be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#dna

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sdnacl98.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------


By Greg W. Steadman
BJS Statistician

------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

At the end of 1997, 69% of DNA labs had a backlog of 6,800 known
and unknown subject cases and 287,000 convicted offender samples.

* To alleviate case backlogs 44% of the labs had hired additional 
staff, 34% were using overtime, 13% were  contracting with private 
labs, and 28% were using other methods.

* The number of full-time staff in DNA labs ranged from 1 to 47,
with a median staff size of 5.  Three quarters of labs had fewer
than 10 full-time staff. 

* Almost all DNA labs (98%) received cases for analysis from
local police and sheriffs' offices. Sixty-five percent of DNA
labs received cases from State police, 48% from medical
examiners, and 43% from State corrections.

* In 1997 labs received about 21,000 known or unknown subject
cases, up from 15,000 in 1996.  Known subject cases in both
years accounted for over 75% of the total.

* In 1997 labs analyzed about 14,000 known or unknown cases
received, an increase from 10,000 in 1996. 

* The median number of cases received by a lab in 1997 was 221;
the median number analyzed, 130.  During the previous year half
of the labs received at least 192 cases and analyzed 122 or more.

* In 1997 the median number of cases received by labs with less
than 10 full-time staff members was 201. Labs with 10 or more
full-time staff had a median of 320 cases. The median backlog in
1997 was 50 cases for the smaller labs and 77 cases for the rest.

* Labs received 116,000 convicted offender samples for analysis
in 1997 and 72,000 in 1996.  Less than half were analyzed:
45,000 in 1997 and 37,000 in 1996.

* Labs in 17 States indicated their state criminal history
records specify whether a DNA sample has been collected. In 5
states the DNA identification is also attached to the records.
----------------------------------------------------------------

As of December 1997, 69% of publicly operated forensic crime
labs across the Nation reported a DNA analyses backlog totaling
6,800 subject cases and 287,000 convicted offender samples.  To
address this backlog, 44% of the labs had hired additional staff
since 1997, 34% were using overtime, and 13% were contracting
with private labs.

These findings come from the initial survey of publicly operated
forensic crime labs that perform DNA testing. Data were obtained
from 108 labs of the approximately 120 known -- including all
statewide labs.


As part of their DNA Laboratory Improvement Program, the
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) funded the survey to help
identify workload and technology issues. 

Forensic Laboratory Survey

While the technology available for analyzing deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) has been progressing rapidly, the U.S. Department of
Justice has undertaken several initiatives to assist forensic
laboratories in improving their DNA analysis capabilities.  This
survey is intended to provide baseline information about
publicly funded forensic crime laboratories across the Nation
that were performing DNA testing in 1997 and 1998. 

This survey was sent to approximately 140 laboratories, and 126
responses were received from individual labs and headquarters
for statewide forensic crime lab systems. The responses 
included 108 publicly funded forensic laboratories that perform
DNA testing in 43 States.

For most of these forensic crime labs, DNA analysis was just one
of several forensic analyses the labs performed. Three-quarters
or more of the forensic labs also were responsible for
controlled substance analysis, firearms/toolmark/footwear/tireprint 
examination, and trace analysis.  About two-thirds of the labs also 
performed crime scene investigation and fire debris analysis (table 1).

About half of these laboratories (55%) were part of a Statewide
laboratory system. The laboratories were located in a variety of
government agencies.

U.S. Department of Justice laboratory support programs

National Institute of Justice (NIJ) -- Forensic DNA Laboratory
Improvement Program 

Authorized by the DNA Identification Act of 1994 (Public Law
103-322), the Forensic DNA Laboratory Improvement Program was
created to improve the capabilities and capacity of State and
local forensic DNA laboratories to support the investigation and
prosecution of violent crime. NIJ's successes in this program
include --
* The development or establishment of forensic DNA testing
capabilities in state and local forensic laboratories to conduct
DNA testing.
* Improvements in the abilities of State DNA labs to meet
national standards for DNA quality assurance and proficiency
testing.
* Fostering cooperation and mutual assistance among forensic DNA
laboratories by funding laboratory compliance with the FBI's
CODIS.  (See page 8 for more detail about CODIS.)

The laboratory improvement program is authorized to award grants
through fiscal year 2000 and has received applications for
funding beyond the available appropriations.  NIJ has proposed
several programs to continue support of forensic laboratories,
DNA testing, research, and development.  For more information
about NIJ programs see their website at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/.

Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) -- State 
Identification Systems (SIS) Program

The State Identification Systems (SIS) Program is a formula
grant program administered by BJA with funding from the FBI. 
The SIS Program enhances the capability of State and local
governments to identify and prosecute offenders by establishing
or upgrading information systems and DNA analysis capabilities. 
One intended use of these grants is to improve the ability to
analyze DNA in ways that are compatible and integrated with the
FBI's CODIS.

For answers to questions and technical assistance in completing
and submitting a SIS application call the U.S. Department of
Justice Response Center at (800) 421-6770.

NIJ -- National Commission on the Future 
of DNA Evidence

The Attorney General directed NIJ to establish a commission to
provide her with recommendations on the use of current and
future DNA methods applications and technologies in the
operation of the criminal justice system, from the crime scene
to the courtroom.

The commission addressed 5 specific issues: 
(1) the use of DNA in post-conviction relief cases 
(2) legal concerns including Daubert challenges and the scope of
discovery in DNA cases
(3) criteria for training and technical assistance for criminal
justice professionals involved in the identification, collection, and 
preservation of DNA evidence at the crime scene
(4) essential laboratory capabilities in the face of emerging
technologies 
(5) the impact of future technological developments on the use
of DNA in the criminal justice system.

For more information see www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/dna/.

Most frequently the State police (42%) operated the DNA labs;
another 25% of labs were part of a local police or sheriff's
department. The remaining labs operated under a variety of
government agencies such as public health and safety and
prosecutors' offices (table 2).

An important aspect of the laboratories' ability to perform
accurate, consistent analyses and then to have those analyses
used and defended in court is the adherence to accepted
procedures and guidelines. One indication that a lab
successfully follows the forensic community's standards is
accreditation by a recognized forensic organization. 

At the start of 1998, 56% of the labs were accredited by an
official organization, and 18% had applied for accreditation or
had undergone a pre- accreditation inspection by an accredited
lab.  Almost all of the accredited labs (93%) had been
accredited by the American Society of Crime Lab
Directors-Laboratory Accreditation Board (ASCLD-LAB) 
(table 3).

Standards for performing DNA testing involve the selection of
markers, the number of tests required, and what procedures
should be followed.  Such standards have been developed through
the Technical Working Group on DNA Analysis and Methodology
(TWGDAM).  The TWGDAM includes representatives from the Office
of Law Enforcement Standards at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology and State and Federal crime labs. 

Another source of laboratory standards is the DNA Advisory Board
(DAB). The FBI established the DAB to develop benchmarks for
labs doing forensic DNA analyses. The final DAB report was
completed in February 1997 and was forwarded to the Director of
the FBI for review and implementation.

Every lab responding to the survey reported following some
standard procedural guidelines. Ninety-nine percent of the labs
follow the guidelines developed by the DAB or the TWGDAM or
both. 

                      Labs reported
Procedural standards  using standards
DAB                         27
TWGDAM                      13
DAB and TWGDAM              63
DAB, TWGDAM and other        3
Other                        1

All labs required their examiner/analysts to perform proficiency 
testing and follow the TWGDAM established guidelines of testing 
every 180 days or less.  Eighty-six percent of the labs required 
the technical leader or manager to undergo proficiency testing, and 
33% required the technicians to do so. 

Although a few labs required technical leaders and technicians
to perform proficiency testing only about once a year, most labs
that required the testing also tested every 180 days or fewer.
Ten percent of labs required certification or completed
proficiency testing at the time of hiring for DNA technical
positions.

Nearly all labs, 97%, used a second examiner to interpret DNA
typing results.

Budget

The laboratories ranged in staff size and budget.  In fiscal
year 1997 the reported budgets for entire forensic laboratories
ranged from $15,000 to $14.3 million. In fiscal year 1998 they
ranged from $30,000 to $16.9 million. Forty-three percent of
forensic labs indicated they could identify the portion of their
budgets used strictly for DNA analyses. Of the labs that
reported budget amounts for DNA work, the annual DNA budget
ranged from $5,000 to $3.9 million in fiscal year 1997 and
$2,000 to $4.1 million in fiscal year 1998 (table 4). 

In both fiscal years some labs received all their funding from
the State, all their funding from the county, or all their
funding from the city.  The main source of funding of DNA labs
was State governments, providing an average 43% of the reported
budgets (table 5).

On average, just over half of DNA laboratory budgets were
allocated for personnel costs in both fiscal year 1997 and 1998
(table 6).  The next largest expenditure in each fiscal year was
supplies, approximately a quarter of the budget. 

Staffing 

Ninety-eight laboratories reported their DNA staff size (table
7).  The DNA labs full-time staffs ranged from 1 full-time
employee to 47 full-time employees. The 98 DNA labs employed a
total of 672 full-time and 85 part-time personnel. 

Salaries

About three-quarters of the labs used a salary schedule for the
DNA technical staff, and about half used a schedule for
administrative staff.  Of labs using salary schedules, the
starting annual salaries for examiners ranged from $23,650 to 
$58,000 with a median starting salary of $34,831 (table 8). 
Technical leader/manager starting salaries ranged from $28,000 to 
$66,400 with a median starting salary of $45,000.  The median 
starting salary for an administrative manager was $49,431 with a 
top starting salary of $84,000.

Educational requirements 

Nearly all labs reported having mini-mum educational
requirements for technical staff.  Of the labs reporting their
specific requirements, 64% required a master's degree and 35%
required a bachelor's degree to be a technical leader or
technical manager. Examiners and analysts needed a bachelor's
degree in 97% of the labs and a master's degree in 3%. 

Laboratory directors

While some forensic crime labs with multiple areas of analysis
may have a director or supervisor responsible for just the DNA
section, in many labs the director of the entire forensic crime
laboratory is considered the director or supervisor of the DNA
laboratory.  The median annual salary for a DNA lab director was
$55,000.

Of the laboratories reporting educational and experience
requirements for their DNA lab director, about 50% of labs
required the director to have a bachelor's degree, and another
36% required a graduate degree.  The median required years of 
experience for a DNA lab director was 5 years. 

Workload

Laboratories receive DNA samples for analysis from several
different sources. Almost all DNA labs (98%) reported receiving
DNA samples from local police and sheriffs' offices.  Sixty-five
percent of DNA labs received cases from State police, 48% from
medical examiners, and 43% from State corrections (table 9). 

A single crime incident can involve one or more victims, one or 
more offenders, multiple pieces of evidence, and multiple biological 
samples for testing.  A single incident can have just a few to hundreds 
of possible samples for testing.  Therefore, labs use different ways 
to measure workload, such as by --
* case, a single criminal incident or event 
* piece of evidence, possibly multiple pieces of 
evidence for a single case
* sample, possibly multiple samples for each piece 
of evidence.

While almost every lab (97%) reported counting the workload by
the case,  about 20% also used pieces of evidence, samples
analyzed, or other measures to count their workload.

                      Labs performing
                      DNA analyses
Unit for counting    Number  Percent
  Total               103      100%
 
Case                  100       97%
Evidence                7        7
Sample                 11       11
Other                   6        6
 
Details do not add to total because of
multiple responses.

Types of DNA work received by forensic crime labs

Forensic crime laboratories receive biological samples for DNA
analysis from a variety of sources for different types of
analyses.  For purposes of this study, the DNA analyses that
crime labs perform are categorized into two general types:
casework and convicted offender samples.

Casework

Casework refers to cases received by a forensic crime lab which
involve a criminal incident under investigation.  Each case may
involve multiple pieces of evidence retrieved from a crime
scene, and each piece of evidence may have multiple samples for
testing.  Casework may involve many different types of
biological samples (such as blood, semen, saliva, and hair) that
must be identified, selected for analysis, and sampled from
crime scene evidence.  Casework is generally more difficult and
time consuming than analysis of convicted offender samples.

Because each case may or may not also have a subject 
or subjects identified as suspects, casework can be further
divided into "suspect cases" and "nonsuspect cases."  This
distinction can change.  For example, if testing eliminates all
suspects, the case can be recategorized as a "nonsuspect case." 
For the purposes of this study, suspect and nonsuspect cases
refer to whether there where any suspects at the time the case
was originally received.

Convicted offender samples

Convicted offender samples are DNA samples collected from
persons convicted of a crime, normally a violent crime or
felony, that are to be analyzed and included in a DNA database.

The DNA Identification Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. . 14132)
authorizes the FBI to establish DNA indexes for -- 
* persons convicted of crimes
* samples recovered from crime scenes
* samples recovered from unidentified human remains. As of June
1998, legislation had passed requiring convicted offenders to
provide samples for DNA databases in all 50 States and the
District of Columbia. By October 1998 the FBI estimated that
States had collected approximately 600,000 DNA samples and
analyzed more than 250,000.

Convicted offender samples are normally blood or saliva
collected from an identified offender.  Ninety percent of DNA
labs that receive convicted offender samples receive samples of
offenders' blood, and 18% receive offenders' saliva.

In 1997 DNA labs received about 21,000 known and unknown subject
cases, up from 15,000 in 1996 (table 10).  Known subject cases
in both years accounted for over 75% of the total casework.  In
1997 the DNA labs analyzed about 14,000 of the cases received,
an increase from 10,000 in 1996.

DNA labs also received 116,000 convicted offender samples in
1997 and analyzed about 45,000, less than half the number
received. That was an increase from 72,000 received and 37,000
convicted offender samples analyzed in 1996. 

The median number of known and unknown subject cases received by
all labs in 1997 was 221; the median number of cases analyzed
was 130. During the previous year half of the labs received 192
or more cases and analyzed 122 or more of those cases. 

The number of cases received and analyzed varied by the size of
the lab. In 1997 the number of known and unknown subject cases
received by labs with less than 10 full-time staff members was
201.  These smaller labs had a median backlog in 1997 of 50
cases.  DNA labs with more than 10 full-time staff received a
median of 320 known and unknown subject cases with a backlog 77
cases to be analyzed. 

Case backlog

Sixty-nine percent of DNA labs reported having a backlog at the
end of 1997 that totaled 6,800 known and unknown subject cases
and 287,000 convicted offender samples. To alleviate case
backlogs 44% of the labs had hired additional staff, 34% were
using overtime, 13% were contracting with private labs, and 28%
were using various other methods.

                        Labs reporting on
                        casework backlogs
Initiatives              Number   Percent
    Total                 110      100%
 
Hired additional staff     48       44
Used overtime              37       34
Contracted with
    private labs           14       13
Other                      31       28
 
Details do not add to total because of
multiple responses        

The DNA labs that hired private labs to do DNA testing in 1996
and 1997 used the private labs mainly for convicted offender
testing.  Public labs sent almost 400 known and unknown subject
cases and 17,700 convicted offender samples to private labs for
analysis in 1997, an increase from about 330 cases and 5,500
convicted offender samples in 1996 (table 11).

Data processing 

After completing casework analyses, 63% of DNA labs reported
their results to the agency or office that submitted the case
for analysis. Fifty-seven percent of DNA labs regularly reported
the results to prosecutors' offices and 40% regularly reported
to the investigating office. 

For convicted offender samples nearly all labs reported their
results to a CODIS office.  (See the discussion of CODIS.)  One lab 
regularly reported convicted offender results to a
sexual offender database, and two regularly reported to a State
identification system.

Policies and procedures for case processing 

To help control the flow of cases through DNA labs, a majority
of labs had policies for the acceptance and processing of
casework. Sixty-nine percent of labs reported having a policy
for acceptance of DNA submissions. While two-thirds of the labs
said they would accept any criminal cases, nearly 30% of the
labs had some restrictions on the known subject cases and
unknown subject cases they would accept (table 12).  

Nearly all labs (92%) reported having a system for prioritizing
how cases are assigned for analysis.  Eighty-one percent of labs
assigned cases for analysis according to the cases' court dates.
Half of labs started cases based on prosecutor requests and
just over a third of the labs used the date cases were received
(table 13).

A majority, 65%, of DNA labs also had a program for looking at
inactive, closed, or previously analyzed cases (table 14). 
Nearly half the labs that analyzed these types of old cases did
so when requested by the agency submitting the case's evidence.
Thirty percent of labs that reanalyzed cases had a program that
analyzed cases when DNA testing was not previously done.

For casework evidence, a third of DNA labs reported a policy to
minimize the number of samples taken per case, such as taking
only the most probative samples (table 15).  Half of labs took
adjacent cuttings to act as a substrate control, and 85% of labs
saved DNA samples for possible retesting.

Fifty-nine percent of labs attempted to notify someone, such as
the agency that submitted the evidence, when retesting would not
be possible because the original analysis would use all available 
material.

Storage of DNA 

Most labs store samples of DNA in case there is a need to
reanalyze the DNA evidence in the future. The most common forms
in which labs stored DNA for retesting were extracted DNA, used
by 88% of labs that stored DNA, and cuttings and swabs stored by
82% of those labs (not shown in a table). Eighty-six percent of
labs that stored DNA stored it frozen, and 22% stored it
ultra-frozen.

The labs' capacities to store DNA ranged from 500 to 250,000
samples. On average 52% of their storage capacity was being
used.  Of DNA labs that saved DNA samples, about 80% stored the
samples indefinitely, and the remaining labs reported storing
DNA samples from 2 to 84 months. The median time DNA samples
were stored by those labs was 24 months.

Equipment and supplies 

Laboratories reported owning a total of 292 thermocyclers,
mainly Perkin-Elmer models. The median number of thermocyclers
for a DNA lab was two.

The DNA labs reported owning a total of 183 analyzers. The most
commonly owned analyzer was the ABI310, making up two thirds of
all the analyzers. The next most common analyzers were the
Hitachi/FMBIO (17%) and the ABI377 (11%). Each DNA lab owned
from 0 to 10 analyzers with the median number of analyzers per
lab being 1.

While 30 labs reported that they planned to use robotics or some
type of automated processing in their DNA analyses, 6 labs
reported that they were currently using automation.  Five of
those labs reported using automation in the extraction of DNA ;
five used it in separation and analysis. Four of the labs used
automation in spotting  or aliquoting, and two labs used it for
PCR reaction set up.

The forensic community is moving away from Restricted Fragment
Length Polymorphism (RFLP) testing toward the newer technology
of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR).  Even so, 43 DNA labs
reported using RFLP for casework, and 14 labs reported using it
for convicted offender samples.

The DQ Alpha test kit was reported by 73 labs for casework,
followed closely by Polymarker, used by 67 labs. Casework was
also done by 44 labs using Profiler Plus and by 41 labs with
D1S80.  For convicted offender samples, 17 labs reported using
Profiler Plus, and 13 labs used Cofiler.

FBI-- Combined DNA Index System (CODIS)

CODIS enables State and local law enforcement crime laboratories
to exchange and compare DNA information electronically.

All 50 states and the District of Columbia have passed
legislation requiring offenders convicted of certain crimes,
determined by each State, to provide.

DNA samples.  Analysis of those samples reveals a set of genetic
characteristics, a DNA profile, unique to each individual. 
Those DNA profiles are entered into the convicted offender index
of CODIS.

DNA profiles developed from crime scene evidence, such as semen
stains or blood spatters, are entered into the forensic index of
CODIS.

CODIS uses the two indexes to generate investigative leads in
crimes from which biological evidence is recovered. CODIS
software searches the two indexes for matching DNA profiles.

The FBI provides CODIS software, installation, training, and
user support, free of charge to any State or local law
enforcement lab performing DNA analysis. 

For more information about the FBI and the CODIS program visit
the FBI website at www.fbi.gov.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics

is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a 
specific topic in depth from one or 
more datasets that cover many topics.

Greg W. Steadman wrote this report 
under the supervision of Steven K. Smith.  
Marika Litras provided statistical assistance 
and review.  Tom Hester and Tina Dorsey edited 
the report. Jayne Robinson prepared 
the report for publication.

February 2000, NCJ 179104



End of file
1/31/02 pm
2/16/00 ih










