U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics

State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002


November 2004, NCJ 204030


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format re available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/slleta02.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------

Matthew J. Hickman
BJS Statistician

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director

Matthew J. Hickman prepared this report. Brian A. Reaves and Steven K. Smith
reviewed the report. Thomas Cohen provided statistical review. Carolyn C.
Williams edited the report and provided production assistance. Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for printing.

The Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) provided partial
funding for the 2002 Census of Law Enforcement Training Academies (CLETA). 
Debra Cohen and Matthew Scheider of COPS assisted with questionnaire
development. Additional information on the COPS Office is available on the
Internet at <http://www.cops.usdoj.gov>.

The 2002 CLETA data were collected and processed by the Police Executive
Research Forum (PERF) under the supervision of Lorie Fridell. PERF project 
staff included Bruce Kubu and Nathan Ballard. Additional information on PERF 
is available on the Internet at <http://www.policeforum.org>.

The International Association of Directors of Law Enforcement Standards and
Training (IADLEST) provided review and comment on the draft CLETA survey
instrument, as well as letters of support, assistance with non-response 
follow-up, and review and comment on this report. Additional information on
IADLEST is available on the Internet at <http://www.iadlest.org>.

Data presented in this report may be obtained from the National Archive
of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960.
The report and data are available on the Internet at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/>.  

Highlights                                        

General characteristics                           

Personnel                                                     

Resources                                         

Trainees                                          

Core curriculum                                   
                                                  
Force and defensive tactics                       

Community policing   
                                          
Special topics   
                                                  
Methodology  

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

General characteristics

* As of yearend 2002 a total of 626 State and local law enforcement academies
operating in the United States offered basic law enforcement training to
individuals recruited or seeking to become law enforcement officers. Academies
that only provide in-service training, corrections/detention training, or
other special types of training were not included in this total.  

* Included in the 626 academies were 274 county, regional, or State academies;
249 college, university, or technical school academies; and 103 city or
municipal academies.

* In addition to basic recruit training, 88% of the academies provided
in-service training for active duty, certified officers. Less than half (44%)
provided training for individuals not sponsored by a law enforcement agency.

Academy personnel

* Academies in 2002 employed about 12,200 full-time and 25,700 part-time
trainers or instructors.

* About three-quarters of academies employed fewer than 50 full-time
equivalent (FTE) training personnel. Just 8% of academies had 100 or more FTE
trainers, but these large academies employed nearly half (47%) of all
full-time trainers. 

* About two-thirds of academies had a minimum education requirement for
full-time trainers. The most common requirement was a high school degree or
GED (33%), followed by a 2-year (12%) or 4-year (11%) degree. Eleven percent
of the academies specifying minimum education had requirements other than
degrees.

* Just over two-thirds of academies required their full-time trainers to have 
a minimum number of years of law enforcement experience, ranging from 1 to 10
years. Three and 5 years were the most common requirements.

Academy resources

* The total expenditures of training academies during fiscal 2002 was an
estimated $725.6 million, including $351.2 million among county, regional, or
State academies, $299.4 million among city or municipal academies, and $75.1
million among college, university, or technical school academies. 

* On a per academy basis, total expenditures were about $1.2 million overall,
ranging from $261,000 among the smallest academies to $6.3 million among the
largest.

* Expenditures per basic trainee were about $13,100 overall, ranging from
$5,400 among the smallest academies to $18,800 among the largest. 

* Per trainee expenditures were much higher in city or municipal academies
(about $36,200 per trainee) compared to county, regional, or state academies
(about $11,200 per trainee) and college, university, or technical school
academies (about $4,600 per trainee).

Academy trainees

* Among basic law enforcement academy classes that completed training during
2002, an estimated 61,354 recruits started training and 53,302 (or 87%)
successfully completed or graduated from their training program.

* Fifty-five percent or 29,519 of recruits who completed training in 2002
graduated from county, regional, or State academies. Twenty-nine percent (or
15,606 recruits) graduated from college, university, or technical school
academies, and 15% (or 8,177 recruits) from city or municipal academies.

* An estimated 17% of recruits who completed training in 2002 were female, and
27% were members of a racial or ethnic minority.

* Overall academy completion rates were somewhat higher among males (88%) than
females (81%). Males had higher completion rates within all race/ethnicity
categories. 

Core curriculum

* The median number of hours in basic recruit training -- excluding any
field training component -- was 720 hours across all academies. The
median number of hours above any State requirement was 100 hours.

* Among academies conducting field training, the median number of
hours in the field training segment was 180 hours.

* The greatest amount of required instruction time was in firearms skills
(median 60 hours), followed by health and fitness (50 hours), investigations 
(45 hours), self-defense (44 hours), criminal law (40 hours), patrol 
procedures and techniques (40 hours), emergency vehicle operations (36 hours),
and basic first-aid/CPR (24 hours).

* Thirty-five percent of academies provided instruction in basic foreign
languages (for example, survival Spanish), with a median of 16 hours of
instruction in this area.

Force and defensive tactics

* Nearly all academies (99%) used semi-automatic pistols in their basic
firearms training. The median qualification score was 75%.

* Sixty-four percent of academies, training 78% of recruits, used computerized
firearms training systems as part of their basic firearms training.

* Seventy-seven percent of academies, training 75% of recruits, provided
training on use of chemical agents (for example, pepper spray).

* Most academies provided training on pressure-point control techniques
(90% of academies, training 77% of recruits), ground fighting techniques
(85%, training 87% of recruits), and speed cuffing (78%, training 78% of
recruits).

* Nine percent of academies, including 17% of those employing 100 or more FTE
trainers, reported having a mock use-of-force review board as part of their
basic use-of-force training. 

Community policing

* Eighty-three percent of academies, training 87% of recruits, provided
training on identifying community problems. Eighty percent, training 85%
of recruits, provided training on the history of community-oriented
policing.

* Nearly 6 in 10 academies, training half of recruits, provided training on
the use of problem-solving models such as SARA or CAPRA (discussed on page 9).

* In the prior 2 years, 57% of academies made changes to their basic recruit
curriculum related to community policing. A third of academies increased the
number of hours devoted to community policing training.

* About 8 in 10 academies, training 85% of recruits, involved members of the
community in various aspects of training.

* Nearly all academies (99%) provided training on the development of
partnerships with culturally diverse communities.

Special topics

* About 4 in 5 academies, training 83% of recruits, provided some type of
training related to terrorism and responding to terrorist incidents. 

* The most common types of terrorism training were the following: response to
weapons of mass destruction (57%), understanding the nature of terrorism
(48%), and overview of relevant Federal, State, and local agencies (for
example, FEMA and FBI) (44%).

* Ninety-six percent of academies addressed racially-biased policing as
part of their basic training program. Ninety-three percent addressed this
topic during academic training, 40% during practical skills training, and
31% during field training.

* Ninety-seven percent of academies addressed disengagement techniques (that 
is, how to withdraw tactfully from a stop or arrest). Eighty-seven percent
addressed this topic during academic training, 79% during practical skills
training, and 35% during field training.

* Forty-one percent of academies, training 47% of recruits, provided training 
or orientation for their family members (such as preparing for possible
lifestyle changes when the recruit begins work as a law enforcement officer).
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The 2002 Census of Law Enforcement Training Academies

During 2003-04 the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) conducted its first
Census of Law Enforcement Training Academies (CLETA) in the United States. 
The CLETA included all currently operating academies that provided basic 
law enforcement training. Academies that provided only in-service training,
corrections/detention training, or other special types of training were
excluded. See the Methodology section on page 21 for additional detail.

As of yearend 2002 a total of 626 law enforcement academies operating in the
United States offered basic law enforcement training to individuals recruited 
or seeking to become law enforcement officers. This includes 274 county,
regional, or State academies, 249 college, university, or technical school
academies, and 103 city or municipal academies.  

This report describes these academies in terms of their personnel,
expenditures, facilities and equipment, trainees, training curricula, and a
variety of special topic areas including community policing, racially-biased
policing, and terrorism. 

General characteristics

Types of training

In addition to basic recruit training, many academies provided additional
types of training. For example, 88% of academies provided in-service
training for active duty, certified officers. Likewise, 84% of academies
provided specialized training of some type (for example, K-9 and SWAT).

Over two-thirds (70%) provided first-line or higher supervisor training, and
over half (54%) provided training for field training instructors. Less common
was training for individuals not sponsored by a law enforcement agency (44%) 
and field training for recruits (36%).

Academies in 2002 provided training and/or certification for a wide variety
of law enforcement positions. The most common positions were local police
officer (93%) and sheriff's deputy (75%). Fifty-four percent of academies
provided training for campus police officers, and 37% provided training for
corrections officers. 

Less than a third of academies provided training for school resource officers
(29%), State police/patrol officers (27%), parole/probation officers (23%),
firefighters (14%), private security officers (14%), tribal officers (13%), 
and emergency medical technicians (13%).

Academy personnel

Academies in 2002 employed about 12,200 full-time trainers or instructors and
over twice as many part-time trainers or instructors.  

About three-quarters of the academies employed fewer than 50 full-time
equivalent training personnel; about half had fewer than 25 full-time
trainers. 

Eight percent of academies that had 100 or more full-time equivalent trainers
employed nearly half (47%) of all full-time trainers. About a quarter of all
academies had 50 or more full-time equivalent trainers, and these academies
employed 70% of all full-time trainers. 

Academies employing fewer than 10 full-time equivalent trainers accounted for
12% of academies and 2% of all full-time trainers.

About 23% of all part-time trainers were employed by an academy with 100 or
more full-time equivalent training personnel, and 52% were employed by an
academy with 50 or more. Academies employing fewer than 10 full-time
equivalent trainers accounted for less than 2% of all part-time trainers.

County, regional, and State academies were fairly equally distributed across
categories of full-time equivalent trainers. In contrast, about three-fifths
of college, university, and technical school academies and about half of
city/municipal academies had fewer than 25 full-time equivalent trainers.

The largest full-time employment category was comprised of sworn officers
permanently employed by or assigned to the academy, with over 4,300 such
personnel (or 35% of all full-time training personnel) overall. The next 
largest full-time employment category was on-duty sworn officers temporarily
assigned to the academy, with about 2,800 such personnel (or 23% of full-time
trainers).

Nearly 12,700 off-duty officers comprised the largest part-time employment
category, accounting for 49% of all paid, part-time trainers. The next largest
part-time employment category consisted of on-duty sworn officers temporarily
assigned part-time to the academy, with about 4,000 such personnel (or 16% of
part-time trainers).

College, university, and technical school academies were staffed primarily
with part-time training personnel. About 9 in 10 trainers were identified as
part-time employees at these academies. The majority of these part-time
trainers (75%) were off-duty officers compensated to teach.

Fifteen percent of academies had part-time training personnel only.
Three-fourths of these academies were 2-year, 4-year, and technical
school academies, and 24% were county, regional, or State academies. 

Sixty-seven percent of academies having only part-time training personnel
employed fewer than 25 full-time equivalent trainers, and 90% employed fewer
than 50. Overall, these academies accounted for nearly 4,300 (or 17%) of all
part-time training personnel in 2002.

Minimum education and experience

About two-thirds of academies with full-time trainers or instructors in 2002
maintained a minimum education requirement. The most common type of
requirement was a high school degree or GED (33%), followed by a 2-year (12%)
or 4-year (11%) degree.  

Larger academies -- those having 100 or more full-time equivalent
trainers -- were the most likely to have a college degree requirement
(about 1 in 3) but were the least likely to require a 4-year degree (about
1 in 20).

Eleven percent of academies indicated that some other type of minimum
education requirement applied to their full-time trainers or instructors.

Just over two-thirds of all training academies required their full-time
trainers or instructors to have a minimum number of years of law
enforcement experience. 

Among those academies having a minimum experience requirement, the
actual requirement ranged from a low of 1 year to a high of 10 years.
Three and 5 years were the most frequently reported requirements. The
average requirement was about 4 years across all academies. The
median requirement was 3 years. 

Instructor certifications

Among academies having full-time training staff, 89% required their
full-time trainers or instructors to have a State-level certification as a
trainer. 

Sixty-one percent of academies required their full-time trainers to have
certification as a subject matter expert, and 26% required an academy
certification as a trainer. Twenty percent of academies indicated other
certification requirements, and 1% had no certification requirement for
their full-time trainers or instructors. 

Refresher training

Seventy-three percent of academies provided ongoing or refresher training for
their trainers or instructors. Academies having 100 or more full-time
equivalent
training personnel were the most likely to provide refresher training (86%).
Academies having fewer than 10 full-time equivalent training personnel were
least likely to provide this training, although 67% did so.  

Among those academies providing refresher training, 56% relied on subject
matter experts to develop the content of the training. About half (51%) used
State commissions and/or conducted a job task analysis/ needs analysis (49%). 

About 3 in 10 academies used a law enforcement advisory board to develop
refresher training. Fourteen percent used some other method to develop this
training.

Performance evaluations

Ninety-three percent of training academies used student evaluations as part of
the overall performance evaluation of academy training personnel. Supervisory
evaluations were also common, with 79% of academies using this type of
evaluation.  

Less common were peer evaluations (that is, trainers evaluated by other
trainers), with 31% of academies using this type of evaluation. Peer
evaluations were more likely to be used in academies with greater numbers of
full-time equivalent training personnel. Thirty-eight percent of those having
100 or more trainers used them, compared to 23% of academies having fewer than
10 full-time equivalent trainers. 

Ten percent of academies used other methods to evaluate the performance of
instructors.

Academy resources

Training funds and equipment

State funding was the most common source of training funds or equipment for
academies in 2002, with 68% of academies receiving this type of funding.

Other government funding came from city/county governments (47% of academies)
and Federal sources (19% of academies).  

The percentage of academies receiving other sources of training funds or
equipment in 2002 were as follows: tuition, 50%; police departments sponsoring
recruits, 34%; student fees (other than tuition), 29%; financial and equipment
donations from private vendors, corporations, and universities, 17%; surplus
government equipment, 10%; and other funding sources, 7%.

Expenditures       

During fiscal 2002, training academies expended an estimated $725.6 million.

County, regional, and State academies accounted for an estimated $351.2
million, or 48% of the total expenditures. City/municipal academies accounted
for an estimated $299.4 million, or 41% of the total. Two-year, 4-year, and
technical school academies had expenditures estimated at $75.1 million, or 10%
of the total. 

Expenditures averaged about $1.2 million per academy during fiscal 2002,
ranging from about $6.3 million for academies having 100 or more full-time
equivalent training personnel, to about $261,000 for academies having less
than 10 full-time equivalent trainers.

On a per trainer basis expenditures averaged about $28,900, ranging from
$17,900 in academies with 50 to 99 full-time equivalent trainers to $41,800 in
those with fewer than 10 full-time trainers.

Overall expenditures averaged about $13,100 per trainee, ranging from $5,400
in academies having less than 10 full-time equivalent trainers to $18,800 in
those having 100 or more.

Expenditures per trainee were much higher in city or municipal academies
(about $36,200 per trainee) as compared to costs in county, regional, and
State academies (about $11,200 per trainee) and college, university, and
technical school academies (about $4,600 per trainee).

Academy facilities

At least 90% of academies had access to an outdoor firearms range (96%), a
vehicle operation range (95%), a weight room (93%), or a defensive tactics 
room (92%). 

At least three-quarters of academies had access to desktop computers (89%), a
library (88%), a gymnasium (87%), a scenario training facility (79%), or a
firearms training simulator (77%).

At least half of academies had access to a media lab/video production facility
(71%), an obstacle course (68%), a mock courtroom (66%), laptop computers
(65%), Internet/online classes (53%), or mobile data terminals or computers
(50%). 

At least a quarter of academies had access to a swimming pool (44%), video
conferencing classes (43%), a satellite downlink for training modules (for
example, LETN) (37%), an indoor firearms range (35%), or dormitory/residential
facilities (31%).

Less than a quarter of all academies had access to a driving simulator (22%)
or mail correspondence classes (16%). 

Academy trainees

Academy class characteristics

In 2002 training academies held two basic recruit academy classes during the
year on average. The average number of academy classes was higher in larger
academies, with about 4 basic recruit classes among those with 100 or more 
full-time equivalent training personnel.  

Average class sizes among all academies ranged from 21 to 32 recruits. Larger
academies generally had larger class sizes, ranging from 27 to 50 recruits 
among academies having 100 or more FTE training personnel. In comparison,
class sizes ranged from 17 to 25 recruits among academies having fewer than 10
FTE training personnel.

Total number of recruits

Among basic law enforcement academy classes that completed training during
2002, an estimated 61,354 individuals started training, and 53,302 (or 87%)
successfully completed their training program. The largest proportion of
recruits who completed training (29% or 15,283 recruits) came from academies
having 100 or more FTE training personnel. About 6% (or 3,122 recruits) came
from academies having fewer than 10 FTE trainers.

The distribution of trainees starting and completing training was similar
across academies, with the percentage completing ranging from 86% to
88% across FTE categories. 

Fifty-five percent (or 29,519) recruits who completed training in 2002
graduated from county, regional, or State academies. Twenty-nine percent (or
15,606 recruits) graduated from college, university, or technical school
academies, 
and 15% (or 8,177 recruits) from city or municipal academies. 

The distribution of trainees starting and completing training was similar
across types of academies, with the percentage of students completing
their study ranging from 84% among city or municipal academies to 88%
among county, regional, or State academies.

Race and gender of recruits

An estimated 17% of recruits who completed training in 2002 were female, and
27% were members of a racial or ethnic minority. Hispanic or Latino recruits
accounted for 12% of those who completed training. Black or African American
recruits accounted for 12%, and recruits of other racial backgrounds were 3%. 

While the overall distribution of recruits by race and gender was fairly
similar among recruits who started and completed training, there were
differences in completion rates. White males, comprising 63% of recruits
who completed training, had the highest rate of completion (89%). Females 
in the "other" race/ethnicity category, comprising less than half a percent 
of recruits who completed training, had the lowest rate of completion (74%).

Overall academy completion rates were higher among males (88%) than among
females (81%). With regard to race/ethnicity, whites had the highest overall
rate (88%), followed by Hispanics or Latinos (83%), blacks or
African-Americans (81%), and persons in other racial categories (78%).  

In-service trainees

Among the 88% of academies that conducted in-service training, such training
was delivered to an estimated 1,000 officers on average during 2002. The
median number of in-service trainees was highest among academies having 100 or
more FTE training personnel (about 3,670 trainees), and lowest among academies
having fewer than 10 FTE trainers (about 200 trainees).

In-service training was more common among city or municipal academies (96%)
and county, regional, or State academies (94%), compared to college,
university, or technical school academies (77%).

The median number of in-service trainees among city or municipal academies
was 1,260; among county, regional, or State academies, 1,200; and among
college, university, or technical school academies, 400.

Core curriculum

The median number of hours in basic recruit training programs -- excluding any
field training component -- was 720 hours across all academies. Basic training
ranged from 620 hours among academies with fewer than 10 full-time equivalent
training personnel to 840 hours among those with 100 or more full-time
trainers. 

Many academies provide basic recruits with a level of training that exceeds
State requirements. The median number of hours above any State requirement was
100 hours, ranging from 70 among academies with fewer than 10 full-time
equivalent training personnel to 250 among academies with 100 or more
full-time trainers. 

Field training

Thirty-eight percent of academies, training 31% of recruits, conducted field
training within their basic recruit training program. Among those academies
conducting field training, the median number of hours in the field training
segment was 180 hours. Eighty-four percent of those conducting field training
required recruits to complete the field training segment in order to complete
the academy.

Curriculum content

A variety of training areas were common to nearly all basic academy curricula.
In terms of instruction time required in each area, firearms skills (60 hours)
was the longest training, followed by health and fitness (50 hours),
investigations (45 hours), self-defense (44 hours), criminal law (40 hours),
patrol procedures/ techniques (40 hours), emergency vehicle operations (36
hours), and basic first-aid/ CPR (24 hours).

Although 90% of academies indicated they provided instruction on community
policing (8 hours, on average), training on its more specific elements, such 
as problem-solving methods (for example, SARA, CAPRA) was less common. 

About two-thirds (65%) provided instruction on problem-solving methods
(6 hours, on average). (See the Community Policing section on page 15
for additional detail on this type of training.)

Sixty percent of academies provided instruction on computers and information
systems (8 hours, on average). 

A third (35%) of all academies provided instruction on basic foreign language
skills (for example survival Spanish), with an average of 16 hours in this
area.

Curriculum development

Academies reported a variety of methods for developing the content of their
basic recruit training curricula. The most common method (88% of academies) 
was development pursuant to the mandates of a State commission or similar 
body. 

Fifty-six percent of academies reported use of a job task analysis or needs
analysis, 51% relied on subject matter experts, and 50% used departmental
objectives to develop curricula. 

Slightly less than half reported content development stemming from 
legislative/regulatory mandates (47%), or use of a law enforcement
advisory board (44%). Fifteen percent of academies used national
experts in community policing.

Testing and evaluation

All but 1% of the academies used written tests and skills/proficiency tests
to evaluate recruits. The median number of written tests was 15 across all
academies using such tests, while the median number of skills/proficiency 
tests was 5.

Eighty-five percent of academies (training 75% of recruits) used physical
fitness tests, with a median of three such tests used.

Scenario-based tests were used by 73% of academies (training 69% of recruits),
and the median number of such tests was eight across all academies using these
tests. 

Just over half of all academies used State competency exams (55%, training 43%
of recruits) or POST/State-constructed tests (51%, training 52% of recruits).
The median number of such tests was one. 

About a quarter of all academies (training 19% of recruits) used oral
tests, and the median number of such tests was two.

Among those academies conducting field training as part of the basic recruit
program, the most common method for evaluating recruits during field training
was the use of standard scales or checklists to rate recruit performance, with
81% using this method. 

Seventy-two percent of academies conducting field training used narrative
reports to evaluate recruits. Just over half (54%) used oral evaluations or
interviews to evaluate recruits. 
 
College credit for training

College credit could be awarded for basic training conducted by or through 77%
of academies (training 83% of recruits). This included 86% of 2-year, 4-year,
and technical school academies.

College credit could be awarded for in-service training conducted by or
through 28% of the academies, including 35% of 2-year, 4-year, and technical
school academies.

An academic degree (for example, associate's degree) was offered by or through
29% of academies (training 22% of recruits), including 58% of 2-year, 4-year,
and technical school academies.

Training environment

The training environment in some academies can be described as a stress
military-style model, while others are described as a non-stress academic 
model. 

Just over half (54%) of academies, training 49% of recruits, indicated that
their training environment was best described as following some type of
stress model, with 41% (training 39% of recruits) indicating "more stress
than non-stress" and 13% (training 10% of recruits) indicating a
"predominantly stress model" .

The remaining 46% of academies (training 51% of recruits) indicated that their
training environment was best described as following some type of non-stress
model, with 35% (training 43% of recruits) indicating "more non-stress than
stress" and 11% (training 8% of recruits) indicating "predominantly
non-stress". 

Training environments varied somewhat by type of academy. A majority
of city/municipal (68%) and county, regional, and state academies (62%)
had some type of stress model, while most college, university, and
technical school academies (62%) had some type of non-stress model.

Discipline

Nearly all (99%) academies had a set of formal rules concerning recruit
behavior, such as a disciplinary code or code of conduct. Termination,
dismissal, or expulsion from the academy was the most common type of
action that could be taken in response to violations, with 95% of
academies indicating this possible consequence. 

About 6 in 10 academies had recruits perform "extra duty" tasks, such
as writing assignments, and roughly the same proportion of academies
used motivational physical training. Less common was the revocation
of leave privileges (16%) and lowering of course grades (15%).

Force and defensive tactics

Firearms training

Nearly all academies (99%) used semi-automatic pistols in their basic
firearms training. Ninety-two percent of academies, training 79% of
recruits, included shotgun training in their basic firearms training, and
36% of academies, training 43% of recruits, included revolver training.
The median minimum qualification score for each of these weapon types
was 75%.

Less than a fifth of academies used less-than-lethal weapons such as
bean bag guns and rubber bullets (18% of academies, training 16% of
recruits), rifles (17%, training 18% of recruits), or automatic weapons
(5%, training 4% of recruits) in their basic training program. The median
minimum qualification score for each of these weapon types was 80%.

Almost all academies (99%) conducted firearms training under nighttime
or reduced lighting conditions.  About 9 in 10 academies, training 92% of
recruits, conducted firearms training under simulated stressful conditions.

Nearly two-thirds of academies, training 78% of recruits, used computerized
firearms training systems. 

Less than half (44%) of academies, training 58% of recruits, conducted
training with nonlethal live fire (for example, simunitions). 

About a third (34%) of academies, training 33% of recruits, provided training
with off-duty weapons.

Each of the various firearms training conditions were more likely to be found
among larger academies. 

Defensive weapons/tactics

Ninety-six percent of academies, training 96% of recruits, provided training
with batons as part of their basic defensive weapons training.

Just over three-quarters (77%) of academies, training 75% of recruits,
provided defensive training with chemical agents.

Less than half (44%) of academies, training 50% of recruits, provided
defensive training with flashlights. About 12% of academies, training 9% of
recruits, provided Taser training.

About 3% of academies provided training with rubber bullets, 2% with stun
guns, and less than 1% with slapjacks or nunchakus.

Nearly all academies (99%) provided instruction on weapon retention as part of
their basic control/defensive tactics training. More than 3 in 4 academies
also provided instruction on pressure-point control techniques (90% of
academies, training 77% of recruits), ground fighting techniques (84%,
training 87% of recruits), and speed cuffing (78%, training 78% of recruits).

Nearly 3 in 10 academies, training 25% of recruits, provided instruction on
neck restraints. About 2 in 10 academies, training 16% of recruits, provided
instruction on full body restraints.

Scenario training

Academies used reality-based scenarios for a variety of weapons and tactics
training. Roughly 9 in 10 used reality-based scenario training to teach arrest
control tactics (93% of academies, training 90% of recruits), self-defense
techniques (92%, training 88% of recruits), use of firearms (88%, training 89%
of recruits), and verbal tactics (88%, training 85% of recruits). 

Eighty-six percent of academies, training 85% of recruits, used scenario
training to teach the force continuum.

Three-quarters of academies, training 73% of recruits, used scenario training
to teach use of non-lethal weapons. About two-thirds (65%), training 67% of
recruits, used scenarios to teach threat assessment. 
               
Liability for excessive force
               
Almost all (96%) academies, training 97% of recruits, provided instruction on
potential civil or criminal liability for excessive use of force.

Mock use of force review boards

Just 9% of academies, training 14% of recruits, had a mock use-of-force review
board as part of their basic use-of-force training. Use of mock review boards
was most common among academies having 100 or more full-time equivalent
training personnel (17%) and least common among those having fewer than 10
training personnel (5%).

Responding to excessive force

Seventy-three percent of academies, training 79% of recruits, provided
instruction on identifying and responding to use of excessive force by peer
officers. A slightly smaller percentage provided instruction on responding to
excessive force used by superior officers (65%). 

Community policing

Basic training

A majority of academies provided community policing training to basic recruits
in the following areas: identifying community problems (83% of academies,
training 87% of recruits); history of community-oriented policing (80%,
training 85% of recruits); environmental causes of crime (61%, training 70% 
of recruits); using problem-solving models (57%, training 50% of recruits);
and prioritizing crime and disorder problems (53%, training 55% of recruits).

Less than half of academies provided community policing training in the
following areas: organizing/mobilizing the community (46% of academies,
training 53% of recruits); assessing the effectiveness of responses (42%,
training 36% of recruits); creating problem-solving teams (38%, training 32%
of recruits); and analyzing crime/calls for service data (29%, training 24% 
of recruits). 


A quarter of academies provided training on using crime mapping to analyze
community problems (25% of academies, training 20% of recruits) and applying
research methods to study crime and disorder (21%, training 18% of recruits).

Nearly all (99%) academies provided training on the development of
partnerships with culturally diverse communities. About 4 in 10 academies
(38%) both integrated this topic throughout their curriculum and provided a
distinct course. Thirty-two percent of academies provided this type of
training through a distinct course only, and 27% integrated this type of
training throughout their curriculum without providing a distinct course.

Changes to basic curriculum

Fifty-seven percent of academies, training 52% of recruits, made changes to
their basic curriculum in the prior two years related to community policing. 

A third of academies, training 25% of recruits, increased the number of hours
devoted to community policing training, and just under a third integrated a
community policing philosophy or strategy into their entire curriculum. 

Integration of community policing throughout the curriculum was most common
among academies having 100 or more full-time equivalent training personnel
(43%), and least common among those having fewer than 10 training personnel
(23%).

Seventeen percent of academies, training 14% of recruits, had developed a
community policing training block during the previous 2 years. Fifteen percent
of academies, training 12% of recruits, had added more community policing
courses to their curriculum.

Among those academies reporting some type of change related to community
policing since January 2000, 38% indicated that the changes were required by
a State or Federal agency.

In-service training

Fifty-two percent of academies provided in-service training on identifying
community problems. About 4 in 10 provided in-service training on the
environmental causes of crime (39%), history of community-oriented policing
(39%), use of problem-solving models (39%), prioritizing crime and disorder
problems (38%), and organizing and mobilizing the community (38%).

About a third of academies provided in-service training on assessing the
effectiveness of responses to community problems (36%), creating
problem-solving teams (35%), and analyzing calls for service data (32%).
Thirty percent of academies provided in-service training on using crime
mapping to analyze community problems, and 27% on applying research
methods to the study of crime. 

Community policing training methods

Sixty percent of academies, training 54% of recruits, used a variety of
training methods related to community policing. The most common method, used
by 46% of academies (training 41% of recruits), had recruits participate in
mock scenarios to learn about community policing.

In about a quarter of academies, training 21% of recruits, experienced
community policing officers taught recruits about community policing.

In 9% of academies, training 9% of all recruits, recruits developed a
community-based project and worked on the project throughout their training.

In 7% of academies, training 5% of all recruits, recruits conducted community
surveys as part of their training. The same proportion of academies and
recruits worked on a problem-solving project as part of their training (that
is, identified a problem within the community, conducted research, developed 
a solution, and presented results).

Community involvement in training

About 8 in 10 academies, training 85% of recruits, involved members of the
community in various aspects of training. The most common type of involvement,
used by 61% of academies (training 52% of recruits), was the use of community
members as trainers or speakers.

About a third sponsored citizen police academies. Twenty-eight percent used
citizen volunteers. In 24% of academies, training 18% of recruits, recruits 
were sent to interact in community locales.

Members of the community were involved in curriculum development in 22% of
academies and served in an oversight capacity in 17% of academies.  

Special topics

Basic training related to terrorism

Fifty-seven percent of academies, training 56% of recruits, provided
instruction on responding to weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, biological,
or chemical weapons) as part of their basic training program.

Forty-eight percent of academies, training 57% of recruits, provided
instruction on understanding the nature of terrorism as part of their basic
training program. Forty-four percent of academies, training 50% of recruits,
provided an overview of relevant Federal, State, and local agencies (for
example, FEMA and FBI).

A third of academies, training 28% of recruits, provided instruction on
inter-agency information sharing as part of their basic training program.
Twenty-eight percent of academies, training 29% of recruits, provided
instruction on intelligence gathering as part of their basic training program.

Less than a quarter of all academies in 2002 provided instruction on related
technology and/or equipment (21% of academies, training 20% of recruits), the
role of anti-terrorist task forces (15%, training 15% of recruits),
post-incident stabilization of the community (13%, training 14% of recruits),
or intelligence analysis (11%, training 8% of recruits).

About 1 in 5 academies, training 17% of recruits, did not provide any basic
training on the above topics related to terrorism and responding to terrorist
incidents.

Additional training related to terrorism

Several academies provided terrorism training other than in their basic
training program. Just over half (52%) provided training on weapons of mass
destruction (nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons).

Forty-seven percent of academies provided training on first response to
terrorist incidents. Less than a quarter of academies provided training on
intelligence gathering (22%) or intelligence analysis (15%). In all categories
of terrorism training, larger academies were more likely to provide these
types of training than smaller academies.

Basic training related to racially-biased policing

Ninety-six percent of academies, training 96% of recruits, addressed the topic
of racially-biased policing as part of their basic training program. 

Ninety-three percent of academies addressed racially-biased policing during
the academic training component of their basic training program. In addition,
40% addressed this topic during practical skills training, and 31% during
field training. 

Basic training related to disengagement techniques

Ninety-seven percent of academies, training 97% of recruits, addressed
"disengagement" techniques (that is, how to tactfully disengage or
withdraw from a stop or arrest) as part of their basic training program.

Eighty-seven percent of academies addressed disengagement techniques as part
of the academic training component of their basic program. About 79% addressed
this topic during practical skills training, and 35% during field training. 

Responding to misconduct

Ninety-four percent of academies, training 96% of recruits, provided formal
instruction on identifying and responding to misconduct committed by peer
officers. Eighty-three percent of academies, training 86% of recruits,
provided instruction on identifying and responding to misconduct committed by
superior officers. 

Training for families of recruits

Forty-one percent of academies, training 47% of recruits, provided training
for the family members of recruits (for example, preparing family members for
changes in lifestyle they may encounter when the recruit begins work as a law
enforcement officer).

Training for family members of recruits was more common among larger
academies. More than 60% of academies having 50 or more FTE trainers provided
such training, compared with about 30% among those having fewer than 25
full-time training personnel.

Training for family members of recruits was also most common among city or
municipal academies (66%) and least common among 2-year, 4-year, and technical
school academies (18%).

Special patrol operations

About 4 in 10 academies provided specialized training for bicycle patrol
operations. About a quarter (27%) provided training for motorcycle patrol
operations. Less common was training for mounted (horse) operations (11%) and
marine operations (10%). In all categories of special patrol operations,
larger academies were more likely to provide these types of training than
smaller academies.

Other special topics

Sixty percent of academies provided training for field training officers
(FTO's). About 59% of academies provided training related to the handling of
hazardous materials (HAZMAT). Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) training was
provided by 48% of academies in 2002. Training on use of dogs in law
enforcement (K-9 training) was provided by 32% of academies in 2002.

About 18% of academies provided training related to court security, including
38% of academies having 100 or more FTE training personnel. Five percent
provided training on airport security, including about a quarter of academies
having 100 or more FTE training personnel. 

Methodology

The 2002 Census of Law Enforcement Training Academies (CLETA) was the first
effort by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to collect information from
training academies across the United States. 

This report describes these academies in terms of their personnel,
expenditures, facilities, equipment, trainees, training curricula, and a
variety of special topic areas.

A master list of 861 law enforcement training academies within the Untied
States was compiled from a variety of sources, including professional
associations, State law enforcement training organizations, and existing law
enforcement data collections. Initial screening verified telephone number,
mailing address and other academy contact information, and eliminated
duplicate listings. 

The survey instrument was subsequently mailed to 819 academies. In the course
of survey administration, 183 academies were determined to be out of scope
because they did not conduct basic law enforcement training, no longer
operated a basic academy, conducted in-service training only, corrections or
detention training only, or some special category of training only (for
example, conservation police). 

During data collection eight additional duplicate academy listings and three
academies that had merged with other academies were identified. One additional
academy not on the master list was identified and added to the mail-out. 

Of the remaining 626 in-scope academies, 528 (84%) returned the survey
instrument. Following extensive mail, e-mail, fax, and telephone follow-up
efforts, a reduced-length survey was sent to all non-responding academies.
Seventy-five (12%) responded using the reduced-length survey. These additional
surveys resulted in an overall 96.3% response rate. 

Follow-up telephone calls to the remaining 23 academies verified their
existence and current operating status, type, and basic functions so that
these academies could be included in the total count. Among the 23
non-responding academies were 10 community college academies, 8 regional
academies, 3 technical school academies, and 2 city/municipal academies.

For agencies returning the reduced-length survey, imputations were made for
additional numerical data elements contained in the full-length survey.
Specifically, imputations were made for expenditures, number of trainees, 
and required years experience for full-time instructors. 

Imputation cells for expenditure and trainee data were based on the type
of academy and the number of full-time equivalent training personnel. For
expenditure data, the ratio of expenditures per FTE was calculated within
each imputation cell. Within cells the median ratio was multiplied by the
number of FTE's in non-responding academies to produce the imputed
expenditure values. 

For trainee data the percentage of trainees completing training was calculated
within each imputation cell. Within cells the median percentage was multiplied
by the number of trainees who started training to produce the imputed value
for those completing training. 

If the number who started training was missing, this value was estimated using
the number of academy classes and range of class sizes. The smallest and
largest class sizes for an academy were added to the product of the average
class size and the number of additional classes. This value was multiplied by
the median percentage of trainees completing within the imputation cell to
produce the imputed value for those completing training. 

Imputation cells for required years experience were based on the State in
which an academy is located and the number of full-time equivalent training
personnel. If the response rate within a State was less than 75%, all
imputation cells were collapsed. If the response rate within a cell was less
than 75%, the cell was collapsed with the nearest two imputation cells.
Imputed values were the median values within imputation cells.


End of file
01/06/05 ih
