
U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems, 2001,  200343

This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sschis01htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sschis



Lawrence Greenfeld
Director



Acknowledgments.  This report was prepared by SEARCH,
The National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics,
Gerald E. Wethington, Chairman, and Gary R. Cooper,
Executive Director. The project director and author of the
report was Sheila J. Barton, Deputy Executive Director.
Support for the project was provided by Jane L. Bassett,
Publishing Specialist, Corporate Communications. The Federal
project monitor was Carol G. Kaplan, Chief, Criminal History
Improvement Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement
No. 95-RU-RX-K001, awarded to SEARCH, The National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics, 7311
Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California 95831. 
Contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the view
or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the U.S.
Department of Justice.

Copyright (c) SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics 2003.

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to
reproduce, publish, translate or otherwise use all or any part of
the copyrighted material in this publication with the exception
of those items indicating they are copyrighted or printed by any
source other than SEARCH, The National Consortium for
Justice Information and Statistics.


Contents


List of data tables

Glossary of terms

Introduction

Major findings
Level of automation of master name indexes and criminal
history files
Level of disposition reporting
Level of felony flagging
Timeliness of trial court disposition data

Detailed findings
Status of State criminal history files
Completeness of data in State criminal history
repository
Disposition data
Correctional data
Timeliness of data in State criminal history repository
-Arrests
-Disposition data
-Admission to correctional facilities
Procedures to improve data quality
Linking of arrests and dispositions
Other data quality procedures
Audits

Data tables

Methodology


List of data tables

1.   Overview of State criminal history record systems,
December 31, 2001

2.   Number of subjects (individual offenders) in State
criminal history file, 1997, 1999 and 2001

3.   Number of final dispositions reported to State criminal
history repository, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

4.   Automation of master name index and criminal history
file, 1993, 1997, 1999 and 2001

5.   Data required to be submitted to State criminal history
repository, 2001

6.   Arrest records with fingerprints, 1993, 1997, 1999 and
2001

7.   Notice to State criminal history repository of release of
arrested persons without charging, 1993, 1997, 1999 and 2001

8.   Completeness of prosecutor and court disposition
reporting to State criminal history repository, 1993, 1997, 1999
and 2001

9.   Policies/practices of State criminal history repository
regarding modification of felony convictions, 2001

10.  Fingerprinting of incarcerated offenders and linkage to
records maintained by State criminal history repository, 2001

11.  Probation and parole data in State criminal history
repository, 1993, 1997, 1999 and 2001

12.  Average number of days to process arrest data
submitted to State criminal history repository and current status
of backlog, 2001


13.  Average number of days to process disposition data
submitted to State criminal history repository and current status
of backlog, 2001

14.  Average number of days to process correctional
admission data submitted to State criminal history repository
and current status of backlog, 2001

15.  Procedures employed by State criminal history
repository to encourage complete arrest and disposition
reporting, 2001

16.  Methods used to link disposition information to
arrest/charge information on criminal history record, 2001

17.  Procedure followed when linkage cannot be made
between court or correctional information in the criminal
history database, 2001

18.  Strategies employed by State criminal history
repository to ensure accuracy of data in criminal history
database, 2001

19.  Audit activities of State criminal history repository,
1993, 1997, 1999 and 2001

20.  Data quality audits of State criminal history repository,
2001

21.  Criminal history records of Interstate Identification
Index (III) participants maintained by the State criminal history
repository and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, March 1,
2003

22.  Fees charged by State criminal history repository for
noncriminal justice purposes, 2001


Glossary of terms

Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS): An
automated system for searching fingerprint files and
transmitting fingerprint images. AFIS computer equipment can
scan fingerprint impressions (or utilize electronically
transmitted fingerprint images) and automatically extract and
digitize ridge details and other identifying characteristics in
sufficient detail to enable the computer's searching and
matching components to distinguish a single fingerprint from
thousands or even millions of fingerprints previously scanned
and stored in digital form in the computer's memory. The
process eliminates the manual searching of fingerprint files and
increases the speed and accuracy of ten-print processing (arrest
fingerprint cards and noncriminal justice applicant fingerprint
cards). AFIS equipment also can be used to identify individuals
from "latent" (crime scene) fingerprints, even fragmentary
prints of single fingers in some cases. Digital fingerprint
images generated by AFIS equipment can be transmitted
electronically to remote sites, eliminating the necessity of
mailing fingerprint cards and providing remote access to AFIS
fingerprint files. 

Central Repository: The database (or the agency housing the
database) that maintains criminal history records on all State
offenders. Records include fingerprint files and files containing
identification segments and notations of arrests and
dispositions. The central repository is generally responsible for
State-level identification of arrestees, and commonly serves as
the central control terminal for contact with FBI record
systems. Inquiries from local agencies for a national record
check (for criminal justice or firearm check purposes) are
routed to the FBI via the central repository. Although usually
housed in the Department of Public Safety, the central
repository is maintained in some States by the State Police or
other State agency. 

Criminal History Record Information (CHRI) or Criminal
History Record Information System: A record (or the system
maintaining such records) that includes individual identifiers
and describes an individual's arrests and subsequent
dispositions. Criminal history records do not include
intelligence or investigative data or sociological data such as
drug use history. CHRI systems usually include information on
juveniles if they are tried as adults in criminal courts.


Most, however, do not include data describing involvement of
an individual in the juvenile justice system. Data in CHRI
systems are usually backed by fingerprints of the record
subjects to provide positive identification. State legislation
varies concerning disclosure of criminal history records for
noncriminal justice purposes. 

Data Quality: The extent to which criminal history records are
complete, accurate and timely. In addition, accessibility
sometimes is considered a data quality factor. The key concern
in data quality is the completeness of records and the extent to
which records include dispositions as well as arrest and charge
information. Other concerns include the timeliness of data
reporting to State and Federal repositories, the timeliness of
data entry by the repositories, the readability of criminal
history records and the ability to have access to the records
when necessary.

Felony or Serious Misdemeanor: The category of offenses for
which fingerprints and criminal history information are
accepted by the FBI and entered in the Bureau's files, including
the III system. Serious misdemeanor is defined to exclude
certain minor offenses, such as drunkenness or minor traffic
offenses. 

Interstate Identification Index (III): An "index-pointer" system
for the interstate exchange of criminal history records. Under
III, the FBI maintains an identification index to persons
arrested for felonies or serious misdemeanors under State or
Federal law. The index includes identification information,
(such as name, date of birth, race, and sex), FBI Numbers and
State Identification Numbers (SID) from each State holding
information about an individual. Search inquiries from criminal
justice agencies nationwide are transmitted automatically via
State telecommunications networks and the FBI's National
Crime Information Center (NCIC) telecommunications lines.
Searches are made on the basis of name and other identifiers.
The process is entirely automated and takes approximately five
seconds to complete. If a hit is made against the Index, record
requests are made using the SID or FBI Number, and data are
automatically retrieved from each repository holding records
on the individual and forwarded to the requesting agency. As of
September 30, 2000, 41 States participate in III. Responses are
provided from FBI files when the State originating the record is
not a participant in III. 

Participation requires that the State maintain an automated
criminal history record system capable of interfacing with the
III system and capable of responding automatically to all
interstate and Federal/State record requests. 

Juvenile Justice Records: Official records of juvenile justice
adjudications. Most adult criminal history record systems do
not accept such records, which are frequently not supported by
fingerprints and which usually are confidential under State law.
Pursuant to an order dated July 15, 1992, the FBI now accepts,
and will disseminate, juvenile records on the same basis as
adult records. States, however, are not required to submit such
records to the FBI 

Master Name Index (MNI): A subject identification index
maintained by criminal history record repositories that includes
names and other identifiers for each person about whom a
record is held in the systems. As of 2001, only the U.S. Virgin
Islands did not have at least a partially automated MNI; almost
all jurisdictions (48 States & Puerto Rico) had fully automated
MNIs. The automated name index is the key to rapidly
identifying persons who have criminal records for such
purposes as presale firearm checks, criminal investigations or
bailsetting. MNIs may include "felony flags," which indicate
whether record subjects have arrests or convictions for felony
offenses. 

National Crime Information Center (NCIC): An automated
database of criminal justice and justice-related records
maintained by the FBI. The database includes the "hot files" of
wanted and missing persons, stolen vehicles and identifiable
stolen property, including firearms. Access to NCIC files is
through central control terminal operators in each State that are
connected to NCIC via dedicated telecommunications lines
maintained by the FBI. Local agencies and officers on the beat
can access the State control terminal via the State law
enforcement network. Inquiries are based on name and other
nonfingerprint identification. Most criminal history inquiries of
the III system are made via the NCIC telecommunications
system. NCIC data may be provided only for criminal justice
and other specifically authorized purposes. For criminal history
searches, this includes criminal justice employment,
employment by Federally chartered or insured banking
institutions or securities firms, and use by State and local
governments for purposes of employment and licensing
pursuant to a State statute approved by the U.S. Attorney
General. Inquiries regarding presale firearm checks are
included as criminal justice uses. 


National Crime Prevention and Privacy  Compact: An
interstate and Federal/State compact which establishes formal
procedures and governance structures for the use of the
Interstate Identification Index (III).  It is designed to facilitate
the exchange of criminal history data among States for
noncriminal justice purposes and to eliminate the need for the
FBI to maintain duplicate data about State offenders. Under the
Compact, the operation of this system is overseen by a
policymaking council comprised of Federal and State officials. 
The key concept underlying the Compact is agreement among
all signatory States that all criminal history information (except
sealed records) will be provided in response to noncriminal
justice requests from another State - regardless of whether the
information being requested would be permitted to be
disseminated for a similar noncriminal justice purpose within
the State holding the data. (That is, the law of the State that is
inquiring about the data - rather than the law of the State that
originated the data - governs its use.) In some cases, ratification
of the Compact will have the effect of amending existing State
legislation governing interstate record dissemination, since
most States do not currently authorize dissemination to all of
the Federal agencies and out-of-State users authorized under
the Compact. At present, noncriminal justice inquiries are
handled by the FBI from its files of voluntarily contributed
State arrest and disposition records. This requires that the FBI
maintain duplicates of State records and generally results in
less complete records being provided, since FBI files of State
records are not always complete due to reporting deficiencies.
The Compact was passed by Congress and signed into law by
the President in October 1998.  The Compact became effective
in April 1999, following ratification by two State legislatures,
those being Montana on April 8, 1999 and Georgia on April 28,
1999.  Since that time, 12 additional States have entered into
the Compact:  Nevada (May 1999); Florida (June 1999);
Colorado (March 2000); Iowa (April 2000); Connecticut (June
2000); South Carolina (June 2000); Arkansas (February 2001);
Kansas (April 2001); Alaska (May 2001); Oklahoma (May
2001); Maine (June 2001); New Jersey (January 2002);
Minnesota (March 2002); and Arizona (April 2002).  

National Fingerprint File (NFF): A system and procedures
designed as a component of the III system, which, when fully
implemented, would establish a totally decentralized system for
the interstate exchange of criminal history records. The NFF
will contain fingerprints of Federal offenders and a single set of
fingerprints on State offenders from each State in which an
offender has been arrested for a felony or a serious
misdemeanor. Under the NFF concept, States forward only the
first-arrest fingerprints of an individual to the FBI accompanied
by other identification data such as name and date of birth. 

Fingerprints for subsequent arrests are not forwarded. 
Disposition data on the individual also is retained at the State
repository and is not forwarded to the FBI. Upon receipt of the
first-arrest fingerprint cards (or electronic images), the FBI
enters the individual's fingerprint impressions in the NFF and
enters the person's name and identifiers in the III, together with
an FBI Number and a State Identification (SID) Number for
each State maintaining a record on the individual. Charge and
disposition information on State offenders are maintained only
at the State level, and State repositories are required to respond
to all authorized record requests concerning these individuals
for both criminal justice and noncriminal justice purposes.
States have to release all data on record subjects for
noncriminal justice inquiries regardless of whether the data
could be released for similar purposes within the State. The
NFF has been implemented in five States:  Florida, New
Jersey, Montana, North Carolina and Oregon. 

Positive Identification: Identification of an individual using
biometric characteristics that are unique and not subject to
alteration. In present usage, the term refers to identification by
fingerprints but may also include identification by retinal
images, voiceprints or other techniques. Positive identification
is to be distinguished from identification using name, sex, date
of birth, or other personal identifiers as shown on a document
subject to alteration or counterfeit such as a birth certificate,
Social Security card or driver's license. Because individuals can
have identical or similar names, ages, etc., identifications based
on such characteristics are not reliable. 

Note to Readers: This is a report of the results of the Survey of
State Criminal History Information Systems. In some of the
tables that follow, data from earlier data quality surveys are
included. Caution should be used in drawing comparisons
between the results of earlier surveys and the survey reported
here. Since the last national data quality survey, the U.S.
Justice Department has continued to implement assistance
programs dedicated to improving criminal history records. As a
result, some States are focusing new or additional resources on
the condition of their records and in many cases, know more
about their records today than in the past. A number of State
repositories have suffered fiscal cutbacks and have had to shift
priorities away from certain criminal history information
management tasks. For these and other reasons, trend
comparisons may not as accurately reflect the status of the
Nation's criminal history records as the current data considered
alone. 

Introduction

This report is based upon the results from a two-part survey
conducted of the administrators of the State criminal history
record repositories in January - July 2002. Fifty-three
jurisdictions were surveyed, including the 50 States, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and
the U.S. Virgin Islands. Responses were received from all 53
jurisdictions. Throughout this report, the 50 States will be
referred to as "States"; the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and the Virgin Islands will be referred to as "territories,"
consistent with prior surveys; "Nation" refers collectively to
both the States and territories.
     
In addition, the Federal Bureau of Investigation was the source
for information relating to the number of criminal history
records of the States participating in the Interstate
Identification Index (III) system that are maintained by the
State criminal history repositories and the number of records
maintained by the FBI for the States, as of March 1, 2003. 

Major Findings

Level of automation of master name indexes and criminal
history files

Overview of State criminal history record systems, December
31, 2001 (Table 1):

*  Forty-nine reporting States, the District of Columbia and
Puerto Rico have automated at least some records in the
criminal history record file.

*  Twenty-seven States (Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Georgia,
Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New
York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Washington,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming) and Puerto Rico have fully
automated criminal history files.

Automation of master name index and criminal history file,
2001 (Table 4):

*  All 50 reporting States and Puerto Rico have fully automated
master name indexes. The Virgin Islands does not maintain a
master name index.

*  The Virgin Islands has no automated criminal history files.

*  Of those States maintaining partially automated criminal
history files, when an offender with a prior manual record is
arrested, the prior manual record is subsequently automated in
18 States. In three States (Kansas, Minnesota and
Pennsylvania) and the District of Columbia, only the new
information is automated. In Delaware, the new information is
added to the manual file. In California, if a manual record
contains seven or more arrests, only the new information is
automated; thus creating a "hybrid record" that is part manual
and part automated. If the manual record contains less than
seven arrests, the entire record is automated.

Level of disposition reporting

Overview of State criminal history record systems, December
31, 2001 (Table 1):

*  Sixteen States (California, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia,
Hawaii, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New
Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota,
Vermont and Virginia) and Puerto Rico, representing
approximately 43% of the Nation's population (based on 53
jurisdictions) and 43% of the Nation's criminal history records,
report that 80% or more arrests within the last 5 years in the
criminal history database have final dispositions recorded.

*  A total of 21 States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
representing approximately 54% of the Nation's population and
53% of the Nation's criminal history records, report that 70% or
more arrests within the past 5 years in the criminal history
database have final dispositions recorded.

*  A total of 24 States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
representing approximately 59% of the Nation's population and
56% of the Nation's criminal history records, report that 60% or
more arrests within the past 5 years in the criminal history
database have final dispositions recorded.

*  When arrests older than 5 years are considered, 14 States and
Puerto Rico, representing 27% of the Nation's criminal history
records, report that 80% or more arrests in the entire criminal
history database have final dispositions recorded. Twenty
States and Puerto Rico, representing 46% of the Nation's
records, report 70% or more arrests in the entire criminal
history database have final dispositions recorded.
Twenty-seven States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
representing 59% of the Nation's criminal history records,
report that 60% or more arrests in the entire database have final
dispositions recorded.

Number of final dispositions reported to State criminal history
repository, 2001 (Table 3):

*  Thirty-nine States and Puerto Rico provided data on the
number of final dispositions reported to their criminal history
repositories indicating that nearly 6.8 million final dispositions
were reported in 2001. The responding jurisdictions represent
approximately 80% of the Nation's population.

Level of felony flagging

Overview of State criminal history record systems, December
31, 2001 (Table 1):

*  Thirty-nine States currently flag some or all felony
convictions in their criminal history databases.

*  Twelve States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin
Islands collect sufficient data to permit them to flag at least
some previously unflagged convictions.

Timeliness of trial court disposition data

Average number of days to process disposition data submitted
to State criminal history repository and current status of
backlog, 2001 (Table 13):

*  An average of 18 days separates the final court dispositions
and receipt of that information by the State criminal history
repositories, ranging from 1 day in Colorado, Connecticut,
Delaware, Massachusetts, New Jersey, North Carolina and
Puerto Rico, to 80 days in North Dakota.

*  An average of 29 days separates the receipt of final trial
court dispositions and entry of disposition data into the
criminal history databases, ranging from less than 1 day in
States where dispositions are entered either directly by the
courts or by tape, to 330 days in Washington. Twenty-four of
the 40 reporting jurisdictions enter the data in less than 10
days.

*  Twenty-seven States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands
indicate having backlogs in entering disposition data into the
criminal history database.


Detailed findings

Status of State criminal history files

Number of subjects (individual offenders) in State criminal
history file, 2001 (Table 2):

*  Over 64 million criminal history records were in the criminal
history files of the State criminal history repositories on
December 31, 2001. (An individual offender may have records
in more than one State.)

*  Eighty-nine percent of the criminal history records
maintained by the State criminal history repositories are
automated. Approximately 6.8 million, or 11%, are not
automated.

*  The Virgin Islands has no automated criminal history files.

Automation of master name index and criminal history file,
2001 (Table 4):

*  All 50 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico have
automated at least some records in either the criminal history
file or the master name index.

*  Forty-nine States and Puerto Rico have fully automated
master name indexes. Maine and the District of Columbia have
partially automated master name indexes. The Virgin Islands
does not maintain a master name index.       

*  Of those States maintaining partially automated criminal
history files, when an offender with a prior manual record is
arrested, the prior manual record is subsequently automated in
18 States. In three States (Kansas, Minnesota and
Pennsylvania) and the District of Columbia, only the new
information is automated. In Delaware, the new information is
added to the manual file. In California, if a manual record
contains seven or more arrests, only the new information is
automated; thus, creating a "hybrid record" that is part manual
and part automated. If the manual record contains less than
seven arrests, the entire record is automated.

Data required to be submitted to State criminal history
repository, 2001 (Table 5):

*  Thirty-two States and the Virgin Islands require prosecutors
to report to State criminal history repositories their decisions to
decline prosecution in criminal cases.

*  Forty-five States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands require felony trial courts to report the
dispositions of felony cases to the State criminal history
repository.

*  State prison admission on felony cases must be reported to
the State criminal history repository in 37 States, the District of
Columbia and Puerto Rico. State prison release information on
felony cases must be reported to the State criminal history
repository in 28 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico.


*  Admission data on felons housed in local correctional
facilities must be reported to the State criminal history
repository in 26 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico. Release data on felons housed in local correctional
facilities must be reported to the State criminal history
repository in 15 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico.

*  The reporting of probation information is mandated in 31
States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, while 30
States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico require
reporting of parole information.

Arrest records with fingerprints, 2001 (Table 6):

*  During 2001, almost 9.7 million fingerprint cards and
livescan images were submitted to the State criminal history
repositories.

*  Forty-two States and Puerto Rico, representing 94% of the
Nation's population, have records that are 99-100% supported.
A total of 44 States, or an additional 2 States, and Puerto Rico,
representing 95% of the Nation's population, have records that
are at least 90% fingerprint-supported. In 4 States and the
District of Columbia, some of the arrests in the criminal history
files, ranging from 30% to 85%, are fingerprint-supported. In
Massachusetts, there are no fingerprint-supported criminal
history records.

Completeness of data in State criminal history repository

Notice to State criminal history repository of release of arrested
persons without charging, 2001 (Table 7):

*  Thirty-five States and the District of Columbia require law
enforcement agencies to notify the State criminal history
repository when an arrested person is released without formal
charging but after the fingerprints have been submitted to the
repository.

Disposition data

Completeness of prosecutor and court disposition reporting to
State criminal history repository, 2001 (Table 8):

*  Eighteen States (Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia,
Idaho, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Nebraska, New
Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
South Dakota, Utah and Vermont) and Puerto Rico report that
criminal history repositories receive final felony trial court
depositions for 80% or more of the cases.

Ten States (Colorado, Connecticut, Maine, Maryland,
Minnesota, New Jersey, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina
and Utah) estimate that they receive notice in 100% of the
cases.

A. A total of 20 States, or 2 additional States (California and
Hawaii) and Puerto Rico report that dispositions in 70% or
more of the cases are received by the State criminal history
repositories.


B. A total of 23 States, or 3 additional States (Delaware,
Montana and Wisconsin) and Puerto Rico report that
dispositions in at least 57% of the cases in their States are
received by the State criminal history repositories.

*  Of the respondents indicating that there is a legal
requirement for prosecutors to notify the State criminal history
record repository of declinations to prosecute, 5 States
(Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, Oklahoma and Rhode
Island) estimate that notice is received in 100% of the cases.

*  Thirteen States were able to estimate the number of
prosecutor declinations received. The number of declinations
received range from 1 in Mississippi to 197,500 in California.

Policies/practices of State criminal history repository regarding
modification of felony convictions, 2001 (Table 9):

*  Expungements: Twenty-four States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands have statutes that
provide for the expungement of felony convictions. In 11
States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, the record is
destroyed by the State criminal history repository. In
Minnesota, although State law does not provide for destroying
conviction data, the State does get orders issued pursuant to the
inherent authority of the courts. In 11 States, the record is
retained with the action noted on the record. Three States seal
the record. In Virginia, although the State law does not provide
for expungement of convictions, if expungement orders are
received, the files are sealed. In Mississippi, records that are
expunged are deleted from the database; however, the State
criminal history repository is authorized to maintain an internal
record of action in some cases.

*  Setting aside of convictions: Thirty-eight jurisdictions have
statutes that provide for setting aside felony convictions. In 2
States, South Dakota and Tennessee, the record is destroyed. In
33 jurisdictions (31 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico), the record is retained with the action noted. In Nevada
and Michigan, the record is sealed. In Mississippi, records are
deleted from the database; however, the State criminal history
repository is authorized to maintain an internal record of action
in some cases.

*  Pardons: All reporting jurisdictions (50 States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands) have statutes
that provide for the granting of a pardon. In 45 States and the
District of Columbia, the criminal history record is retained
with the action noted. In 6 jurisdictions (4 States, Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands), the record is destroyed. In Mississippi,
records are deleted from the database; however, the State
criminal history repository is authorized to maintain an internal
record of action in some cases.                   

*  Restoration of civil rights: Forty-two States and the District
of Columbia have legal provisions for the restoration of a
convicted felon's civil rights. In the majority of those
jurisdictions (35 States and the District of Columbia), the
record is retained with the action noted. In 2 States, the record
is destroyed. In Missouri, no action is taken. In Alaska and
Maryland, although there are legal provisions for restoration of
civil rights, such actions are not reported to the State criminal
history repository. In Mississippi, records are deleted from the
database; however, the State criminal history repository is
authorized to maintain an internal record of action in some
cases.

Correctional data

Fingerprinting of incarcerated offenders and linkage to records
maintained by State criminal history repository, 2001 (Table
10):

*  In 38 States and Puerto Rico, there is a legal requirement
(State statute or State administrative regulation having the
force of law) that the State prison system must fingerprint
admitted prisoners and send the fingerprints to the State
criminal history repository.

*  A total of 26 States and Puerto Rico have the same legal
requirement for reporting by local jails.

*  In jurisdictions where State correctional facilities are legally
required to report information or the information is reported
voluntarily, the majority (31 States and Puerto Rico) estimate
that in at least 98% of the cases, admission information is
reported to the State repository. Twenty-nine of those States
and Puerto Rico estimate that 100% of the admissions are
reported to the repository. Four States estimate a reporting rate
of less than 98%, ranging from less than 5% in Pennsylvania to
90% in Washington.

*  For reporting from local jails, where required by law or
completed voluntarily, 12 States and Puerto Rico report that
95% or more of the admissions are reported to the State
repositories. Four States report rates of less than 95%, ranging
from less than 5% in Pennsylvania to 87% in Montana.

*  In 44 States and Puerto Rico, fingerprints received from
State and local correctional facilities are processed by the State
criminal history record repository to establish positive
identification of incarcerated offenders and to ensure that
correctional information is linked to the proper records.

Probation and parole data in State criminal history repository,
2001 (Table 11):

*  Of the 20 responding jurisdictions where reporting of
probation data is legally required or voluntarily reported, 10
estimate that at least 95% of the cases in which probation is
ordered are reported to the State criminal history repository by
the probation authority. One additional State (Arkansas) reports
that in at least 60% of the cases, the State criminal history
repository receives probation information. Arkansas also
reported that it expected to receive 100% reporting by late 2002
with the implementation of a new system. Six States report that
information is received on less than 60% of the cases. In Texas,
probation sentences are reported; releases are not.

*  Seventeen jurisdictions (16 States and Puerto Rico) where
reporting of parole data is legally required or voluntarily
reported, estimate that parole information is reported in 95% or
more of the cases. Four States report receiving parole
information in less than 95 % of the cases.

Timelines of data in State criminal history repository

-Arrests

Average number of days to process arrest data submitted to
State criminal history repository and current status of backlog,
2001 (Table 12):

*  Based on the responses of 48 jurisdictions, the average
number of days between arrest and receipt of arrest data and
fingerprints by the State criminal repositories is 13.7, ranging
from 1 day or less in 5 States and the District of Columbia to
169 in Mississippi. The majority (30) receive the data in 10
days or less.

*  Based on the responses of 47 jurisdictions, the average
number of days between receipt of fingerprints by the State
criminal history repository and entry into the master name
index by the State criminal history repositories is 14.4, ranging
from 0 in Delaware to 180 days in Oklahoma. The majority
(36) of jurisdictions enter the data in 10 days or less.    

*  Based on the responses of 48 jurisdictions, the average
number of days between receipt of fingerprints by the State
criminal history repository and entry of arrest data into the
criminal history databases is 18.8, ranging from 0 in Delaware
to 180 in Oklahoma. The majority (34) of jurisdictions enter
the data in 10 days or less.

*  Twenty-six States indicate that they have, or had at the time
of the survey, backlogs in entering arrest data into the criminal
history database. The number of person-days to clear the
backlogs range from 2 days in Rhode Island to clear an
estimated 200 unprocessed or partially processed fingerprint
cards, to over 12,600 in Washington to clear an estimated
129,000 unprocessed or partially processed fingerprint cards.

-Disposition data

Average number of days to process disposition data submitted
to State criminal history repository and current status of
backlog, 2001 (Table 13):

*  An average of 17.5 days separates the final court
dispositions and receipt of that information by the State
criminal history repositories, ranging from 1 day in Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, New Jersey, North
Carolina and Puerto Rico, to 80 days in North Dakota.

*  An average of 29.5 days separates the receipt of final trial
court dispositions and entry of disposition data into the
criminal history databases, ranging from less than 1 day in
States where dispositions are entered either directly by the
courts or by tape, to 330 days in Washington. Twenty-four of
the 39 reporting jurisdictions enter the data in less than 10
days.     

*  Twenty-seven States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands
indicate having backlogs in entering disposition data into the
criminal history database, ranging from 5 days to clear a
backlog of 200 dispositions in Utah, to over 6,300 days to clear
338,000 dispositions in Washington.
     
-Admission to correctional facilities

Average number of days to process correctional admission data
submitted to State criminal history repository and current status
of backlog, 2001
(Table 14):

*  Based on 33 applicable jurisdictions providing responses, the
average number of days between the admission of offenders to
State correctional facilities and receipt of the information by
the State criminal history repository is 13, ranging from 1 day
or less in 9 States, to 60 days in North Carolina.

*  Based on the responses of 21 applicable States, the average
number of days between the release of offenders from State
correctional facilities and receipt of the information by the
State criminal history repository is 16, ranging from 1 day or
less in 5 States, to 30-45 days in Florida.

*  The responses from 31 applicable jurisdictions indicate that
the average number of days between the receipt of correctional
information and entry by the State criminal history repository
into the criminal history database is 14.5, ranging from 1 day or
less in 9 jurisdictions, to 90 days in Illinois.
                                   
*  Thirteen jurisdictions indicate that they have or had backlogs
in entering the correctional information into the criminal
history databases. The number of person-days to clear the
backlogs range from 10 in Nebraska to clear an estimated 120
unprocessed or partially processed custody-supervision forms,
to 666 person-days in Missouri to clear an estimated 100,000
unprocessed or partially processed custody-supervision forms.

Procedures to improve data quality

Procedures employed by State criminal history repository to
encourage complete arrest and disposition reporting, 2001
(Table 15):

*  The method most used to encourage complete arrest and
disposition reporting is telephone calls, conducted by 42 States,
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.

*  Twenty-seven States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico generate lists of arrests with missing dispositions as a
means of monitoring disposition reporting. Twenty of those
jurisdictions use the lists to provide notice to criminal justice
agencies in order to obtain the missing dispositions.

*  Thirty-three States generate form letters to encourage
complete arrest and disposition reporting.

*  Thirty States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
report using field visits to encourage complete arrest and
disposition reporting.

*  Other jurisdictions report using such methods as audits,
training, and electronic contact as methods to encourage
complete arrest and disposition reporting.

Linking of arrests and dispositions

Methods used to link disposition information to arrest/charge
information on criminal history record, 2001 (Table 16):

*  Thirty-three States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands utilize methods for linking disposition
information and arrest/charge information, which also permit
the linking of dispositions to particular charges and/or specific
counts.

*  All responding jurisdictions report using at least one method
for linking disposition information and arrest/charge
information on criminal history records, and nearly every
jurisdiction indicates multiple mechanisms to ensure linkage:

- Thirty-two States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
employ a unique tracking number for the individual subject.

- Thirty-seven States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
use a unique arrest event identifier.

- Fifteen States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
utilize a unique charge identifier.

- Thirty-seven States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin
Islands use the arrest date to link disposition data.

- Thirty-five States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands use the subject's name as a method to link
disposition information to arrest information.

- Twenty-three States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico report using the reporting agency's case number.

- Individual jurisdictions also report using other methods, such
as the originating agency (ORI) number, the Social Security
number and other unique combinations of numbers.

Procedure followed when linkage cannot be made between
court or correctional information in the criminal history
database, 2001 (Table 17):

*  Forty-seven jurisdictions report that they sometimes receive
final court dispositions that cannot be linked to arrest
information in the criminal history database.

The jurisdictions vary in the percentage of court dispositions
that cannot be linked to arrest cycles in the criminal database
from less than 1% in Nevada to 50% in Indiana. Seven States
(Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, North Carolina, Vermont,
West Virginia and Wyoming) report that all final court
dispositions can be linked to the arrest cycle in the criminal
history database.

*  Thirty-four jurisdictions report that they sometimes receive
correctional information that cannot be linked to arrest
information in the criminal history record database. The
percentage of correctional dispositions that cannot be linked to
arrest cycles in the criminal history database range from a
"minimal amount" in Nevada and less than 1% in Montana and
South Dakota, to 100% in Wisconsin, where correctional
information is posted to the criminal history record as an
independent event.

*  The jurisdictions use a variety of procedures when a linkage
cannot be established. Seven States create "dummy" arrest
segments from court disposition records; five States create
"dummy" court segments from custody records. Three States
and the District of Columbia enter court information into the
database without any linkage to a prior arrest, and 15 States
enter custody information into the database without any linkage
to a prior court disposition. Twenty-three States and the Virgin
Islands do not enter the unlinked court information. Fifteen
States do not enter unlinked custody information. Fifteen States
utilize other procedures, such as returning the information to
the originating or contributing agency or using temporary or
pending files until a match can be established.

Other data quality procedures

Strategies employed by State criminal history repository to
ensure accuracy of data in criminal history database, 2001
(Table 18):

*  To prevent the entry and storage of inaccurate data and to
detect and correct inaccurate entries in the criminal history
database, all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands use at least one strategy to circumvent
this problem.

*  Forty-three States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin
Islands manually review incoming source documents or
reports.

*  The other most-frequently utilized strategy is the use of
computer edit and verification programs employed by 42
States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.

*  Twenty-nine States and the Virgin Islands perform manual
double-checking before data entry. Manual review of criminal
record transcripts before dissemination is performed in 28
States and the Virgin Islands.

*  Twenty-one States and the District of Columbia perform
random sample comparisons of the State criminal history files
with stored documents.

*  Twenty-one States and Puerto Rico generate error lists that
are returned to the reporting agencies.

*  Seventeen States use various strategies, such as audits and
contacting contributing agencies for more information.

Audits

Audit activities of State criminal history repository, 2001
(Table 19):

*  Forty-nine States and Puerto Rico maintain transaction logs
to provide an audit trail of all inquiries, responses and record
updates or modifications.

*  More than half of the repositories, a total of 35 States, report
that the State criminal history repository or some other agency
performed random sample audits of user agencies to ensure
accuracy and completeness of repository records and to ensure
that the agencies comply with applicable laws and regulations.

Data quality audits of State criminal history repository, 2001
(Table 20):

*  During the 5 years before the survey, an audit of the State
criminal history repository's database (other than ongoing
systematic sampling) was conducted in 27 States to determine
the level of accuracy and completeness of the criminal history
file.

*  Of the States where audits were performed, 21 States report
that another agency conducted the audit; the repository
conducted its own audit in 3 States; and 3 States indicated that
auditing was conducted by both an outside agency and the
repository.

*  Twenty-five jurisdictions in 2001 reported that no data
quality audit had been conducted during the previous 5 years,
and 24 reported that they are not planning to audit in the
coming 3 years. 

*  In 22 States where audits were conducted, changes were
made as a result of the audits to improve the data quality of
records.

*  Twenty-five States and Puerto Rico had data quality audits
planned or scheduled for sometime in the next 3 years.

*  Forty-nine States and Puerto Rico had initiatives underway
at the repository or contributing agencies to improve data
quality. Initiatives included audit activities (31); automation
changes (41); disposition or arrest reporting enhancements
(42); felony flagging (18); fingerprint enhancements (30);
agency interfaces (36); legislation (10); plan development (25);
establishment of task forces (17); implementation of tracking
numbers (19); and training (40).             

Criminal history records of Interstate Identification Index (III)
participants maintained by the State criminal history repository
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2001 (Table 21):

*  As of March 1, 2003, over 29 million III records are indexed
with the State's identification (SID) pointers. Approximately
19.1 million records are maintained by the FBI for the States.

Fees charged by State criminal history repository for
noncriminal justice purposes, 2001 (Table 22):

*  Almost all of the responding States (49) and the Virgin
Islands currently charge fees for conducting criminal history
record searches for noncriminal justice requesters. Mississippi
and Puerto Rico do not charge fees.

*  Fees for fingerprint-supported searches range from $6 in
Arizona to up to $52 in California. In some cases, California
does not charge a fee for the search.

*  Fees for name searches range from $1 in Texas to $25 in
Alabama, Connecticut, Massachusetts and South Carolina. Ten
States (Arizona, California, Delaware, Georgia, Maryland,
New York, Ohio, South Dakota, Tennessee and Wyoming) do
not conduct name searches for noncriminal justice purposes.

*  Eighteen jurisdictions (California, Connecticut, Delaware,
Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Virgin Islands, Virginia, Washington and
Wyoming) charge different fees for volunteer searches. 
          

Methodology

This report is based upon the results from a two-part survey
conducted of the administrators of the State criminal history
record repositories in January - July 2002.  A total of 53
jurisdictions were surveyed, including the 50 States, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and
the U.S. Virgin Islands.  Responses to the survey were received
from all 53 jurisdictions. 

The survey instruments consisted of 63 questions, having
several parts.  The survey was designed to collect
comprehensive data relating to State criminal history
information systems.  Fifteen topical areas are covered in this
report, as follows: 

*  current quality and quantity of records in the criminal history
databases;

*  level of automation of master name indexes and criminal
history records maintained by the State repositories;

*  capacity of criminal history system to flag convicted felons
in the database;

*  level of fingerprint-supported arrest reporting to the State
repositories and the processing and timeliness of the
information that is entered into criminal history record
databases;

*  notice to the State repository of persons released without
charging following submission of fingerprints to the State
repository;

*  level of prosecutor-reported information in criminal history
databases;

*  level and timeliness of disposition reporting by the courts to
the State criminal history repositories;

*  types and timeliness of information reported to the State
criminal history repositories by State and local correctional
facilities;

*  level of probation/parole-related information in State
criminal history databases;

*  extent to which the records in State criminal history
databases contain final disposition information;

*  policies and practices of the State repository regarding
modification of felony convictions;

*  ability of the State repositories to link reported disposition
data to arrest data in State criminal history record databases; 

*  level of audit activity in the States and the strategies
employed the State repositories to ensure accuracy of the data
in the criminal history record databases; and

*  participation of the States in III and NFF; and

*  fees charged by State criminal history repositories for
conducting record searches for noncriminal justice requesters.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation also provided information
for the report. The information includes the number of criminal
history records of the States participating in the Interstate
Identification Index (III) system that are maintained by the
State criminal history repositories and the number of III records
maintained by the FBI for the States.  

Following the receipt of the responses, all data were tabulated. 
Survey respondents were requested to respond to particular
questions relating to the current data compared to data from
earlier surveys.  Respondents also were permitted a final
review of the data after it was placed in the tables that appear in
this report.

Numbers and percentages shown in the tables were rounded. 
In most cases, numbers were rounded to the nearest 100. 
Percentages were rounded to the nearest whole number.  

In the analyses of the tables, averages and totals were
calculated using the mid-point of the range where ranges
appear in the underlying data.  In instances where the result is
.5, when it followed an even number, the number was rounded
down to the even number (e.g., 4.5 became 4); in instances
where the .5 followed an odd number, the number was rounded
up to the next even number (e.g., 1.5 became 2).       

Data reported for 1993 was taken from Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Survey of Criminal History Information Systems,
1993 (January 1995). Data reported for 1995 was taken from
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Survey of Criminal History
Information Systems, 1997  (April 1999). Data reported for
1995 was taken from Bureau of Justice Statistics, Survey of
Criminal History Information Systems, 1999  (October 2000).
          

End of file
8/6/03 jb












