U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs

Bureau of Justice Statistics

Survey of State Criminal History
Information Systems, 1999


Criminal Justice Information Policy


----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sschis99.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 
may available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sschis 
-----------------------------------------------------------------




Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director



Acknowledgments. This report was prepared by SEARCH, The
National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics, Kenneth
E. Bischoff, Chairman, and Gary R. Cooper, Executive Director.
The project director and author of the report was Sheila J. Barton,
Deputy Executive Director. Support for the project was provided by
Jane L. Bassett, Publishing Specialist, Corporate Communications.
The Federal project monitor was Carol G. Kaplan, Chief, Criminal
History Improvement Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement No.
95-RU-RX-K001, awarded to SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics, 7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite
145, Sacramento, California 95831. Contents of this document do
not necessarily reflect the view or policies of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics or the U.S. Department of Justice.

Copyright (c) SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics 2000.

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to reproduce,
publish, translate or otherwise use all or any part of the copyrighted
material in this publication with the exception of those items
indicating they are copyrighted or printed by any source other than
SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice Information and
Statistics.


Contents

List of data tables

Foreword

Glossary of terms

Introduction

Major findings
Level of automation of master name indexes and criminal history
files
Level of disposition reporting
Level of felony flagging
Timeliness of trial court disposition data

Detailed findings
Status of State criminal history files
Completeness of data in State criminal history repository
Disposition data
Correctional data
Timeliness of data in State criminal history repository
-Arrests
-Disposition data
-Admission to correctional facilities
Procedures to improve data quality
Linking of arrests and dispositions
Other data quality procedures
Audits

Data tables

Methodology

List of data tables



1. Overview of State criminal history record systems, December 31,
1999

2. Number of subjects (individual offenders) in State criminal
history file, 1995, 1997 and 1999

3. Number of final dispositions reported to State criminal history
repository, 1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999

4. Automation of master name index and criminal history file, 1989,
1993, 1997, and 1999

5. Data required to be submitted to State criminal history repository,
1999

6. Arrest records with fingerprints, 1989, 1993, 1995, and 1999

7. Notice to State criminal history repository of release of arrested
persons without charging, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 1999

8. Completeness of prosecutor and court disposition reporting to
State criminal history repository, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 1999

9. Policies/practices of State criminal history repository regarding
modification of felony convictions, 1999

10. Fingerprinting of incarcerated offenders and linkage to records
maintained by State criminal history repository, 1999

11. Probation and parole data in State criminal history repository,
1989, 1993, 1997, and 1999

12. Average number of days to process arrest data submitted to
State criminal history repository and current status of backlog, 1999

13. Average number of days to process disposition data submitted to
State criminal history repository and current status of backlog, 1999

14. Average number of days to process correctional admission data
submitted to State criminal history repository and current status of
backlog, 1999

15. Procedures employed by State criminal history repository to
encourage complete arrest and disposition reporting, 1999

16. Methods used to link disposition information to arrest/charge
information on criminal history record, 1999

17. Procedure followed when linkage cannot be made between court
or correctional information in the criminal history database, 1999

18. Strategies employed by State criminal history repository to
ensure accuracy of data in criminal history database, 1999

19. Audit activities of State criminal history repository, 1989, 1993,
1997, and 1999

20. Data quality audits of State criminal history repository, 1999

21. Criminal history records of Interstate Identification Index (III)
participants maintained by the State criminal history repository and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, June 30, 1999

22. Estimated records with dispositions available through the
Interstate Identification Index (III), June 30 1999

23. Fees charged by State criminal history repository for
noncriminal justice purposes, 1999



Foreword



SEARCH conducted five previous surveys in this series for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, covering 1989, 1992, 1993, 1995, and
1997. This year's report largely updates the information collected in
previous years.

The National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
mandated by the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act became
operational November 30, 1998. This survey provides a summary of
quantitative information at the end of 1999. The levels of coverage,
completeness, accuracy, and accessibility of the State criminal
history information systems directly affect the effectiveness and
efficiency of the NICS. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics hopes that the information
contained in this report will assist States as they continue to
improve their systems and to remain vigilant in maintaining the
goals they have already achieved.

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director


Glossary of terms

Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS): An automated
system for searching fingerprint files and transmitting fingerprint
images. AFIS computer equipment can scan fingerprint impressions
(or utilize electronically transmitted fingerprint images) and
automatically extract and digitize ridge details and other identifying
characteristics in sufficient detail to enable the computer's searching
and matching components to distinguish a single fingerprint from
thousands or even millions of fingerprints previously scanned and
stored in digital form in the computer's memory. The process
eliminates the manual searching of fingerprint files and increases
the speed and accuracy of ten-print processing (arrest fingerprint
cards and noncriminal justice applicant fingerprint cards). AFIS
equipment also can be used to identify individuals from "latent"
(crime scene) fingerprints, even fragmentary prints of single fingers
in some cases. Digital fingerprint images generated by AFIS
equipment can be transmitted electronically to remote sites,
eliminating the necessity of mailing fingerprint cards and providing
remote access to AFIS fingerprint files. 

Central Repository: The database (or the agency housing the
database) that maintains criminal history records on all State
offenders. Records include fingerprint files and files containing
identification segments and notations of arrests and dispositions.
The central repository is generally responsible for State-level
identification of arrestees, and commonly serves as the central
control terminal for contact with FBI record systems. Inquiries from
local agencies for a national record check (for criminal justice or
firearm check purposes) are routed to the FBI via the central
repository. Although usually housed in the Department of Public
Safety, the central repository may be maintained in some States by
the State Police or some other State agency. 

Criminal History Record Information (CHRI) or Criminal History
Record Information System: A record (or the system maintaining
such records) that includes individual identifiers and describes an
individual's arrests and subsequent dispositions. Criminal history
records do not include intelligence or investigative data or
sociological data such as drug use history. CHRI systems usually
include information on juveniles if they are tried as adults in
criminal courts.


Most, however, do not include data describing involvement of an
individual in the juvenile justice system. All data in CHRI systems
are usually backed by fingerprints of the record subjects to provide
positive identification. State legislation varies concerning disclosure
of criminal history records for noncriminal justice purposes. 

Data Quality: The extent to which criminal history records are
complete, accurate and timely. In addition, accessibility sometimes
is considered a data quality factor. The key concern in data quality
is the completeness of records and the extent to which records
include dispositions as well as arrest and charge information. Other
concerns include the timeliness of data reporting to State and
Federal repositories, the timeliness of data entry by the repositories,
the readability of criminal history records and the ability to have
access to the records when necessary.

Felony or Serious Misdemeanor: The category of offenses for which
fingerprints and criminal history information are accepted by the
FBI and entered in the Bureau's files, including the III system.
Serious misdemeanor is defined to exclude certain minor offenses,
such as drunkenness or minor traffic offenses. 

Interstate Identification Index (III): An "index-pointer" system for
the interstate exchange of criminal history records. Under III, the
FBI maintains an identification index to persons arrested for
felonies or serious misdemeanors under State or Federal law. The
index includes identification information, (such as name, date of
birth, race, and sex), FBI Numbers and State Identification Numbers
(SID) from each State holding information about an individual.
Search inquiries from criminal justice agencies nationwide are
transmitted automatically via State telecommunications networks
and the FBI's National Crime Information Center (NCIC)
telecommunications lines. Searches are made on the basis of name
and other identifiers. The process is entirely automated and takes
approximately five seconds to complete. If a hit is made against the
Index, record requests are made using the SID or FBI Number, and
data are automatically retrieved from each repository holding
records on the individual and forwarded to the requesting agency.
As of September 30, 2000, 41 States participate in III. Responses
are provided from FBI files when the State originating the record is
not a participant in III. 

Participation requires that the State maintain an automated criminal
history record system capable of interfacing with the III system and
capable of responding automatically to all interstate and
Federal/State record requests. 

Juvenile Justice Records: Official records of juvenile justice
adjudications. Most adult criminal history record systems do not
accept such records, which are frequently not supported by
fingerprints and which usually are confidential under State law.
Pursuant to an order dated July 15, 1992, the FBI now accepts, and
will disseminate, juvenile records on the same basis as adult
records. States, however, are not required to submit such records to
the FBI 

Master Name Index (MNI): A subject identification index
maintained by criminal history record repositories that includes
names and other identifiers for each person about whom a record is
held in the systems. As of 1999, only one State did not have at least
a partially automated MNI; almost all States (45) had fully
automated MNIs. The automated name index is the key to rapidly
identifying persons who have criminal records for such purposes as
presale firearm checks, criminal investigations or bailsetting. MNIs
may include "felony flags," which indicate whether record subjects
have arrests or convictions for felony offenses. 

National Crime Information Center (NCIC): An automated database
of criminal justice and justice-related records maintained by the
FBI. The database includes the "hot files" of wanted and missing
persons, stolen vehicles and identifiable stolen property, including
firearms. Access to NCIC files is through central control terminal
operators in each State that are connected to NCIC via dedicated
telecommunications lines maintained by the FBI. Local agencies
and officers on the beat can access the State control terminal via the
State law enforcement network. Inquiries are based on name and
other nonfingerprint identification. Most criminal history inquiries
of the III system are made via the NCIC telecommunications
system. NCIC data may be provided only for criminal justice and
other specifically authorized purposes. For criminal history
searches, this includes criminal justice employment, employment by
Federally chartered or insured banking institutions or securities
firms, and use by State and local governments for purposes of
employment and licensing pursuant to a State statute approved by
the U.S. Attorney General. Inquiries regarding presale firearm
checks are included as criminal justice uses. 


National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact: An interstate and
Federal/State compact which establishes formal procedures and
governance structures for the use of the Interstate Identification
Index (III). It is designed to facilitate the exchange of criminal
history data among States for noncriminal justice purposes and to
eliminate the need for the FBI to maintain duplicate data about State
offenders. Under the compact, the operation of this system is
overseen by a policymaking council comprised of Federal and State
officials. The key concept underlying the compact is agreement
among all signatory States that all criminal history information
(except sealed records) will be provided in response to noncriminal
justice requests from another State - regardless of whether the
information being requested would be permitted to be disseminated
for a similar noncriminal justice purpose within the State holding
the data. (That is, the law of the State that is inquiring about the data
- rather than the law of the State that originated the data - governs
its use.) In some cases, ratification of the compact will have the
effect of amending existing State legislation governing interstate
record dissemination, since most States do not currently authorize
dissemination to all of the Federal agencies and out-of-State users
authorized under the compact. At present, noncriminal justice
inquiries are handled by the FBI from its files of voluntarily
contributed State arrest and disposition records. This requires that
the FBI maintain duplicates of State records and generally results in
less complete records being provided, since FBI files of State
records are not always complete due to reporting deficiencies. The
compact was passed by Congress and signed into law by the
President in October 1998. The compact became effective in April
1999, following ratification by two State legislatures, those being
Montana on April 8, 1999 and Georgia on April 28, 1999. Since
that time, six additional States have entered into the compact:
Nevada (May 1999); Florida (June 1999); Colorado (March 2000);
Iowa (April 2000); Connecticut (June 2000); and South Carolina
(June 2000). 

National Fingerprint File (NFF): A system and procedures designed
as a component of the III system, which, when fully implemented,
would establish a totally decentralized system for the interstate
exchange of criminal history records. The NFF will contain
fingerprints of Federal offenders and a single set of fingerprints on
State offenders from each State in which an offender has been
arrested for a felony or a serious misdemeanor. Under the NFF
concept, States will forward only the first-arrest fingerprints of an
individual to the FBI accompanied by other identification data such
as name and date of birth. 


Fingerprints for subsequent arrests would not be forwarded.
Disposition data on the individual would also be retained at the
State repository and would not be forwarded to the FBI. Upon
receipt of the first-arrest fingerprint cards (or electronic images), the
FBI will enter the individual's fingerprint impressions in the NFF
and will enter the person's name and identifiers in the III, together
with an FBI Number and a State Identification (SID) Number for
each State maintaining a record on the individual. Charge and
disposition information on State offenders will be maintained only
at the State level, and State repositories will be required to respond
to all authorized record requests concerning these individuals for
both criminal justice and noncriminal justice purposes. States would
have to release all data on record subjects for noncriminal justice
inquiries regardless of whether the data could be released for similar
purposes within the State. The NFF has been implemented in four
States: Florida, New Jersey, North Carolina and Oregon. 

Positive Identification: Identification of an individual using
biometric characteristics that are unique and not subject to
alteration. In present usage, the term refers to identification by
fingerprints but may also include identification by retinal images,
voiceprints or other techniques. Positive identification is to be
distinguished from identification using name, sex, date of birth, or
other personal identifiers as shown on a document subject to
alteration or counterfeit such as a birth certificate, Social Security
card or driver's license. Because individuals can have identical or
similar names, ages, etc., identifications based on such
characteristics are not reliable. 



Note to Readers: This is a report of the results of the Survey of State
Criminal History Information Systems. In some of the tables that
follow, data from earlier data quality surveys are included. Caution
should be used in drawing comparisons between the results of
earlier surveys and the survey reported here. Since the last national
data quality survey, the U.S. Justice Department has continued to
implement assistance programs dedicated to improving criminal
history records. As a result, some States are focusing new or
additional resources on the condition of their records and in many
cases, know more about their records today than in the past. A
number of State repositories have suffered fiscal cutbacks and have
had to shift priorities away from certain criminal history
information management tasks. For these and other reasons, trend
comparisons may not as accurately reflect the status of the Nation's
criminal history records as the current data considered alone. 


Introduction

This report is based upon the results from a two-part survey
conducted of the administrators of the State criminal history record
repositories in January -September 1999. Fifty-three jurisdictions
were surveyed, including the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Responses were received to at least one part of the survey from 52
jurisdictions. Only Puerto Rico did not complete either part of the
survey. Throughout this report, the 50 States will be referred to as
"States"; the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands will be referred to as "territories," consistent with prior
surveys; "Nation" refers collectively to both the States and
territories.

In addition, the Federal Bureau of Investigation was the source for
information relating to the number of criminal history records of the
States participating in the Interstate Identification Index (III) system
that are maintained by the State criminal history repositories and the
number of records maintained by the FBI for the States, as of June
30, 1999. The number of dispositions available through III in each
State also are reported.


Major Findings


Level of automation of master name indexes and criminal history
files


Overview of State criminal history record systems, December 31,
1999 (Table 1):

* Fifty States and the District of Columbia have automated at least
some records in the criminal history record file.

* Twenty-one States (Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii,
Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode
Island, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wyoming) have
fully automated criminal history files and master name indexes.


Automation of master name index and criminal history file, 1999
(Table 4):

* Forty-five States have fully automated master name indexes. The
Virgin Islands does not maintain a master name index.

* The Virgin Islands has no automated criminal history files.

* Of those States maintaining partially automated criminal history
files, when an offender with a prior manual record is arrested, the
prior manual record is subsequently automated in 22 States. In four
States (California, Delaware, Minnesota and Pennsylvania) and the
District of Columbia, only the new information is automated. In
Maine, the new information is added to the manual file.


Level of disposition reporting


Overview of State criminal history record systems, December 31,
1999 (Table 1):

* Eighteen States (Alaska, California, Connecticut, Delaware,
Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, Montana, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Vermont and Virginia) and the District of
Columbia representing approximately 38% of the Nation's
population (based on 53 jurisdictions) and 41% of the Nation's
criminal history records, report that 80% or more arrests within the
past 5 years in the criminal history database have final dispositions
recorded.

* A total of 23 States and the District of Columbia representing
approximately 46% of the Nation's population and 47% of the
Nation's criminal history records, report that 70% or more arrests
within the past 5 years in the criminal history database have final
dispositions recorded.

* A total of 32 States and the District of Columbia representing
approximately 64% of the Nation's population and 66% of the
Nation's criminal history records, report that 60% or more arrests
within the past 5 years in the criminal history database have final
dispositions recorded.

* When arrests older than 5 years are considered, 15 States,
representing 25% of the Nation's criminal history records, report
that 80% or more arrests in the entire criminal history database have
final dispositions recorded. Twenty-three States, representing 43%
of the Nation's criminal history records, report that 70% or more
arrests in the entire criminal history database have final dispositions
recorded. Thirty-two States, representing 66% of the Nation's
criminal history records, report that 60% or more arrests in the
entire criminal history database have final dispositions recorded.


Number of final dispositions reported to State criminal history
repository, 1999 (Table 3): 

Forty-eight States provided data on the number of final dispositions
reported to their criminal history repositories indicating that over
7.6 million final dispositions were reported in 1999. The responding
States represent approximately 96% of the Nation's population.


Level of felony flagging


Overview of State criminal history record systems, December 31,
1999 (Table 1):

* Forty-two States currently flag some or all felony convictions in
their criminal history databases.

* Eighteen States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands,
collect sufficient data to permit them to flag at least some
previously unflagged felony convictions.


Timeliness of trial court disposition data


Average number of days to process disposition data submitted to
State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table 13):

* An average 30 days separates the final court dispositions and
receipt of that information by the State criminal history repositories,
ranging from 1 day or less in Colorado, Delaware, the District of
Columbia and New Jersey to 110 days in Wisconsin. The majority
of responding repositories receives the data in 30 days or less.

* An average 39 days separates the receipt of final trial court
dispositions and entry of disposition data into the criminal history
databases, ranging from less than 1 day in States where dispositions
are entered either directly by the courts or by tape to 365 days in
Ohio. Half of the responding jurisdictions enter the data in 10 days
or less.

* Twenty-eight States and the Virgin Islands indicate having
backlogs in entering disposition data into the criminal history
database.


Detailed findings


Status of State criminal history files


Number of subjects (individual offenders) in State criminal history
file, 1999 (Table 2):

* Over 59 million criminal history records were in the criminal
history files of the State criminal history repositories on December
31, 1999. (An individual offender may have records in several
States.)

* Eighty-nine percent of the criminal history records maintained by
the State criminal history repositories are automated. Approximately
6.2 million records, or 11%, are not automated.

* The Virgin Islands has no automated criminal history files.


Automation of master name index and criminal history file, 1999
(Table 4):

* All of the reporting States and the District of Columbia have
automated at least some records in either the criminal history record
file or the master name index.     

* Of the responding jurisdictions, 45 States have fully automated
master name indexes. Six jurisdictions do not have fully automated
master name indexes. Of those six jurisdictions, three States and the
District of Columbia have partially automated master name indexes.
Maine's master name index is not automated, and the Virgin Islands
does not maintain a master name index.

* Of those jurisdictions maintaining partially automated criminal
history files, when an offender with a prior manual record is
arrested, the record is automated in 22 States. In four States
(California, Delaware, Minnesota and Pennsylvania) and the
District of Columbia, only the new information is automated. In
Maine, the information is added to the manual file.


Data required by State law to be submitted to State criminal history
repository, 1999(Table 5):

* Thirty-five States require prosecutors to report to State criminal
history repositories their decisions to decline prosecution in
criminal cases. In Michigan, arrest fingerprints are submitted after
the prosecutor's decision to charge a crime punishable by over 92
days.

* Forty-seven States require felony trial courts to report the
dispositions of felony cases to the State criminal history repository. 

* State prison admission on felony cases must be reported to the
State criminal history repository in 36 States. State prison release
information on felony cases must be reported to the State criminal
history repository in 31 States. 

* Admission data on felons housed in local correctional facilities
must be reported to the State criminal history repository in 25
States. Release data on felons housed in local correctional facilities
must be reported to the State criminal history repository in 17
States. 

* The reporting of probation information is mandated in 26 States
and the District of Columbia, while 28 States and the District of
Columbia require the reporting of parole information.


Arrest records with fingerprints, 1999 (Table 6):

* During 1999, over 8.8 million arrest fingerprint cards (or
electronic substitutes) were submitted to the State
criminal history repositories.

* Thirty-seven States, representing 72% of the Nation's population,
have records that are 100% fingerprint-supported. A total of 42
States, or an additional 10 States, representing 92% of the Nation's
population have records that are at least 90% fingerprint-supported.
In 6 States and the District of Columbia, some of the arrests in the
criminal history files, ranging from 35% to 85%, are
fingerprint-supported. In Massachusetts, there are no
fingerprint-supported criminal history records.


Completeness of data in State criminal history repository


Notice to State criminal history repository of release of arrested
persons without charging, 1999 (Table 7):

* More than half of the States (31) and the District of Columbia
require law enforcement agencies to notify the State criminal history
repository when an arrested person is released without formal
charging but after the fingerprints have been submitted to the
repository. 


Disposition data


Completeness of prosecutor and court disposition reporting to State
criminal history repository, 1999 (Table 8): 

* Seventeen States (Connecticut, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Maine,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey, North Dakota,
Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah,
Vermont and Virginia) report that criminal history repositories
receive final felony trial court dispositions for 80% or more of the
cases. 
Seven States (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, Oregon, Rhode
Island, South Carolina and Utah) estimate that they receive notice in
100% of the cases.

A. A total of 21 States, or four additional States (Arizona, Arkansas,
Delaware and Hawaii) report that final felony trial court
dispositions in 70% or more of the cases in their States are received
by the State criminal history repositories.

B. A total of 23 jurisdictions, or 1 additional State (Oklahoma) and
1 additional territory (Virgin Islands), report that final felony trial
court dispositions in 60% or more of the cases in their jurisdictions
are received by the State criminal history repositories.

* Of the respondents indicating that there is either a legal
requirement for prosecutors to notify the State criminal history
record repository of declinations to prosecute or where the
information is reported voluntarily, seven States and one territory
(Delaware, District of Columbia, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts,
New Jersey, North Dakota and Utah) estimate that they receive
notice in 80% or more of such cases. Three States (Delaware,
Massachusetts and New Jersey) estimate that notice is received in
100% of the cases. All of the noted jurisdictions, except
Massachusetts and the District of Columbia, report a legal
requirement to notify the repository. (See Table 5.)

* Ten States were able to estimate the number of prosecutor
declinations received. The numbers ranged from 100 in Mississippi
to 213,000 in California.


Policies/practices of State criminal history repository regarding
modification of felony convictions, 1999 (Table 9): 

* Expungements: Twenty-one States, the District of Columbia and
the Virgin Islands have statutes that provide for the expungement of
felony convictions. In 10 States and the Virgin Islands, the record is
destroyed by the State criminal history repository. In Minnesota,
although State law does not provide for expungements, the State
repository does receive orders issued pursuant to the inherent
authority of the court, and records relating to such orders are
destroyed. In eight States, the record is retained with the action
noted on the record. Six States seal the record. In Virginia, although
State law does not provide for the expungement of convictions,
orders are received by the State repository, and the records are
sealed.
 
* Setting aside of convictions: Forty-two jurisdictions have statutes
that provide for setting aside felony convictions. In three States, the
record is destroyed. In 35 jurisdictions (33 States, the District of
Columbia and the Virgin Islands), the record is retained with the
action noted. In Nevada, the record is sealed.  Three States did not
indicate how the records are treated by the State repository.

* Pardons: All of the reporting jurisdictions (49 States, the District
of Columbia and the Virgin Islands) have statutes that provide for
the granting of a pardon. In 43 States and the District of Columbia,
the criminal history record is retained with the action noted. In four
jurisdictions (South Dakota, Tennessee, Vermont and the Virgin
Islands), the record is destroyed. In Massachusetts, the record is
sealed. Two States did not indicate how pardons are treated by the
State repository. 

* Restoration of civil rights: Forty-one States and the District of
Columbia have legal provisions for the restoration of a convicted
felon's civil rights. In the majority of those jurisdictions (33 States
and the District of Columbia), the record is retained with the action
noted. In three States (South Dakota, Tennessee and Vermont), the
record is destroyed. In Massachusetts, the record is sealed.
Restoration of civil rights is not tracked in Alaska, and in Missouri,
no action is taken. Two States that have laws providing for the
restoration of civil rights did not indicate how the records are
treated by the State repository.


Correctional data


Fingerprinting of incarcerated offenders and linkage to records
maintained by State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table 10):

* In 39 States, there is a legal requirement (State statute or State
administrative regulation having the force of law) that the State
prison system must fingerprint admitted prisoners and send the
fingerprints to the State criminal history repository.

* A total of 28 States have the same legal requirement for reporting
by local jails. 

* In States where State correctional facilities are legally required to
report information or the information is reported voluntarily, the
majority of States (30) estimate that in at least 99% of the cases,
admission information is reported to the State repository.
Twenty-nine of those States estimate that 100% of the admissions
are reported to the repository. Seven jurisdictions estimate a
reporting rate of less than 99%, ranging from 85% in Virginia to 0%
in Kansas.
 
* For reporting from local jails where required by law or completed
voluntarily, 11 States report that 95% or more of the admissions are
reported to the State repositories. Three States report rates of less
than 95% ranging from 40% in North Dakota to less than 5% in
Pennsylvania.

* In 45 States, fingerprints received from State and local
correctional facilities are processed by the State criminal history
record repository to establish positive identification of incarcerated
offenders and to ensure that correctional information is linked to the
proper records.


Probation and parole data in State criminal history repository, 1999
(Table 11):

* Of the 16 States where reporting of probation data is legally
required or voluntarily reported, 11 estimate that at least 90% of the
cases in which probation is ordered are reported to the State
criminal history repository. One additional State reports that in at
least 75% of the cases, the State criminal 
history repository receives probation information. Four States report
that information is received in 60% or less of the cases. 

* Sixteen States where reporting of parole data is legally required or
voluntarily reported, estimate that parole information is reported in
90% of the cases. Three States report receiving parole information
in less than 90% of the cases, ranging from 75% in Minnesota to
0% in Idaho. In Colorado, 100% of admission to parole information
is received; release from parole is not reported.


Timeliness of data in State criminal history repository


-Arrests


Average number of days to process arrest information submitted to
State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table 12):

* The average number of days between arrest and receipt of arrest
data and fingerprints by the State criminal history repositories is 13,
ranging from 1 day or less in California, the District of Columbia,
Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, New
York, Pennsylvania, South Dakota and Virginia (most due to
livescan) to up to 93 days in Mississippi. The majority (27) receive
the data in 14 days or less.

* The average number of days between receipt of fingerprints by the
State criminal history repository and entry into the master name
index by the State criminal history repositories is 21, ranging from 0
in Delaware to up to as many as 150 days in Texas. The majority of
jurisdictions (28) enter the data in 10 days or less.

* The average number of days between receipt of fingerprints and
entry of arrest data into the criminal history databases is 26, ranging
from less than one day in Delaware, the District of Columbia,
Georgia, New Mexico, New York and Virginia to up to 180 days in
Tennessee. The majority of reporting jurisdictions (24) enter the
data in 14 days or less.

* Twenty-nine States indicate that they have, or had at the time of
the survey, backlogs in entering arrest data into the criminal history
database. The number of person-days to clear the backlogs range
from 1-2 days in New Hampshire to 3,600 person-days to clear an
estimated 84,000 unprocessed or partially processed fingerprint
cards in Washington. Initial fingerprint classification is a more
time-consuming task than entry of disposition data into the
database.


-Disposition data


Average number of days to process disposition data submitted to
State criminal history repository and current status of backlog, 1999
(Table 13):

* An average 30 days separates the final court dispositions and
receipt of that information by the State criminal history repositories,
ranging from 1 day or less in Colorado, Delaware, the District of
Columbia and New Jersey to 110 days in Wisconsin. The majority
of responding repositories receives the data in 30 days or less.

* An average 39 days separates the receipt of final trial court
dispositions and entry of disposition data into the criminal history
databases, ranging from less than 1 day in States where dispositions
are entered either directly by the courts or by tape to 365 days in
Ohio. Half of the responding jurisdictions enter the data in 10 days
or less.

* Twenty-eight States and the Virgin Islands indicate having
backlogs in entering disposition data into the criminal history
database.


-Admission to correctional facilities


Average number of days to process correctional admission data
submitted to State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table 14):

* The average number of days between the admission of offenders
to State correctional facilities and receipt of the information by the
State criminal history repository is 15, ranging from 1 day in
Delaware, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and
Tennessee to 60 days in North Carolina. 

* The average number of days between the admission of offenders
to local jails and receipt of the information by the State criminal
history repository is 17, ranging from 1 day in New Jersey and
South Dakota to 30 days in California, Idaho, Maryland, North
Dakota and Wyoming. 

* The average number of days between receipt of correctional
admissions information by the State criminal history repository and
entry into the criminal history databases is 53, ranging from less
than 1 day in Mississippi, New York and Virginia to approximately
365 days in Arkansas and Michigan. The majority of responding
States (18) enter the information in 10 days or less. 

* Eighteen States indicate that they have or had backlogs in entering
the correctional information into the criminal history databases. The
number of person-days to clear the backlogs range from 2 in North
Carolina and Oklahoma to clear an estimated 500-600 unprocessed
or partially processed custody-supervision forms in each to 780
person-days to clear an estimated 35,900 forms in California.


Procedures to improve data quality


Procedures employed by State criminal history repository to
encourage complete arrest and disposition reporting, 1999 (Table
15):


* The method most used to encourage complete arrest and
disposition reporting is telephone calls conducted by 38 States and
the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands.

* Twenty-six States and the District of Columbia generate lists of
arrests with missing dispositions as a means of monitoring
disposition reporting.

*  Thirty-one States and the District of Columbia report using field
visits to encourage complete arrest and disposition reporting.

* Twenty-nine States generate form letters as a method of
encouraging complete arrest and disposition reporting.

* Other jurisdictions report using such methods as training, audits
and electronic contact as methods to encourage complete arrest and
disposition reporting.


Linking of arrests and dispositions


Methods used to link disposition information to arrest/charge
information on criminal history record, 1999 (Table 16):


* Thirty-six States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands
utilize methods for linking disposition information and arrest/charge
information which also permit the linking of dispositions to
particular charges and/or specific counts.

* All responding jurisdictions report using at least one method for
linking disposition information and arrest/charge information on
criminal history records, and nearly every jurisdiction indicates
multiple mechanisms to ensure linkage:

- Thirty-one States and the District of Columbia employ a unique
tracking number for the individual subject.  


- Thirty-nine States and the District of Columbia use a unique arrest
event identifier.

- Twenty-one States and the District of Columbia utilize a unique
charge identifier. 

- Thirty-five States, the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands
use the arrest date; thirty-five States, the District of Columbia and
the Virgin Islands use the subject's name.

- Twenty-four States and the District of Columbia report using the
reporting agency's case number.

- Individual jurisdictions also report using other methods, such as
the originating agency (ORI) number, the booking number and
unique combinations of numbers. 


Procedures followed when linkage cannot be made between court or
correctional information and arrest information in the criminal
history database, 1999 (Table 17):

* Forty-three jurisdictions report that they sometimes receive final
court dispositions that cannot be linked to arrest information in the
criminal history record database. 

The jurisdictions vary in the percentage of court dispositions that
cannot be linked to arrest cycles in the criminal history database
from less than 1% in Nevada to 70% in Maine. Three States
(Massachusetts, Vermont and Wyoming) report that all final court
dispositions can be linked to the arrest cycle in the criminal history
database. 

* Twenty-seven jurisdictions report that they sometimes receive
correctional information that cannot be linked to arrest information
in the criminal history record database. The percentage of
correctional dispositions that cannot be linked to arrest cycles in the
criminal history database range from less than 1% in Nevada to
60% in Tennessee.
 
* The jurisdictions use a variety of procedures when a linkage
cannot be established. Eight States create "dummy" arrest segments
from court disposition records; four States create "dummy" court
segments from custody records. Eight States enter court information
into the database without any linkage to a prior arrest; and 16 States
enter custody information into the database without any linkage to a
prior court disposition. Twenty-five States do not enter the unlinked
court information. Eight jurisdictions do not enter unlinked custody
information. Fourteen States utilize other procedures, such as
contacting or returning the information to the originating or
contributing agency or using temporary or pending files until a
match can be established.


Other data quality procedures


Strategies employed by State criminal history repository to ensure
accuracy of data in criminal history database, 1999 (Table 18):

* To prevent the entry and storage of inaccurate data and to detect
and correct inaccurate entries in the criminal history database, a
large majority of the jurisdictions, a total of 46 States, the District of
Columbia and the Virgin Islands complete a manual review of
incoming source documents or reports.

* Other methods used most frequently include computer edit and
verification programs employed by 42 States and the District of
Columbia. 

* Manual double-checking before data entry is completed in 28
jurisdictions. Manual review of transcripts before dissemination is
performed in 28 jurisdictions.

* Twenty-one States and the District of Columbia perform random
sample comparisons of the State criminal history repository files
with stored documents.

* Eighteen States generate error lists that are returned to the
reporting agencies.

* Eleven States use various methods, such as audits and contacting
contributing agencies for additional information.


Audits


Audit activities of State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table
19):

* Forty-seven States and the District of Columbia maintain
transaction logs to provide an audit trail of all inquiries, responses
and record updates or modifications.

* More than half of the repositories, a total of 33 jurisdictions report
that the State criminal history repository or some other agency
performed random sample audits of user agencies to ensure
accuracy and completeness of repository records and to ensure that
the agencies comply with applicable laws and regulations.


Data quality audits of State criminal history repository, 1999 (Table
20):


* During the 5 years before the survey, an audit of the State criminal
history repository's database (other than ongoing systematic
sampling) was conducted in 22 States and the District of Columbia
to determine the level of accuracy and completeness of the criminal
history file.

* Of the jurisdictions where audits were performed, in 20 States and
the District of Columbia, another agency conducted the audit; in 1
State, the repository conducted its own audit; and 1 State indicated
that auditing was conducted by both an outside agency and the
repository.

* Twenty-one jurisdictions in 1999 reported not having conducted
an audit during the previous 5 years, and 17 responded that they are
not planning to audit in the coming 3 years. Four States gave no
indication of plans for the next 3 years.

* In 17 of the jurisdictions where audits were conducted, changes
were made as a result of the audit to improve data quality of the
records. 

* Twenty States and the District of Columbia had data quality audits
planned or scheduled for the next 3 years.

* Forty-seven States and two territories had initiatives underway at
the repository or contributing agencies to improve data quality.
Initiatives included audit activities (28); automation changes (40);
disposition or arrest reporting enhancements (43); felony flagging
(21); fingerprint enhancements (33); agency interfaces (37);
legislation (19); plan development (24); establishment of task
forces/advisory groups (20); implementation or improvement of
tracking numbers (21); and training (30).    


Criminal history records of Interstate Identification Index (III)
participants maintained by the State criminal history repository and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 1999 (Table 21):

* As of June 30, 1999, over 21.3 million III records are indexed
with the State's identification (SID) pointers. Approximately 12.3
million records are maintained by the FBI for the States.


Estimated records with dispositions available through the Interstate
Identification Index (III), June 30, 1999 (Table 22):

* Over 21.5 million records with dispositions were available
through III as of June 30, 1999. This number means that 64% of the
total records in III had dispositions, as of June 30, 1999.


Fees charged by State criminal history repository for noncriminal
justice purposes , 1999 (Table 23):

* Almost all of the responding States (46), the District of Columbia
and the Virgin Islands currently charge fees for conducting criminal
history record searches for noncriminal justice requesters.
Mississippi and Vermont do not charge fees.

* Fees for fingerprint-supported searches range from $6 in Arizona
to up to $52 in California. In some cases, California does not charge
a fee for the search.

* Fees for name searches range from $1 in Texas to $25 in
Alabama, Connecticut, Massachusetts and South Carolina. Nine
States (California, Delaware, Georgia, Maryland, New York, Ohio,
South Dakota, Tennessee and Wyoming) do not conduct names
searches for noncriminal justice purposes.

*Fourteen States (California, Connecticut, Delaware, Indiana, Iowa,
Michigan, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, South
Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, Washington and Wyoming) and the
Virgin Islands charge different fees for volunteer searches.


Methodology

This report is based upon the results from a two-part survey
conducted of the administrators of the State criminal history record
repositories in January - September 1999.  A total of 53
jurisdictions were surveyed, including the 50 States, the District of
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands.  Responses for at least one part of the survey were received
from 53 jurisdictions. Puerto Rico did not submit a survey response
to either part.

The survey instruments consisted of 43 questions, having several
parts.  The survey was designed to collect comprehensive data
relating to State criminal history information systems.  Fifteen
topical areas are covered in this report, as follows: 

*  current quality and quantity of records in the criminal history
databases;

*  level of automation of master name indexes and criminal history
records maintained by the State repositories;

*  capacity of criminal history system to flag convicted felons in the
database;

*  level of fingerprint-supported arrest reporting to the State
repositories and the processing and timeliness of the information
that is entered into criminal history record databases;

*  notice to the State repository of persons released without
charging following submission of fingerprints to the State
repository;

*  level of prosecutor-reported information in criminal history
databases;

*  level and timeliness of disposition reporting by the courts to the
State criminal history repositories;

*  types and timeliness of information reported to the State criminal
history repositories by State and local correctional facilities;

*  level of probation/parole-related information in State criminal
history databases;

*  extent to which the records in State criminal history databases
contain final disposition information;

*  policies and practices of the State repository regarding
modification of felony convictions;

*  ability of the State repositories to link reported disposition data to
arrest data in State criminal history record databases; 

*  level of audit activity in the States and the strategies employed
the State repositories to ensure accuracy of the data in the criminal
history record databases; and

*  participation of the States in III and NFF; and

*  fees charged by State criminal history repositories for conducting
record searches for noncriminal justice requesters.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation also provided the source of
information in two areas.  The information includes the number of
criminal history records of the States participating in the Interstate
Identification Index (III) system that are maintained by the State
criminal history repositories and the number of III records
maintained by the FBI for the States.  The number of III records
containing dispositions also is taken from FBI data.

Following the receipt of the responses, all data were tabulated. 
Survey respondents were requested to respond to particular
questions relating to the current data compared to data from earlier
surveys.  Respondents also were permitted a final review of the data
after it was placed in the tables that appear in this report.

Numbers and percentages shown in the tables were rounded.  In
most cases, numbers were rounded to the nearest 100.  Percentages
were rounded to the nearest whole number.  

In the analyses of the tables, averages and totals were calculated
using the mid-point of the range where ranges appear in the
underlying data.  In instances where the result is .5, when it
followed an even number, the number was rounded down to the
even number (e.g., 4.5 became 4); in instances where the .5
followed an odd number, the number was rounded up to the next
even number (e.g., 1.5 became 2).

Data reported for 1989 was taken from Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems (March
1991).  Data reported for 1993 was taken from Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems,
1993 (January 1995). Data reported for 1995 was taken from Bureau
of Justice Statistics, Survey of State Criminal History Information
Systems, 1997  (April 1999).

mz 10/27/00