U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Survey of State Procedures
Related to Firearm Sales, 1997

---------------------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be available. 
To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ssprfs
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Prepared by the 
Regional Justice Information Service
St. Louis, Missouri


December 1998, NCJ-173942



Background
                                    
This report is the third edition of the BJS
document, Survey of State Procedures Related 
to Firearm Sales.  The first edition, released 
in May 1996 (NCJ-160763), described procedures 
related to presale firearm background checks in
each of the 50 States and other United
States jurisdictions as of April 1996.  The
second edition, released in September
1997 (NCJ-165705), described procedures 
related to presale firearm background checks 
in each of the 50 States and other United States
jurisdictions as of  the end of 1996.  This
edition updates the earlier publications
and describes the procedures and practices in 
effect as of the end of 1997.  The scope of 
the individual State summaries has been expanded to
provide information not included in the
second edition.  (References to "States"
in this publication generally apply to a
territory, commonwealth or district as
well.)

This report is prepared as part of the BJS
Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) project, a
component of the BJS National Criminal
History Improvement Program (NCHIP). 
The FIST project was established in 1995
to collect data describing the impact of
presale firearm checks required under
Federal or State law.  

Data collected under the FIST program
are also included in BJS Bulletins.  The
first Bulletin, Presale Firearm Checks,
NCJ-162787, was released in February
1997 and described inquiries and
rejections related to all firearm sales
between February 1994 (the effective
date of the Brady Act requirements) and
June 1996.  A second BJS Bulletin,
Presale Handgun Checks 1996, NCJ-165704, 
was released in September 1997
and focused only on inquiries and
rejections related to attempted handgun
sales during 1996.  The most recent BJS
Bulletin, Presale Handgun Checks
1997, NCJ-171130, was released in June
1998 and focused on inquiries and
rejections related to attempted handgun
sales during 1997.

BJS anticipates that the procedural
information presented in this report will be
used together with the statistical
information presented in the Bulletins to
provide the user with a more complete .understanding of the impact of presale
firearm check requirements. 

Survey Methodology.  Data for this
report were collected from agencies
designated by their respective States as
authorized to perform record checks for
handgun purchasers and to determine if
applications are acceptable under the
Brady Act, or, particularly in the case of 
Brady-alternative States, under
applicable State legislation.  For
purposes of this report, these agencies
are referred to as CLEOs (Chief Law
Enforcement Officers).  Depending on the
State, CLEOs may be either a single
State agency servicing the entire State or
one or more local agencies.  The status
of the reporting agency is described on
the individual State summaries, and a list
of State contacts is in Appendix A.  

Descriptions of procedures, as reported
in this publication, and statistical data
presented in the Bulletins, were
voluntarily provided on survey
questionnaires.  BJS also provided States
with software for direct reporting of
statistical information.  The software,
which was designed to minimize State
burdens associated with data collection,
was used at the option of the State.  To
ensure accuracy, a copy of each State's
summary in this publication was
forwarded to the State for review, and
clarifying comments were used to refine
the summary.  Data collection and
collation, and supplementary legal
research, were provided  by the Regional
Justice Information Service (REJIS), the
BJS grantee for the FIST Project. 

Consistent with confidentiality and privacy
protection procedures, no data were
collected under the project in a form
identifiable to any individual.  Additionally,
the software provided to assist States in
submitting data contains a purging
mechanism which destroys data in
accordance with applicable Federal or
State law.

Legal Background.  The state
summaries included in this report outline
procedures that are consistent with
Federal law.  The currently applicable
interim provisions of the Brady Handgun
Violence Prevention Act (Brady Act), PL
103-159 (107 Stat. 1536), amending the
Gun Control Act of 1968 (18 U.S.C. Chapter 44), prohibit
sale of a handgun by a Federal Firearm
Licensee (FFL) for a period of 5 days or
until the licensee has been advised that,
based on a background check, a
prospective purchaser is not prohibited
from purchase under either Federal or
State law.  The interim provisions of the
Brady Act also permit States with
prohibitory statutes comparable to
Federal law to follow a variety of
alternative procedures.  The "Brady-alternative
States" generally employed either an "instant 
check" or a "permit or other approval-type system."

After November 1998, when the
permanent provisions of the Brady Act
are effective, instant background checks
through the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) or
permits will be required prior to the sale
of any firearm by a federal firearm
licensee. 

The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), at
18 U.S.C. 922, prohibits the transfer of
any firearm to any person who --

    * is under indictment for, or has
    been convicted of, a crime
    punishable by  imprisonment
    for more than 1 year;

    * is a fugitive from justice;

    * is an unlawful user of or
    addicted to any controlled
    substance;

    * has been adjudicated as a
    mental defective or committed
    to a mental  institution;

    * is an alien unlawfully in the
    United States;

    * was discharged from the armed
    forces under dishonorable
    conditions;

    * has renounced United States
    citizenship;

    * is subject to a court order
    restraining him or her from
    harassing, stalking, or
    threatening an intimate partner
    or child; or

    * has been convicted in any
    court of a misdemeanor crime
    of domestic violence.

Additionally, the GCA makes it unlawful
for any licensed importer, licensed
manufacturer, licensed dealer, or
collector to transfer a long gun to a
person less than 18 years of age or any
other firearm to a person less than 21
years of age.  (The GCA contains other
restrictions on firearms transfers as well,
and readers are advised to consult the
full text of the statute or the web sites
listed at the end of this section.)

The information provided for each State
in this report may include procedures and
prohibitions required under State as well
as Federal legislation.  In some cases, for
example, States have imposed
procedural or prohibitory requirements
which go beyond the baseline 
requirements of Federal law.   With
respect to the impact of State restoration
of revoked handgun ownership privileges,
readers are urged to contact the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (BATF)
for further information.

As noted in the individual summaries or
the Appendix tables, this report may
describe  State procedures and
prohibitions applicable to both handguns
and other firearms.

Statistical and Legal Changes Over
Time.  Changes in the number of
handgun sale inquiries and denials, and
the rate of overall or specific categories of
rejections may reflect a variety of factors. 
These include changes in State law,
revisions in State policy, changes in State
organization, and the status and
availability of different categories of
records.  The regular release of updated
information in these BJS documents is
intended to highlight such changes. 
Thus, all appendices included in the
previous edition of this publication have
been updated.  In addition, a new
appendix summarizes revisions of
background check procedures, additional
restrictions on purchases, and other
significant changes in State firearms laws
between the effective date of the Brady
Act and the end of 1997.

Significant post-Brady changes include
implementation of an instant check or a
permit or other approval-type system by
several States in order to qualify for the
Brady-alternative designation.  Numerous
States enacted additional restrictions on
purchases, including several prohibitions
upon juveniles or persons who committed
serious criminal offenses as minors. 
Increased restrictions upon persons who
commit domestic violence were added at
the federal and state levels.  As noted in
the second edition of this publication, the
Federal Gun Control Act was amended,
effective October 1996, to prohibit firearm
sales to persons convicted of any
misdemeanor involving domestic
violence.  In addition to these purchase
restrictions, several states enacted new
legislation to permit court-ordered
seizures of firearms from persons subject
to domestic violence restraining orders.

To aid in further legal research, a new
appendix provides citations to the
relevant firearm laws for each of the
jurisdictions summarized.

As this publication went to press, Federal
and State agencies were preparing to
implement NICS as mandated by the
permanent requirements of the Brady
Act.  Effective November 30, 1998, the
NICS will allow federal firearms licensees
to contact the system by telephone or
other electronic means  for information on
whether receipt of a firearm by a
prospective transferee would violate
Federal or State law.  The licensees will
contact either the FBI or a designated
state point of contact (POC) to initiate
background checks on individuals
purchasing firearms.

Persons holding firearm permits issued
under state statutes which are
determined by BATF to qualify as
alternatives under the permanent
requirements of the Brady Act will not be
required to undergo a NICS check.  The
current pawn shop exemption for
background checks on individuals who
are redeeming firearms will cease on
November 30, 1998.

Further information on the GCA, the
Brady Act, the NICS, and BJS related
publications is available from federal
agencies at:

http://www.fbi.gov/programs/
nicsfact.htm

http://www.atf.treas.gov/core/
firearms/firearms.htm

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/


          DEFINITIONS OF CATEGORIES INCLUDED IN STATE SUMMARIES
                                    
[Explanatory Note - When used below, "state" refers to any United States
jurisdiction, whether it be a state, commonwealth, district or
territory.  The definitions are not alphabetized; they follow the format as
used in each state summary.] 

Source of Information.  The state agency which provided
information for the survey.  Indicates whether that agency is the
Chief Law Enforcement Officer (CLEO) for the state, and lists
any other agencies which perform CLEO functions.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  State laws restricting
handgun or long gun purchasers who would not be prohibited by
federal law.

Limitations on Use.  The general scope of state limitations on
activities such as carrying and discharging handguns and long
guns.

Permits.  Whether a permit, license, identification card or other
document issued by a CLEO is required for the purchase,
possession or carrying of handguns and long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Whether the state maintains a registry
of handgun owners.  A long gun registry is listed if the state
maintains one.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Whether the state requires a
background check for firearm transfers not covered by the Brady
Act, such as sales by private individuals or pawnshops, or
redemptions by persons who pawn handguns.

Restoration of Rights.  Whether a convicted felon's right to own
or possess firearms can be restored automatically or by pardon,
court order, or other process.

Background Checks.  The state's procedures for conducting
background checks of firearms purchasers, including time limits
imposed on CLEOs by state law.  Indicates whether state law
requires a waiting period after a buyer applies and before a seller
can complete a firearm transfer.

Information on the Application.  Purchaser and firearm
information requested on the state's application, including any
that is required by state law.  Indicates whether the standard
BATF form (contents listed in Appendix Table 5) is used.

Inquiry Process.  Time required, on the average, for the state's
CLEO(s) to process routine firearm purchase applications
requiring no research, and applications which require research
into missing arrest dispositions and other questions.

Fees Charged.  The amounts charged to firearms purchasers
for background checks or the issuance of documents needed for
purchase.

State Data.  Databases maintained by the state which are
normally available to the CLEO(s) during the course of a
background check.  If the files are not fully automated, 
the extent of database automation is indicated.

Retention of Applications.  The length of time that approved
and rejected firearm purchase applications are retained by the
CLEO(s), including retention periods required by federal or state
law.

Statistics Maintained.  Categories of handgun crimes or
incidents tracked by the state.

Current Activity.  The number of handgun applications 
and disapprovals, and the rejection rate, for the states 
that maintain statewide data.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A summary of revisions of 
Brady-related procedures and other significant changes in state
firearms law which were passed or became effective between
February 28, 1994 and December 31, 1997.

Relevant Laws.  Citations to state statutes governing the
transfer and use of firearms.


Alabama
A Brady State: 4,040,587 population


Source of Information.  Information was  provided by
the Alabama Bureau of Investigation and the Alabama
Criminal Justice Information Center, which are not
CLEOs.  The CLEOs in the State are the 67 county
sheriffs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Alabama
prohibits the purchase of handguns by persons who
are habitually intoxicated.

Limitations on Use.  The State places limitations on
carrying a concealed handgun, and forbids the
carrying or discharge of handguns and long guns
within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  Alabama does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration. Handguns are not registered
in Alabama.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensee sales, the State requires
background checks for sales by pawnshops. 

Restoration of Rights.  Alabama does not allow a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored. 

Background Checks.  Firearm dealers request
background checks on handgun purchasers by
sending applications to the sheriffs via registered or
certified mail.  The results of background checks are
sent back to the dealers.  Alabama requires a 48-hour
waiting period before completion of a handgun
transfer.

.Information on the Application.  Alabama's
application includes the following information: first
name, last name, date of birth, place of birth, current
address, prior address, occupation, social security
number, race, sex, height, weight, date and hour of
application plus the make, model, caliber, and
manufacturer's number of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are within the discretion of the local
CLEOs.

State Data.  Alabama makes fugitive, criminal history,
probation / parole, and domestic violence restraining
order data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs. 

Statistics Maintained.  Alabama maintains statistics
on handguns stolen or recovered, and on events 
which involve handguns and drugs, homicides,
assaults or violence against a police officer.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  An amendment forbid
carrying or possessing a deadly weapon on the
premises of a public school.  

Relevant Laws.  Code of Alabama 13A-11 et seq. 
.
.Alaska
A Brady State: 550,043 population
                                    

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Alaska Department of Public Safety, which is the
CLEO for part of the State.  The other CLEOs are 34
local police agencies.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Alaska
prohibits knowingly selling handguns or long guns to
persons whose physical or mental condition is
substantially impaired by intoxicating liquor or 
controlled substances.  Handguns cannot be
possessed by persons who were adjudicated a
delinquent minor, within the past 10 years, for conduct
that would constitute a felony if committed by an adult.

Limitations on Use.   The State places limitations on
carrying a concealed handgun, and forbids the
carrying or discharge of handguns and long guns
within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  Alaska does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Alaska.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to  Federal
Firearm Licensee sales, the State requires
background checks for pawnshop sales and
redemptions, and transfers between individuals,
including sales occurring at gun shows.

Restoration of Rights.  Alaska allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored if the
conviction is pardoned or set aside, or at least 10
years have elapsed since the person's unconditional
discharge on the prior offense.

Background Checks.  Handgun sellers contact 
either the State agency or a local police agency for
background checks on purchasers.  The results of
background checks are sent back to the sellers.

.Information on the Application.  Alaska uses the
standard BATF form. 

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the local
CLEO.

State Data.  Alaska makes fugitive, criminal history,
and domestic violence restraining order/
misdemeanor data available to each CLEO via the
statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs.  

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new law provided for
permits to carry concealed handguns.  Amendments
prohibited discharge of a firearm from a vehicle or at a
building or a school.

Relevant Laws.  Alaska Statutes 11.61.190 et seq;
18.65.700 et seq.
.Arizona
A Brady State: 3,665,228 population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Arizona Department of Public Safety, which is the
CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits possession of handguns and long guns by
persons previously adjudicated delinquent, unless
their rights have been restored.  It is illegal to
knowingly transfer a handgun or long gun to a person
who intends to use the firearm in the commission of
any felony.

Limitations on Use.  Arizona places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and long guns, and
forbids the carrying or discharge of firearms within
certain areas and premises.

Permits.  Arizona does not require a permit to
purchase  handguns or long guns.  Carrying a
concealed handgun requires a permit.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not
registered.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only handgun sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees are subject to background
checks requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Arizona allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored unless
the person committed a "dangerous offense." 
Persons convicted of "serious offenses" must wait 10
years (all other felons 2 years) after completion of the
sentence before applying for a court order  restoring
civil rights.  Since July 1988, firearm rights as well as
civil rights must be included on the court order.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts checks
on handgun purchase applicants.  Dealers contact the
CLEO by 1-800 number, regular telephone, fax, or
mail.  Results of background checks are reported to
the dealers.

.Information on the Application.  Arizona uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  Applications which require no
research are normally processed in less than 5
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally
take less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  No fee is charged.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive and
criminal history (including probation/parole) data from
the statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated and contain 100% of the data available at
the State level.  In addition, the CLEO has access to
sex offender registration and department of
corrections data.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained for 5 years.

Statistics Maintained.  Arizona maintains statistics
on events which involve handguns and homicides,
assaults, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997 Arizona processed  62,266
applications; 2,277 were disapproved.  This
represents a rejection rate of 3.7%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  New laws provided for
concealed weapon permits and a handgun clearance
center to conduct instant checks on handgun
purchasers.  Additional restrictions on purchases were
enacted.  Restoration of the right to possess a firearm
was limited for certain offenders.

Relevant Laws.  Arizona Revised Statutes 13-905 et
seq; 13-3101 et seq.
.Arkansas
A Brady State: 2,350,725 population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Arkansas State Police, the CLEO for the State
during 1997, and the Office of the Attorney General,
which became the CLEO in 1998. 

Additional Restrictions on Purchase. Arkansas
does not place any additional restrictions on the
purchase of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  The State limits carrying 
concealed handguns and long guns, and forbids the
carrying or discharge of firearms within certain areas
and premises. 

Permits.  Arkansas does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Arkansas.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only handgun sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees are subject to background
checks requirements in the State. 

Restoration of Rights. The governor can restore a
felon's right to own a handgun upon a
recommendation from a chief law enforcement officer
if the underlying offense did not involve the use of a
weapon and occurred more than 8 years ago. 
Restoration of rights can also occur with a pardon.

Background Checks. The State Police conducts
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
when requested by firearm dealers. Applications are
received in person or by 1-900 number or certified
mail.  If an application is rejected, that result is
reported to the dealer.  If an application is not
rejected, the 5-day waiting period is allowed to expire. 
Fingerprints are used if there is a question of identity.

.Information on the Application.  Arkansas uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  The State Police reports only
application denials to inquiring dealers.  Applications
that require extended research are  normally
processed in less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  The State Police charges $15 for the
background check and an additional $3 for using the
1-900 number.

State Data.  The State Police has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor data from the statewide computer
network.  These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Arkansas maintains statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
assaults, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Arkansas processed
14,556 applications; 202 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 1.4%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new law authorized
issuance of concealed weapon licenses. 
Amendments increased penalties for illegally
possessing or furnishing a firearm.

Relevant Laws.  Arkansas Code 5-73-101 et seq.



California
A Brady-Alternative State: 29,760,021  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the California Department of Justice, which is the
CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
restricts the purchase of handguns and long guns by
persons who were convicted of misdemeanors
specified in State law, were adjudged wards of the
juvenile court (until age 30), did not complete a
firearm safety course or show proof of exemption, or
communicated a threat to a licensed psychotherapist.

Limitations on Use.  California places limits on
carrying a concealed handgun or long gun, and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase
handguns or long guns.  Carrying a concealed firearm
requires a permit.

Handgun Registration.  The State does not register
handguns, but the automated files maintain a record
of handgun purchases and transfers.  New residents
are required to report handgun ownership.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All sales by California
licensed firearms dealers are covered, as well as 
sales and redemptions at pawnshops and sales from
one individual to another.

Restoration of Rights.  California allows restoration
of the right to own firearms if the subject is granted a
Governor's pardon or if the underlying case is
reopened and the subject is allowed to plead to a
lesser charge.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts checks
on purchases of handguns and long guns, and
informs firearm sellers of the denials via mail or
telephone.  Effective April 1, 1997, the State
implemented a "paperless" process, and reduced the
waiting period to 10 days.

.Information on the Application.  The State requires
the name, sex, home address, local address if
traveling, California driver's license, California ID card
or miliary ID card number, Basic Firearms Safety
Certificate or exemption number, height, weight,
descent, hair color, eye color, date of application, and,
if a handgun, the make, model, type, and serial
number of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  Applications are processed within
the 10-day waiting period.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $14 for a check
on a single handgun or an unlimited number of long
guns, and $10 for additional handguns purchased at
the same time.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive, State
and Federal criminal record, court restraining orders,
probation/parole, juvenile, mental health, and
domestic abuse files.  These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  All applications prior to
April 1, 1997 are kept on microfiche indefinitely.  All
applications after April 1, 1997 are maintained in an
automated file indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  The State tracks handgun
and long gun sales and denials, stolen or recovered
handguns, handgun accidents, and events which
involve a handgun and drugs, homicides, and other
specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, California processed
204,409 applications; 1,839 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 0.9%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Highlights included
authorization to participate in the NICS and a law
allowing seizure of firearms from domestic violence
offenders.

Relevant Laws.  California Penal Code 417.3; 626.9;
12000 et seq; Family Code 6389.



Colorado
A Brady-Alternative  State: 3,294,394  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, which is the
CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State will
not authorize a handgun purchase if the applicant is
guilty of certain misdemeanors specified in State law.

Limitations on Use.  Colorado places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and long guns, and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase  handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Colorado.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only handgun sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees require background
checks.  As of March 1997, pawnshop redemptions
were excluded from coverage.

Restoration of Rights.  Convicted felons are not
allowed to regain the right to possess a handgun in
the State.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts instant
background checks on handgun purchase applicants. 
The dealer requests a check by using a 1-800
number, and the CLEO is allowed a maximum period
of one day to complete processing.

.Information on the Application.  Colorado's
application includes the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, date of birth, Social Security
number (optional), date of request, and the action
taken.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process takes less than 1 minute. 
Applications requiring research take less than 1 day.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $10 for the
background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, juvenile, and
domestic abuse restraining order/misdemeanor data
from the statewide computer network.  These files are
fully automated.

Retention of Applications. The CLEO purges
approved applicant information within 48 hours;
denied applicant information is purged after 2 years.

Statistics Maintained.  Colorado maintains statistics
on the number of handgun application approvals and
denials, including reasons for denials.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Colorado processed
46,853 applications; 2,476 were disapproved,  a
rejection rate of 5.3%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new law established an
instant check system for handgun sales.  An
amendment forever prohibited felons from possessing
firearms.

Relevant Laws.  Colorado Revised Statutes 
12-26.5-101 et seq; 18-12-101 et seq.



Connecticut
A Brady-Alternative  State: 3,287,116  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Connecticut State Police, which is the CLEO for
the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase. Connecticut
prevents handguns from being purchased by
applicants who committed any of eleven
misdemeanors pertaining to firearms and dangerous
weapons, or did not complete a firearm safety course,
or whose suitability can be questioned because of
involvement in police incidents.

Limitations on Use. The State places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises. 

Permits.  Connecticut requires a valid Eligibility
Certificate or Pistol Permit to purchase handguns
without a 14-day waiting period.  An authorization
number is also required at the time of sale.  A permit
is not required to purchase long guns; however, a 
14-day waiting period is required without a pistol permit,
eligibility certificate or hunting license.  The pistol
permit is also required to carry a handgun.

Handgun Registration.  The State's firearm
registration form includes sale, weapon, buyer and
seller information.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Background checks on
handgun and long gun purchasers are required for
transfers by Federal Firearm Licensees, individuals
and pawnshops (including redemptions).

Restoration of Rights.  Connecticut allows rights to
be restored if the person goes to the Board of
Pardons and has the conviction cleared from the
record.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts checks
on applicants for pistol permits and eligibility
certificates, and on handgun and long gun purchases. 
The CLEO can be contacted by regular telephone,
mail, certified mail or fax, or in person.  A 14-day
waiting period is required for firearm transfers without
proper permits.

.Information on the Application.  The State's
application includes the sale authorization number,
name, address, race, sex, height, weight, date of
birth, Social Security and operator's license numbers,
dealer information, date of application, date action
taken, and the action taken.

Inquiry Process.  Applications requiring no research
are normally processed in less than 15 minutes; those
which require research normally take less than 3
days.

Fees Charged.  A maximum fee of $35 will be
charged for pistol permits and eligibility certificates.

State Data.  Fugitive, criminal history, probation/
parole, and domestic abuse restraining
order/misdemeanor data are available to the CLEO
from the statewide computer network.  Access to
juvenile data will be expanded in October 1998. 

Retention of Applications.  Connecticut keeps
rejected applications to purchase firearms for 10
years.  Dealers keep approved applications for 5
years. 

Statistics Maintained.  The State's Crime Analysis
Unit maintains statistics on confiscated handguns and
on events which involve handguns and gangs,
homicides and other activities.

Current Activity.  No information is available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  New statutes added
restrictions on purchase, and permit, background
check, fee and data collection requirements.  An
amendment modified waiting period requirements.

Relevant Laws.  Connecticut General Statutes 
29-27et seq; 53-202 et seq; 53-217a.



Delaware
A Brady-Alternative  State: 666,168  population
Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Delaware State Police, which is the CLEO for the
State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Delaware
prevents handguns and long guns from being
purchased by applicants who committed
misdemeanors involving assault or drug violations
within the past 5 years, or have been adjudicated as
delinquent for conduct which if committed by an adult
would constitute a  felony, and have not reached the
age of 25.

Limitations on Use.  The State limits carrying a
concealed handgun and requires that long guns be
unloaded while being carried in a motor vehicle. 
Carrying or discharging firearms within certain areas
and premises is forbidden.

Permits.  Delaware does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Delaware.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Sales by Federal Firearm
Licensees require background checks in the State. In
addition, checks may be run on private sales, which is
an option and not a requirement.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
own a handgun may be restored through a governor's
pardon.

Background Checks.  Firearm sellers request instant
checks on handgun and long gun purchasers by using
a 1-800 number.  The CLEO reports background
check results by telephone.

.Information on the Application.  Delaware's
application includes the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, date of birth, Social Security
number, date of request, date action taken, and the
action taken.  If the application is rejected, the type,
make, model,and serial number of the weapon are
recorded.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 6
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally
take less than 14 minutes.

Fees Charged.  No fees are charged.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, juvenile, mental
health, and domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor data from the statewide computer
network.  These files are fully automated except for
mental health, which is partially automated.

Retention of Applications.  Delaware keeps the
approved applications for 60 days and the rejected
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Delaware maintains statistics
on handgun accidents as well as statistics on events
which involve a handgun and homicides, drugs, and
other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Delaware processed
11,369 applications; 491 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 4.3%.

Post-Brady Legislation  A new statute prohibited the
possession of weapons on school property or at State
recreational facilities.

Relevant Laws  Delaware Code 11-1441 et seq.



Florida
A Brady-Alternative  State: 12,937,926 population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE),
which is the CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits the sale of handguns and long guns to
persons who have had adjudication of guilt withheld or
imposition of sentence suspended on a felony charge
and 3 years have not elapsed since the completion
date of any court provisions.

Limitations on Use.  Florida limits carrying
concealed handguns, and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase 
handguns or long guns. A license to carry a concealed
firearm can be used for purchases without a new
background check.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Florida.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees, background checks on
handgun and long gun applicants are required for
sales by pawnshops. However, pawnshop
redemptions are not covered unless the gun is
redeemed more than 90 days after being pawned.

Restoration of Rights.  Florida allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon and, if necessary, a pardon from
the State where the felony conviction occurred.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts instant
checks when requested by a seller using a 1-800
number or a fax.  State law requires a 3-day waiting
period for handgun transfers.  If a handgun application
is not rejected by the end of the 3-day waiting period,
the transaction can be completed.  Long gun
purchasers do not have a waiting period.

.Information on the Application.  Florida uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 3
minutes.  Applicants requiring research take less than
3 days.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $8 for the
background check.

State Data. The CLEO has access to the following
statewide data: fugitive, criminal history, domestic
violence misdemeanors/restraining orders, juvenile,
drug use, mental health, State disqualifiers, and
probation/parole.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for less than 2 days; rejected applications
are retained indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Information may be obtained
by contacting the Florida Department of Law
Enforcement Firearm Purchase Program.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Florida processed 198,922
applications; 7,348 were disapproved, a rejection rate
of 3.7%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  Florida Statutes 790.001 et seq.




Georgia
A Brady-Alternative  State: 6,478,216  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Crime
Information Center, which is the CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Applicants
must have resided in the State for at least 3 months in
order to purchase handguns.

Limitations on Use.  Georgia limits carrying
concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Georgia does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a handgun.

Handgun Registration. Handguns are not registered
in Georgia.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees, background checks are
required for pawnshop sales.  However, pawnshop
redemptions are not covered unless the gun is
redeemed more than 1 year after being pawned. 

Restoration of Rights.  Georgia allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored if the
person is granted a pardon and the Pardon and
Parole Board specifically restores the right to possess
a firearm.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts instant
checks on handgun purchase applicants when
requested by a firearm seller using a 1-800 number. 
The results of the checks are sent back to the sellers. 
The CLEO is allowed 1 day to complete a check, but
the time can be extended if the applicant's criminal
history record is not immediately available.

.Information on the Application.  Georgia's
application contains the following information:  name,
sex, race, date of birth, and Social Security number or
other identification number.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 5
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally
take less than 1 day.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $5 for the
background check.

State Data.  Georgia has access to databases for
fugitive, criminal history, probation and parole, mental
health, and domestic violence misdemeanor data. 
These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  The Georgia Consent
Form is attached to ATF 4473 and retained by the
dealer.  The State does not keep a record of approved
sales.  Rejected applications are kept on record for 90
days.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Georgia processed 83,673
applications; 7,136 were disapproved, a rejection rate
of 8.5%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new law established an
instant check system for handgun transfers which
occurred after January 1, 1996.  An amendment
exempted a pawnshop redemption from background
check requirements if it occurs within 12 months of
the handgun being pawned.

Relevant Laws.  Official Code of Georgia 16-11-101
et seq.




Hawaii
A Brady-Alternative  State: 1,108,229   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Hawaii Criminal Justice Information Center and
the Honolulu Police Department.  The CLEOs in the
State are four local police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Hawaii
prohibits issuing a permit for handguns or long guns
to persons who have committed violent
misdemeanors or illegal sales of drugs; are addicted
to intoxicating liquor; or have significant behavioral,
emotional or mental disorders.  Persons acquiring a
handgun are required to complete a firearm safety
course.

Limitations on Use.  The State places limitations on
carrying handguns and long guns concealed or within
certain areas and premises.

Permits.  Hawaii mandates a permit to acquire
handguns and long guns.  A license is needed to carry
a handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns and long guns
are required to be registered in Hawaii.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensee sales, the State requires a
background check for sales by individuals.  Handguns
may not be pawned in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Hawaii allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs perform
background checks on applicants for permits to
acquire handguns and long guns.  A 14-day waiting
period is required before issuance of a permit, and all
applications must be approved or denied within 20
days.  A permit to acquire a handgun must be used
within 10 days after issuance.

.Information on the Application.  Hawaii requires an
applicant's name, address, race, sex, height, weight,
date and place of birth, hair and eye color, Social
Security and telephone numbers, fingerprints,
business address, occupation, aliases, nicknames,
maiden name, scars, marks and tattoos, photograph,
and mental health history.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  First time applicants are charged $24
to subsidize the FBI fingerprint check.

State Data.  The State maintains an automated
control repository which includes criminal history and
domestic violence misdemeanor data.  Mental health
data is recorded manually.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs keep approved
and rejected applications on file indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The firearms permit statute
was amended to require training for persons acquiring
handguns and to allow CLEOs to charge a fee to
cover the FBI fingerprint check.  Registration of long
guns was mandated.  Amendments allowed the police
to seize firearms from domestic violence offenders,
and revoked the exemption from seizure formerly
available to law enforcement officers.

Relevant Laws.  Hawaii Revised Statutes 134-1 et
seq.




Idaho
A Brady-Alternative  State: 1,006,749   population


Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement, which is
the CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place any additional restrictions on the
purchase of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Idaho limits carrying concealed
handguns and long guns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase
handguns or long guns.  Permits are required for
concealed weapons and, if issued after March 22,
1995, can be used to purchase handguns without a
new background check.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Idaho.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only firearm dealers
registered with the State may access the instant
check system to sell handguns.  Sales between
individuals and redemptions by pawnshops do not
require background checks.

Restoration of Rights.  The State allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored
automatically after completion of imprisonment,
probation or parole (except for certain felony
offenses).

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts instant
checks on applicants for purchases of handguns. 
Registered dealers request checks by using a 1-800
number or a regular telephone.  The results of
background checks are reported to the dealers.  As
an alternative, a dealer may request a background
check from the buyer's local sheriff, subject to the 5-day waiting period.

.Information on the Application.  Idaho's application
requires the following information:  name, sex, race,
and date of birth.  The following fields are optional:
address, height, weight, and Social Security number.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 3
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally are
processed in less than 1 hour.

Fees Charged.  Applicants are not charged for
background checks.  The CLEO charges registered
dealers an annual $100 fee.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence protective
order/misdemeanor data on the statewide computer
network, as well as a sex offender registry. These files
are fully automated. 

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO keeps
approved applications for less than 5 days and
rejected applications for 6 months.

Statistics Maintained.  Idaho maintains statistics on
events which involve a handgun and homicides,
gangs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Idaho processed 22,761
applications; 790 were disapproved, a rejection rate of
3.5%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new chapter allowed
firearms dealers to access an instant check system
for handgun transfers.  Subsequent amendments
exempted certain license holders from background
check requirements, and allowed dealers the option of
requesting a check from a buyer's local sheriff.  

Relevant Laws.  Idaho Code 18-3302 et seq; 19-5401 et seq.




Illinois
A Brady-Alternative  State: 11,430,602  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Illinois State Police, which is the CLEO for the
State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits issuing a Firearm Owner's Identification
(FOID) card to a person who is prohibited by any
Illinois statute or federal law.  State law includes
prohibitions similar to the federal restrictions, and
further prohibits persons who are under 21 years of
age and have been convicted of a misdemeanor other
than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent; or are
mentally retarded.

Limitations on Use.  Illinois places limitations on
carrying handguns and long guns in vehicles and
forbids carrying concealed firearms.

Permits.  Illinois requires residents to possess a valid
Firearm Owner's Identification (FOID) card in order to
purchase firearms or ammunition.

Handgun Registration.  Guns are registered by
some local governments, but not by the State.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Background checks are
required for sales by licensed dealers, and for
pawnshop sales and redemptions.  Sales between
private individuals are not covered.  However, records
of transactions between private individuals must be
kept for 10 years.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
own a firearm may be restored if he or she is  granted
relief from Illinois convictions.  An application for relief
is made to the Director of the State Police, whose
decision can be appealed to the courts.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts
background checks on applicants for  FOID cards,
most of whom apply by mail.  A maximum period of 30
days is allowed to process the FOID card applications. 
When a valid card is used for a purchase, the dealer
requests an instant check through the Firearm
Transfer Inquiry Program (FTIP) Unit of the State
Police, using one of two 1-900 numbers.  The waiting
period required to purchase is 24 hours for a long gun
and 72 hours for a handgun.

Information on the Application.  The FOID 
application requires name, address, date of birth,
race, sex, height, weight, eye color, hair color, a
recent picture, and answers to specific questions
regarding eligibility factors.

Inquiry Process.  FTIP purchase inquiries requiring
limited analysis are completed in less than 1 minute. 
Inquiries requiring complete analysis are completed
within 24-72 hours,  depending on the type of firearm.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $2 for an FTIP
inquiry at the time of purchase and $5 for the FOID
card, which is good for 5 years.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to automated files
with national, fugitive, criminal history and conviction
data from the statewide computer network.  Other
files cover mental health, and domestic violence
restraining orders and misdemeanors. 

Retention of Applications.  Approved FTIP
transactions from 1-900 calls are kept for 1 year;
rejected transactions are kept for 5 years.  FOID card
applications are retained on microform.

Statistics Maintained.  Illinois maintains statistics on
stolen or recovered handguns, and  on events which
involve a handgun and homicides, gangs, and other
specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Illinois processed  171,865
FTIP inquiries from 1-900 calls; 1,943 were
disapproved, a rejection rate of 1.1%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  See Appendix Table 6.

Relevant Laws.  Compiled Statutes 430:65/0.01 et
seq; 720:5/24-1 et seq; 725:5/112A-14.5.


Indiana
A Brady-Alternative  State: 5,544,159   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Indiana State Police, which is the CLEO for the
entire State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Indiana does
not allow sales of handguns to persons who are under
23 years of age and were adjudicated a delinquent
child for an act that would be a felony if committed by
an adult; are alcohol abusers; or attempt a purchase
while in a state of intoxication.

Limitations on Use.  Indiana places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  Indiana does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A license is
required to carry a handgun; the license can also be
used for a purchase without a new background check.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are voluntarily
registered in Indiana.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees, background checks are
required for handgun transfers from one individual to
another.  Handguns cannot be pawned in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Indiana allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a full pardon from the governor, if 15 years have
elapsed since the time of the offense.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts
background checks on purchase applications received
through the mail from handgun sellers.  Disapprovals
are reported to sellers by telephone.  If an application
is approved, the State's required 7-day waiting period
is allowed to expire.

.Information on the Application.  Indiana's
application contains the following information: date
and hour of the transfer, name, address, occupation,
sex, eye color, hair color, race, complexion, age,
place of birth, date of birth, nationality, height, weight,
build, scars and marks, plus the make, model, caliber,
and serial number of the handgun.  Fingerprints may
be required.

Inquiry Process.  Applications are normally
processed within the 7-day waiting period.

Fees Charged. The CLEO does not charge a fee for
background checks.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to criminal history
data from the statewide computer network.  This file is
fully automated and contains 100% of the data
available at the State level.

Retention of Applications. The CLEO does not
retain approved applications but retains rejected
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Indiana processed
207,611 handgun license and purchase applications;
1,167 were disapproved, a rejection rate of 0.6%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The State's prohibition
against transferring possession of firearms to persons
under 18 years of age was extended to assault
weapons.  A new chapter, effective November 30,
1998, establishes a system by which dealers will call
the State Police for background checks and receive a
response during the call or by return call without
delay.

Relevant Laws.  Indiana Code 35-47-1 et seq.




Iowa
A Brady-Alternative  State: 2,776,755  population
 
Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Iowa Department of Public Safety, which is the
CLEO for State employees.  The other CLEOs in the
State are the 99 county sheriffs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Iowa
prohibits the sale of handguns to anyone who has a
history of repeated acts of violence or is addicted to
alcohol.

Limitations on Use.  Iowa places limitations on
carrying handguns and long guns concealed or within
certain areas and premises. 

Permits.  Iowa requires an annually renewed permit
to acquire handguns, unless the purchaser holds a
valid permit to carry firearms.  A permit is not required
to purchase long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Iowa.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Permit regulations pertain
to all handgun sales by Federal Firearm Licensees
and pawnshops, as well as sales from one individual
to another.  However, redemptions by the person who
pawned a gun are not covered by State law.

Restoration of Rights.  Iowa allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for permits to
acquire handguns.  Permits may not be issued without
the check being completed.  If approved, the sheriff
issues a permit that is valid for 1 year.  Iowa has a
minimum 3-day waiting period because the permit is
valid 3 days after being issued.

.Information on the Application.  Iowa's application
includes the following information:  name, address,
date of birth, Social Security number (optional), date
of request, date action taken, and the action taken.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  CLEOs have access to fugitive, criminal
history, and domestic abuse restraining
order/misdemeanor data on the statewide computer
network.  These files are fully automated.  The CLEOs
also have access to some probation, parole, and
juvenile data.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs keep the
approved applications for 4 years and rejected
applications for 3 years.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  Iowa Code 702.7; 724.1 et seq.



Kansas
A Brady State: 2,477,574

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Kansas Bureau of Investigation, which is not a
CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are the 123 local
sheriffs and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Kansas
restricts possession of firearms by certain persons
who were adjudicated a juvenile offender because of
the commission of an act which if done by an adult
would constitute a disqualifying offense.

Limitations on Use.  The State limits carrying
handguns and long guns concealed or within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Kansas does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Kansas.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensees sales, the State requires a
background check for pawnshop sales.

Restoration of Rights.  Kansas allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored after 5 or
10 years (depending on the type of crime) from the
date of conviction or release from imprisonment
(whichever period is longer).  Restoration is not
allowed if the offense involved possession of a
firearm.

Background Checks.  Firearm sellers requesting
background checks on handgun purchasers contact
the CLEOs via telephone, fax, or regular or certified
mail.   Applications are also accepted in person.  The
CLEOs use a statewide computer network to contact
the State's central repository and receive a qualified
or disqualified message.

.Information on the Application.  Kansas uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  The background check process
usually takes less than 1 day.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  Kansas provides criminal history,
domestic violence misdemeanor, and juvenile
offender data to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.  Complete criminal history records
are disseminated to the CLEOs and to other
authorized recipients via mail.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs. 

Statistics Maintained.  Kansas maintains statistics
on stolen or recovered handguns, as well as statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
gangs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments to criminal
possession of a firearm laws restricted persons who
possess handguns as juveniles, were convicted of
certain firearm offenses in other jurisdictions, or were
convicted of involuntary manslaughter while driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.

Relevant Laws.  Kansas Statutes 21-4201 et seq.




Kentucky
A Brady  State: 3,685,296  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Kentucky State Police, which is the CLEO for most
of the State.  The sheriffs of  Marshall, Ballard,
Callaway, and Boyd counties also function as CLEOs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place any additional restrictions on the
purchase of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Kentucky places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and long guns, and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Kentucky does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A license is
required to carry a concealed firearm.

Handgun Registration.  The State does not register
handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees require background  checks in
Kentucky.

Restoration of Rights.  Kentucky allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  Firearm dealers can request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
by mail,  fax, or certified mail.  If the application is
rejected, the denial is telephoned to the dealer with
only the message number from the background check
response.  The applicant will receive a denial letter
stating the charge, contributing agency, date of
criminal history, and disposition, if available.

.Information on the Application.  In addition to the
data required on the standard BATF form, Kentucky
requires the Social Security number.

Inquiry Process.  Background checks normally take
no longer than 3 days.

Fees Charged.  No fees are charged.

State Data.  CLEOs have access to fugitive, criminal
history, and domestic violence restraining order data
from the statewide computer network.  These files are
fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  The CLEOs retain the
rejected applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained. Kentucky maintains statistics
on handguns stolen or recovered, as well as statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
assaults, drugs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, the Kentucky State Police
processed 79,574 applications for areas covered by
the agency.  The State Police disapproved 1,973
applications, a rejection rate of 2.5%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new statutory section
provided for licenses to carry concealed firearms. 
New statutes prohibited possession of a firearm on
the property of an elementary school or a high school,
and allowed a court to restrict firearm possession by a
person charged with domestic violence.

Relevant Laws.  Kentucky Revised Statutes 237.030
et seq; 431.064; 527.010 et seq.

Louisiana
A Brady State: 4,219,973  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Louisiana State Police, which is not a CLEO.  The
CLEOs for the State are 63 sheriffs and the New
Orleans Police Department.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Louisiana places limitations on
carrying a concealed handgun and forbids the
carrying or discharge of handguns and long guns
within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Louisiana.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees are subject to background checks
requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
own a handgun can be restored in Louisiana through
a governor's pardon or by a sheriff.  Except for certain
offenders, persons conviction free for ten years after
completion of their sentence may apply to the sheriff
of their parish of residence for a permit to possess
firearms.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for purchases of
handguns.  Firearm dealers request the checks by
sending purchase applications to the CLEOs.

.Information on the Application.  Louisiana uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  Louisiana makes  criminal history and
fugitive data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.  These files are fully automated.  A
domestic violence restraining order registry was
scheduled to go online in 1998.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs. 

Statistics Maintained. No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  An amendment provided
for issuance of concealed handgun permits by the
Department of Public Safety and Corrections.

Relevant Laws.  Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:91;
14:95; 14:95.1; 40:1379.3: 40:1751 et seq.




Maine
A Brady State: 1,227,928  population
.Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Maine State Police, which is the CLEO for
unincorporated areas of the State.  The other CLEOs
are 128 local police agencies.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Maine
prohibits sales of handguns to certain persons who
have engaged in conduct as juveniles that if
committed by an adult would have been a
disqualifying offense.

Limitations on Use.  The State places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and long guns and
forbids the carrying or discharge of firearms within
certain areas and premises.

Permits.  Maine does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit to carry a
concealed weapon is required.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Maine.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees are subject to background checks
requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Maine allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored by the
Commissioner of Public Safety, a court order, or a
governor's pardon.  An application to the
Commissioner can be made if 5 years without
additional violations have elapsed since completion of
the sentence.

Background Checks. Firearm dealers request
background checks on handgun purchasers by 
sending applications to the local police departments or
the State police.

.Information on the Application.  Maine uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  The State police normally process
approved applications within 24 hours, and rejected
applications within 72 hours.

Fees Charged.  No fees are charged. 

State Data.  Maine makes fugitive, criminal history,
and Department of Motor Vehicle data available to
each CLEO.  These files are maintained manually and
are accessed via teletype.  The local police check
court files for domestic violence restraining orders.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The transfer of a firearm to
a minor without parental consent was forbidden by a
new law.

Relevant Laws.  Maine Revised Statutes 15.393;
17A.554; 25.2001 et seq.




Maryland
A Brady-Alternative State: 4,781,468  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Maryland State Police Licensing Division, the
CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits transfers of handguns to persons who are
habitually intoxicated or visibly under the influence of
alcohol or drugs; were convicted of any common law
offense or misdemeanor that carries more than a 2-year 
term of imprisonment; or participate in straw
purchases.  Applicants must have resided in the State
for 1 month, and are limited to purchasing one
handgun every 30 days.

Limitations on Use.  Maryland limits carrying a
concealed handgun, and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit issued by
the Secretary of the Maryland State Police is required
to carry a handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Maryland maintains a
permanent record of all completed sales of handguns
and other regulated firearms.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Dealers selling regulated
firearms in Maryland must have a regulated firearms
dealers license issued by the State, in addition to a
Federal Firearms License. Background checks are
required for all handgun sales, including those which
occur at pawnshops and gun shows, or between
individuals.  Pawnshop redemptions are not
considered to be sales.

Restoration of Rights.  The right to own a firearm
may be restored through a governor's pardon,
provided that more than 10 years have passed since
the conviction and no other criminal violations have
occurred.

Background Checks.  Handgun sellers request
checks by submitting purchase applications to the
CLEO by certified mail or fax.  Maryland requires a
minimum 7-day waiting period for all transfers.

.Information on the Application.  The application
includes the name, address, race, sex, height, weight,
hair color, eye color, date and place of birth, driver's
identification number, Social Security number,
occupation, date of request, date action taken, action 
taken, and the type, make, model, and serial number
of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  Applications requiring no  research
take approximately 5 days.   Applications which
require research normally take less than 1 month.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges a $10 application
fee.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor, and probation/parole data. 
Fugitive and criminal history files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  A permanent record of
all completed applications of regulated firearms is
maintained.  Rejected applications are maintained for
3 years.

Statistics Maintained.  Maryland maintains statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
robbery, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Maryland processed
31,599 applications; 275 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 0.9%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments added
purchase restrictions, revised existing restrictions,
established a waiting period, and limited the use of
firearms on school property or in a vehicle.

Relevant Laws.  Code of Maryland 27-36A et seq;
27-441 et seq.



Massachusetts
A Brady-Alternative State: 6,016,425  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety,
which is not a CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are
270 local police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase. Applicants
must be able to satisfy the CLEO that they have a
proper purpose for purchasing a firearm and are a
suitable person.  The State prohibits possession of
handguns or long guns by persons who are not U.S.
citizens; have been treated or confined for habitual
drunkenness; or were adjudicated or released from
confinement as a youthful offender within the prior 5
years.

Limitations on Use.  The State places restrictions on
carrying handguns and long guns and forbids the
carrying or discharge of firearms within certain areas
and premises.

Permits.  Unless a purchaser possesses a license to
carry, the State requires a firearm identification card
to purchase any firearm and, further, requires a permit
to purchase a handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns and long guns
purchased in Massachusetts are registered; new
residents who own handguns must notify the State.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Massachusetts requires a
background check for sales by Federal Firearm
Licensees and for all other firearm transfers. 
Handguns cannot be pawned in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
own a handgun may be restored through a governor's
pardon, or following five years after completion of the
sentence without additional violations.

Background Checks.  The local police departments
conduct background checks on applicants for
documents required to purchase firearms.  The
CLEOs are allowed 30 days to process identification
card applications.


Information on the Application.  The application
includes the following information:  name, address,
telephone number, place of birth, business address,
employer, occupation, build, complexion, eye color,
hair color, height, weight, date of birth, Social Security
number, mother's maiden name, father's name,
applicant's other names, fingerprints, photograph, and
references. 

Inquiry Process.  No information is available. 

Fees Charged.  The fee for an identification card or a
permit to purchase is $2.

State Data.  Massachusetts provides fugitive, criminal
history, probation/parole, juvenile, and domestic
violence restraining order/misdemeanor data on the
statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated.  Manual files are kept on mental health
data.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep copies
of approved and rejected applications indefinitely. 

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments to the
identification card and license to carry statutes barred
issuance of either to a person adjudicated or released
from confinement as a youthful offender in the prior 5
years.

Relevant Laws.  Massachusetts Laws 140-121 et
seq.




Michigan
A Brady-Alternative State: 9,295,297   population

.Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Michigan State Police.  The CLEOs in the State
are the 595 local sheriffs and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Michigan
prohibits issuing licenses to purchase handguns to
persons who the CLEO has probable cause to believe
will use the gun to harm themselves or others, or
violate the law.

Limitations on Use.  The State limits carrying
concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging handguns or long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Michigan requires a license to purchase a
handgun and a license to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  The State requires
registration of handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensees sales, Michigan requires a
background check for sales by private individuals. 
Gifts and loans are treated as sales.  Handguns
cannot be pawned.

Restoration of Rights.  Felons convicted of
nonviolent offenses regain the right to own a handgun
3 years after completion of their sentences.  Violent
offenders may have their rights restored 5 years after
completion of a sentence, if approved by a county
Concealed Weapons Licensing Board or the circuit
court.

Background Checks.  Prospective purchasers apply
for licenses in person.  The larger CLEOs generally
have their own automated inquiry system, while other
agencies use the statewide system to check on
license applicants.

Information on the Application.  The application
includes the following information: name, address, 
race, sex, height,  hair color, eye color, and date of
birth.  At the time of registration, the make, caliber,
type, model, and serial number of the weapon are
recorded.

Inquiry Process.  Applications not needing research
are normally processed by non-automated agencies in
less than 1 hour, and by  automated agencies in less
than 5 minutes.  Applications requiring research take
less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  CLEOs are allowed to charge any fee
not exceeding $5 for a license.

State Data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order, probation/parole,
mental health, and juvenile (if reportable to the State)
data is available to each CLEO.  Some corrections
data is also available.  Domestic violence
misdemeanors can be located  through an automated
pointer that requires manual research.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are kept on file for 6 years. Rejected applications are
kept at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  Michigan maintains statistics
on handguns stolen, recovered, confiscated, or fired
accidentally, as well as statistics on events which
involve a handgun and homicides, gangs, and other
specific activities.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Enumerated court orders
and dispositions that prohibit purchase of a handgun
were added by amendment to the handgun license
statute.

Relevant Laws.  Michigan Compiled Laws 28.421 et
seq; 750.234(a) et seq.




Minnesota
A Brady-Alternative State: 4,375,099   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, which is
not a CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are 568 local
sheriffs and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits sales of handguns to certain persons who
were convicted of or adjudicated delinquent for
committing a crime of violence as a juvenile. 

Limitations on Use.  Minnesota requires a permit to
carry a handgun and limits carrying a loaded long gun. 
Carrying or discharging a firearm within certain areas
and premises is forbidden.

Permits.  Minnesota allows its citizens to make single
purchases of handguns or to obtain a transferee
permit which is good for 1 year and can be used to
purchase an unlimited number of handguns.  A valid
permit to carry constitutes a transferee permit. 
Purchasing a long gun does not require a permit.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Minnesota.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensee sales, the State requires
background checks for transfers between private
individuals and pawnshop sales / redemptions.

Restoration of Rights.  Persons convicted of
committing crimes of violence may purchase
handguns if 10 years have elapsed since restoration
of civil rights or expiration of the sentence (whichever
occurs first) and the person has not been convicted of
any other crime of violence, or if the conviction has
been expunged or the person has been pardoned.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for transferee
permits or single purchases of handguns.  Permit
applicants may contact a CLEO directly, and a firearm
seller may request a single purchase approval.  The
CLEOs are allowed a maximum period of 5 business
days (7 days) to complete background checks.

.Information on the Application.  The following
information is required:  name, address, telephone
number, driver's license number, sex, date of birth,
height, weight, eye color, and distinguishing physical
characteristics.  Applicants must show an
identification card with a color photograph.

Inquiry Process.  No statewide information is
available.

Fees Charged.  State law does not allow any fees to
be charged.

State Data.  Minnesota makes criminal history,
fugitive, juvenile and domestic violence restraining
order data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network .  These files are fully automated. 
Manual files contain information on mental health and
chemical dependency.  Automation of mental health
and domestic violence misdemeanor data is
underway.

Retention of Applications.  Approved and rejected
applications are kept at the discretion 
of the local CLEOs. 

Statistics Maintained.  The State tracks handgun
incidents which involve homicide or the death or injury
of more than one person.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments added
restrictions on firearm possession, and required
CLEOs to check mental health data.

Relevant Laws.  Minnesota Statutes 609.224;
624.711 et seq.




Mississippi
A Brady-Alternative State:  2,573,216  population
Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Mississippi Department of Public Safety, which is
not a CLEO.  The CLEOs are 262 local sheriffs and
police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
makes it unlawful to transfer a handgun to a person
whom the transferor knows to be in a state of
intoxication..

Limitations on Use.  Mississippi places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Mississippi does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Mississippi.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees are subject to background checks
requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Mississippi allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored through a governor's pardon.

Background Checks. The  CLEOs conduct
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
when requested by a firearms dealer.  The CLEOs
receive applications in person or by mail, fax, or
certified mail.  Results of the background checks are
reported to the dealers.

.Information on the Application.  Mississippi  uses
the standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  The background check process
normally takes less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  The State maintains an automated
message switch that allows local CLEOs to access
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and the
Interstate Identification Index (III).  Arrest and
disposition data on felonies and misdemeanors
became available online in 1998.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs retain approved
applications for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs. 

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A reciprocity statute was
added to the concealed handgun permit law.

Relevant Laws.  Mississippi Code 45-9-101;
97-37 et seq.




Missouri
A Brady-Alternative State: 5,117,073  population


Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Missouri State Highway Patrol, which is not a
CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are the 114 local
sheriffs, and the St. Louis County Police Department.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits issuing a permit to persons who are
habitually intoxicated, were convicted of
misdemeanors specified by State law, or rendered a
false statement on their application.  Applicants must
have resided in the State for 6 months and must be
U.S. citizens.

Limitations on Use.  The State prohibits the carrying
of weapons concealed, and limits the carrying or
discharge of handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Missouri mandates a permit to acquire a
handgun, but does not mandate a permit to acquire a
long gun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered 
by the State, but are registered by some counties and
municipalities.

Scope of Sales Covered. In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensees sales, the State requires a
background check for transfers between individuals
and for pawnshop sales.

Restoration of Rights.  Missouri allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for permits to
acquire handguns and are allowed a maximum period
of 7 business days to complete the process. 
Applicants generally contact a CLEO in person.

.Information on the Application.  Missouri's
application includes the following information:  name,
residence and business addresses, height, hair color,
eye color, date of birth, Social Security number,
occupation, reason for desiring a permit, date of
request, date action taken, reason for rejection, type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon, and
the date and manner of the weapon's disposition.

Inquiry Process.  No statewide information is
available.

Fees Charged.  The CLEOs charge $10 for a permit.

State Data.  Missouri makes fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor,
and probation/parole data available to each CLEO via
a statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated. 

Retention of Applications.  The local CLEOs keep
the approved and rejected applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Missouri maintains statistics
on handguns stolen, recovered, or fired accidentally.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The unlawful use of
weapons statue was amended to prohibit discharge of
a firearm at or from a motor vehicle, or at a building.

Relevant Laws.  Missouri Revised Statutes 571.010
et seq.




Montana
A Brady State: 799,065   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Montana Department of Justice, which is not a
CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are 56 local sheriffs
and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Montana
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  The State forbids the carrying of
a concealed long gun and requires a concealed
weapon permit to carry a concealed handgun on
certain premises.  Discharging a firearm within
specified areas is prohibited.

Permits.  Montana does not require a permit to
purchase  handguns or long guns, but does require
concealed weapon permits.

Handgun Registration.  The State does not  register
handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of handguns by
Federal Firearm Licensees require background
checks in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Montana allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored by a
governor's pardon or upon completion of the sentence
(except for certain offenders who must apply to the
court for a permit to purchase firearms).

Background Checks.  Firearms dealers request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
by sending applications to the CLEOs.  The results of
the checks are reported back to the dealers.  Persons
possessing concealed weapon permits are exempt
from the federal 5-day waiting period.

.Information on the Application.  Montana
uses the standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  Montana makes fugitive and criminal
history data available to each CLEO via its statewide
computer network.  These files are fully automated. 
Some domestic violence data is also available.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
retained at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  Montana maintains statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments clarified
procedures for concealed weapon permits and
deprivation of a convicted offender's right to possess
a firearm.

Relevant Laws.  Montana Code 45-8-301 et seq; 46-18-801.




Nebraska
A Brady-Alternative State: 1,578,385  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Nebraska State Patrol, which is not a CLEO.  The
CLEOs are 93 sheriffs and the Lincoln and Omaha
Police Departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Nebraska limits carrying 
concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging long guns within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  Nebraska requires a transfer certificate
(valid for up to 3 years) to purchase a handgun.  A
permit is not required to purchase long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Nebraska.

Scope of Sales Covered.  A transfer certificate is
required for sales by Federal Firearm Licensees and
other handgun transfers, with limited exceptions.

Restoration of Rights.  Nebraska does not allow a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for handgun
transfer certificates.  Checks are requested from the
local CLEO in person or by mail or fax. The results of
the checks are reported by mail or fax.  A maximum
period of 2 days is allowed for a CLEO to investigate
and decide on an application.

.Information on the Application.  Nebraska's
application includes the following data: name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, date of
birth, Social Security number, date of request, date
action taken, action taken plus the type, make, model,
and serial number of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 1 day. 
Applications requiring research normally take less
than 2 days.

Fees Charged.  Nebraska charges $5 for the
background check.

State Data.  Nebraska makes fugitive, criminal
history, and probation/parole data available to each
CLEO via the statewide computer network.  These
files are automated and contain 75% of the data
available at the State level.  The State Patrol will
research mental health data upon a request from a
CLEO.

Retention of Applications.  Approved and rejected
applications are kept at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  Nebraska maintains statistics
on events which involve a handgun and drugs,
homicides, assaults, or violence against a police
officer.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  Nebraska Revised Statutes 28-1202; 69-2401 et seq.


Nevada
A Brady State: 1,201,833   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Nevada Highway Patrol, which is the CLEO for the
State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Nevada places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and long guns and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed firearm.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Nevada except in Clark County. 

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of handguns by
Federal Firearm Licensees require background
checks in Nevada.  Private persons wishing to
transfer a firearm may request a check on the
transferee from the State records repository.

Restoration of Rights.  Nevada allows a convicted
felon's right to own a firearm to be restored if the
person is honorably discharged from probation;
firearms rights are specifically restored by a court
order or a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts
background checks on applicants for purchases of
handguns.  Firearms dealers request checks by using
a 1-800 number or regular telephone number.  A
determination is rendered within 5 working days.

.Information on the Application.  Nevada's Federal
Firearm Licensees use the BATF forms when
preparing to conduct a firearm transaction.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the background check process normally
takes less than 5 minutes.  Applications requiring
research normally are processed in less than 3 days.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $15 for the
background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence misdemeanor
data from the statewide computer network .  These
files are fully automated.  Currently under
development  is a protective order registry.

Retention of Applications.  Approved applications
are retained for a maximum period of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
kept indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Nevada maintains statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
drugs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997 Nevada processed 24,765
applications; 686 were disapproved, a rejection rate of
2.8%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  New statutes provided for
the issuance of concealed firearm permits, made
certain permit information confidential, and allowed a
person wishing to transfer a firearm to request a
check on the transferee from the State records
repository.

Relevant Laws.  Nevada Revised Statutes 202-253
et seq.




New Hamsphire
A Brady-Alternative State: 1,109,252  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the New Hampshire State Police, which is the CLEO
for the entire State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The handgun
purchase restrictions found in State law are similar to
federal restrictions.

Limitations on Use.  New Hampshire places
limitations on carrying concealed handguns and
forbids carrying firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  New Hampshire does not require a permit
to purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in New Hampshire.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to Federal
Firearm Licensees sales, background checks on
handgun purchase applicants are required for sales
by pawnshops.  Sales between private individuals and
pawnshop redemptions are not covered.

Restoration of Rights.  New Hampshire does not
allow a convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored.

Background Checks.  Instant checks on handgun
purchase applicants are conducted by the New
Hampshire Department of Safety.  Dealers can
request checks by using a 1-900 number.  The
maximum period allowed for completing a background
check is 1 day. 

.Information on the Application.  New Hampshire's
application includes the following information:  name,
race, sex, date of birth, Social Security and/or driver's
license number, date of request, date action taken,
and the action taken.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process takes less than 5 minutes. 
Applications requiring research normally are
processed in less than 4 hours.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $7 for the
background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence restraining
order data from the statewide computer network.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO retains the
approved applications for 20 days and the rejected
applications for 3 years.

Statistics Maintained.  New Hampshire maintains
statistics on stolen or recovered handguns, as well as
statistics on events which involve a handgun and
homicides, drugs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997 New Hampshire processed
12,557 applications; 232 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 1.8%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new chapter established
a statewide instant check system for handgun
purchases.

Relevant Laws.  New Hampshire Revised Statutes
159:1 et seq.




New Jersey
A Brady-Alternative State: 7,730,188  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the New Jersey State Police, the CLEO for some
unincorporated areas.  The other CLEOs are 505
local police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits issuing firearm purchase permits to persons
who are habitually intoxicated, physically unable to
handle firearms, or attempting to falsify their
application.  In addition, issuance of a permit must be
in the interest of public health, safety, or welfare.

Limitations on Use.  New Jersey places limitations
on carrying handguns and long guns concealed or
within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  The State requires a permit to purchase a
handgun, which is valid for 90 days.  Long guns can
be acquired with a firearms purchaser identification
card.  A permit is required to carry a handgun. 

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are registered in
New Jersey at the time of purchase. 

Scope of Sales Covered.  All sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees and from one individual to another
are covered by State law.  Handguns cannot be
pawned.

Restoration of Rights. New Jersey allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored if the person's criminal record is expunged.

Background Checks.  CLEOs conduct checks on
applicants for a permit to purchase a handgun or a
firearms purchaser identification card.  If no cause for
denial exists, a permit or identification card shall be
granted within 30 days (or 45 days for a non-resident
application).  Handgun transfers require a 7-day
minimum waiting period.  

.Information on the Application.  The application
contains the following:  name, address, date of birth,
place of birth, citizenship, Social Security number,
sex, height, weight, race, hair color, complexion, eye
color, distinguishing physical characteristics,
occupation, name and address of employer, and
questions relating to criminal and disorderly conduct
convictions, firearms permits previously denied,
alcohol and drug use, physical defects or sickness,
psychiatric conditions or treatment, and court orders
related to domestic violence.  Also included are the
applicant's signature, the date of the application, and
two referrals.  First-time applicants are required to be
fingerprinted.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the background check takes less than 1
month.  Applications requiring research normally take
less than 6 months. 

Fees Charged.  Fingerprint fees are $49.  Document
fees are $2 for a permit to purchase a handgun and
$5 for a firearms purchaser identification card.

State Data.  New Jersey makes fugitive, criminal
history, domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor, juvenile, and probation/parole
data available to each CLEO.  Mental health files are
under development and only partial data is available.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs retain approved
and rejected applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  No information is available.

Current Activity.  In 1997, New Jersey processed
25,386 applications; 214 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 0.8%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  See Appendix Table 6 for
details.

Relevant Laws.  New Jersey Statutes 2C:39-1 et
seq; 2C:58-1 et seq.




New Mexico
A Brady State: 1,151,069   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the New Mexico Department of Public Safety, which is
the CLEO for some unincorporated areas.  Other
CLEOs are 112 local sheriffs and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  New Mexico limits carrying
concealed handguns and long guns, and forbids
carrying or discharging firearms within certain areas
and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in New Mexico.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only handgun sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees require background
checks in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  New Mexico allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored by a governor's pardon or upon the expiration
of 10 years after completion of the sentence without
additional violations.

Background Checks.  CLEOs conduct background
checks on handgun purchase applicants when
requested by firearms dealers.   The results of the
checks are reported back to the dealers.

Information on the Application.  New Mexico  uses
the standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 2
days.  Applications requiring research normally are
processed in less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs,
and vary from $0 to $20.

State Data.  New Mexico makes criminal history,
domestic violence misdemeanor, and juvenile data
available to each CLEO via the statewide network. 
These files are manual, and requests to search them
are made by teletype from the CLEO to the
Department of Public Safety.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep the
approved applications for a maximum of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
kept at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  New Mexico maintains
statistics on events which involve a handgun and
murder or assault of a police officer.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new statute made it
unlawful for a person under the age of 19 to possess
a handgun.  An amendment prohibited carrying a
deadly weapon on any public school premises.

Relevant Laws.  New Mexico Statutes 30-7-1 et seq.





New York
A Brady-Alternative State: 17,990,455  population


Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services, which is not a CLEO.  The CLEOs in the
State are 58 county judges.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  New York
prohibits issuing a handgun license to persons who
are not of good moral character or have been
convicted of a "serious offense," as defined by State
law.

Limitations on Use.  The State forbids carrying
handguns and long guns within certain areas and
premises.  Carry restrictions can be added to
handgun licenses at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Permits.  New York requires a license to  possess
and carry a handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are registered in
New York.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All sales by Federal
Firearm Licensees are covered by State law, as well
as pawnshop sales and redemptions.  Firearms
dealers are further required to posses a State license.

Restoration of Rights.  New York may authorize a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored.  This procedure requires a court order.

Background Checks.  Applicants for licenses to
possess handguns apply in person at local sheriffs
and police departments, which conduct background
checks on behalf of the county judges.  Fingerprints
are forwarded to the State and to the FBI for
processing.  Applications must be acted upon within 6
months unless there is good cause for delay.

.Information on the Application.  New York's
application includes the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, eye
color, date of birth, Social Security number,
fingerprints, business address, previous address,
occupation, character references, date of request,
date action taken, action taken, reason for rejection
plus the type, make, model, and serial number of the
weapon.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  License fees vary by issuing
authority, but are at least $74, including a fingerprint
processing charge.

State Data.  Local CLEOs have access to criminal
history, fugitive, mental health, and domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor data at the State level.

Retention of Applications.  Approved and rejected
applications are retained indefinitely by the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The licensing statute was
amended to provide that all information will be
confidential except an applicant's name and address. 
Licensing procedures were revised for Nassau,
Suffolk, and Westchester counties.  An amendment
allows a court to suspend or revoke a license, or order
seizure of firearms from one subject to or in violation
of a protective order. 

Relevant Laws.  New York Penal Law 265.00 et seq;
400.00 et seq; Criminal Procedure Law 530.14.



North Carolina
A Brady-Alternative State: 6,628,637   population
Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation,
which is not a CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are
100 county sheriffs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  An  applicant
for a handgun permit must not be habitually
intoxicated or lack good moral character.

Limitations on Use.  North Carolina places
restrictions on carrying concealed handguns and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  The State requires a permit to purchase
handguns and to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in North Carolina.

Scope of Sales Covered.  State handgun permit
requirements apply to all sales by Federal Firearm
Licensees, pawnshops and individuals.  However,
redemptions by the person who pawned a handgun
are not covered by State law.

Restoration of Rights.  North Carolina allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored automatically 5 years after completion of the
sentence without additional violations.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on applicants for handgun permits
and are allowed 30 days to complete the checks.

.Information on the Application.  The exact fields on
the application are at the discretion of the county
sheriff.  Most CLEOs require an extensive list of
information.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  The State mandates a charge of $5
for processing a permit application.

State Data.  North Carolina makes fugitive, criminal
history, probation/parole, domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor, and motor vehicle
data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.  These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs retain
approved applications for 5 years and rejected
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  North Carolina maintains
statistics on events which involve a handgun and
homicides, suicides, and violence against a police
officer.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amendments to several
statutes incorporated restrictions similar to the
Federal prohibitions into State law.  An amendment
provided a 5-year duration for weapon purchase
permits.  A new article authorized permits to carry
concealed handguns.

Relevant Laws.  North Carolina General Statutes 14-269; 14-402 et seq.



North Dakota
A Brady State: 638,000   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the North Dakota Bureau of Criminal Investigation,
which is not a CLEO.  The CLEOs in the State are 53
local sheriffs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prevents handguns from being purchased if the
applicant was convicted of a "Class A" misdemeanor
involving violence or intimidation, committed while
using or possessing a firearm or dangerous weapon.

Limitations on Use.  North Dakota limits carrying
concealed handguns and long guns and forbids
carrying or discharging firearms within certain areas
and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry concealed firearms.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in North Dakota.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to sales by
Federal Firearms Licensees, a background check is
required for sales by individuals and pawnshops. 
However, pawnshop redemptions are not covered. 

Restoration of Rights.  North Dakota allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored 5 or 10 years after completion of the
sentence with no additional violations, depending on
the type of offense committed.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
when requested by a seller.  The  applications are
received in person or by regular or certified mail.  The
results of the checks are reported to the sellers.

.Information on the Application.  North Dakota uses
the standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process. No information is available.

Fees Charged.  Local CLEOs are allowed to charge
up to $10 for the background check.

State Data.  North Dakota makes fugitive (50% is
automated) and criminal history (75% is automated)
data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.  Court restraining order data is
also available.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs keep the
approved applications for a maximum of 20 days, as
permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are
kept indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  North Dakota maintains
statistics on events which involve a handgun and
homicides, drugs, and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  North Dakota Century Code 62.1-0l
et seq.




Ohio
A Brady  State: 10,847,115  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, which is the CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Ohio restricts
the purchase of handguns by persons who are chronic
alcoholics or were adjudicated a delinquent child for
an offense that if committed by an adult would be a
felony offense of violence or a drug offense.

Limitations on Use.  The State forbids carrying or
discharging handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.  Carrying concealed firearms is
prohibited.

Permits.  Ohio does not require a permit to purchase
handguns or long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Ohio.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of  handguns
by Federal Firearm Licensees require a background
check.

Restoration of Rights.  Ohio allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored by a
court of common pleas if the person has been law
abiding since completion of the sentence.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
when requested by dealers using a 1-900 number. 
Only disapprovals are reported to the dealers.  If
disapproval is not communicated  by the CLEO, the
dealer can complete the transaction after the 5-day
waiting period has expired.

Information on the Application.  Ohio's application
contains the following information:  name, previous
name and date of birth.  The following fields are
optional:  address, sex, height, weight, Social Security
number, State ID or Operators License number,
business address, previous address, place of birth,
occupation, race, hair color, eye color, and date of
request.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 15
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally are
processed in less than 3 days.

Fees Charged.  Ohio charges $15 for the background
check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor, and probation/parole data from
the statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated.

Retention of Applications.  Ohio retains the
approved applications for a maximum period of 20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected
applications are retained indefinitely. 

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Ohio processed 55,074
applications; 473 were disapproved, a rejection rate of
0.9%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new statute prohibited
deadly weapon possession in courthouses.  An
amendment prohibited deadly weapon possession on
school premises or in a school building or bus.

Relevant Laws.  Ohio Revised Code 2923.11 et seq.





Oklahoma
A Brady State: 3,145,585 population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, which is
not a CLEO.  The CLEOs are 440 local sheriffs and
police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits the purchase of handguns by persons who
are under the influence of alcohol or were adjudicated
as a delinquent child within the past 10 years.

Limitations on Use.  Oklahoma limits carrying
concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  Oklahoma does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Oklahoma.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of  handguns
by Federal Firearm Licensees require a background
check in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Oklahoma allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored if the
person was convicted of a non-violent offense and
receives a complete pardon from the proper authority.

Background Checks.  Firearms dealers request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
from the CLEOs.  The results of the background
checks are reported to the dealers.

.Information on the Application.  Oklahoma uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  Oklahoma makes criminal history data
available to each CLEO via the statewide computer
network.  This file is fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep
approved applications for a maximum period of 20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected
applications are kept at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Statutes prohibiting certain
persons from receiving firearms were amended to
add persons adjudicated delinquent and to clarify the
definition of incompetent persons.  An amendment
allowed restoration of the right to possess a handgun
for nonviolent felons who have been pardoned. 
Amendments to statutes limiting the use of firearms
added rifles and shotguns to the list of regulated
weapons and prohibited discharging a firearm into any
dwelling or any building used for public or business
purposes. A new section established procedures for
issuing  licenses to carry concealed handguns, and an
amendment specified premises where concealed 
carrying is forbidden.

Relevant Laws.  Oklahoma Statutes 21-1271.1 et
seq.





Oregon
A Brady-Alternative State: 2,842,321  population


Source of Information.  Information was  provided by
the Oregon State Police.  The CLEO is the
Superintendent of State Police.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase. The State
restricts the purchase of handguns and long guns by
persons who, within the past 4 years, have been
convicted of a misdemeanor involving violence or
were under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court for
having committed an act which, if committed by an
adult, would constitute a felony or a misdemeanor
involving violence.  Persons on probation are
restricted unless an exception is granted by the court.

Limitations on Use.  Oregon places limitations on
carrying concealed firearms and forbids discharging
firearms within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns, but does require a
license to carry a concealed weapon.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Oregon. 

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of  handguns
by Federal Firearm Licensees require a background
check.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
own a firearm can be restored by Federal relief,
expungement, or the passage of 15 years since
completion of a sentence for a felony which did not
involve criminal homicide or the use of a weapon,
provided that there is only one felony conviction on the
person's record.

Background Checks.  Dealers call a 1-800 number
for the Oregon State Police Firearms Unit and provide
the required information on purchase applicants. 
Background queries are processed on the purchaser
and the handgun being sold; the dealer is given a
transaction number for an approval or informed that
the applicant is denied.

Information on the Application.  Oregon uses the
standard BATF form and a thumbprint form generated
by the State Police.

Inquiry Process.  The CLEO is allowed a maximum
period of 2 days to complete a check.

Fees Charged.  Oregon charges $10 for a
background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to criminal
history, fugitive, stolen gun, domestic violence
restraining order, juvenile, and mental health data
from the statewide computer network.

Retention of Applications.  The Oregon State Police
Firearms Unit keeps a record of approved and
rejected applications on file for 5 years.

Statistics Maintained.  Oregon maintains statistics
on the number of stolen handguns as well as statistics
on events which involve a handgun and homicides,
assaults, or violence against a police officer.

Current Activity.  In 1997, Oregon processed 48,597
applications; 1,370 were disapproved, a rejection rate
of 2.8%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new statute established a
statewide instant check system for handgun
purchases.

Relevant Laws.  Oregon Revised Statutes 166.170 et
seq.





Pennsylvania
A Brady  State: 11,881,643   population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Pennsylvania State Police, which is not a CLEO. 
The CLEOs are 66 county sheriffs and the
Philadelphia Police Department.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits sales of firearms to persons who have been
convicted of certain State offenses involving violence
or multiple impaired driving offenses.  Sales to
persons who were adjudicated delinquent are
prohibited, unless their rights have been restored. 

Limitations on Use.  Pennsylvania places limitations
on carrying concealed firearms, and on carrying
firearms within a first-class city, in vehicles, on school
property, or in a court facility.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry concealed firearms.  

Handgun Registration.  A record of sale is  required
to be sent to the Pennsylvania State Police on all retail
sales of handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All handgun sales are
regulated in Pennsylvania, including individual
transfers.  Handguns cannot be pawned.

Restoration of Rights.  The court may restore a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun in the event
of a governor's pardon, Federal relief, vacation of the
conviction, or, for some offenses, the expiration of 10
years after completion of the sentence without
additional violations.

Background Checks.  Dealers request background
checks on handgun purchase applicants by sending
Brady forms to the CLEOs.  A 48-hour minimum
waiting period is required by State law.  Checks must
be completed during the Brady Act's 5-day waiting
period.  An instant check system will begin on July 1,
1998.

Information on the Application.  The State's record
of sale contains the applicant's name, address, race,
sex, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth,
Social Security number, occupation, and date of
request, plus the make, model, serial number, caliber,
and barrel length of the firearm.

Inquiry Process.  Applications are processed during
the waiting period.

Fees Charged.  There is a $3 State-mandated fee on
retail gun sales for the creation and operation of an
instant check system.  The new system will charge
dealers a $2 fee for an instant check.

State Data.  Pennsylvania makes criminal history,
fugitive, and probation/parole data available to each
CLEO via the statewide computer network.  These
files are automated and contain more than 50% of the
data available at the State level.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs keep approved
applications for no more than 20 days, as permitted by
the Brady Act.  Rejected applications are kept at the
CLEOs' discretion.

Statistics Maintained.  The State maintains statistics
on events which involve handguns used in homicides,
weapons used in assaults, or the murder or assault of
a police officer.

Current Activity.  No information is available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Amended statutes
described specific classes of persons not to possess,
use, manufacture, control, sell or transfer firearms;
specified procedures for all firearm transfers,
including a provision for establishing an  instant check
system; and detailed conditions for the restoration of
firearm rights.

Relevant Laws.  PA. Statutes 18-6101 et seq.




Rhode Island
A Brady  State: 1,003,464  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Rhode Island Department of the Attorney General,
which is not a CLEO.  The CLEOs are 39 local police
departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits sales of handguns and long guns to persons
who are habitually intoxicated.  Handgun purchasers
are required to complete a firearm safety course.

Limitations on Use.  Rhode Island limits carrying
concealed handguns, and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  Rhode Island does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Rhode Island.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees, background checks are
required for pawnshop sales / redemptions, and
transfers between private individuals.

Restoration of Rights.  Rhode Island allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored through a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  Firearm sellers request 
background checks on purchasers of handguns and
long guns by sending applications to the CLEOs.  The
results of the checks are reported  to the sellers. 
Checks must be completed within the 7-day waiting
period, which applies to handguns and long guns.

Information on the Application.  Rhode Island's
application includes the purchaser's name, address,
date of birth, place of birth, height, weight, hair and
eye color, scars, tattoos, and other identifying marks,
and questions concerning eligibility.

Inquiry Process.  Most CLEOs complete the
background check within 5 days. 

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the  CLEOs.

State Data.  Rhode Island makes fugitive, criminal
history, probation/parole, domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor, and mental health
data available to each CLEO via the statewide
computer network.  These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  CLEOs are required by
State law to retain approved applications for 30 days. 
Rejected applications are retained indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Total applications and denials
for the year are recorded.

Current Activity.  No information is available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Statutes which determine
who is ineligible to purchase firearms were amended
to prohibit persons subject to electronic monitoring
and to revise the definition of prohibited aliens.

Relevant Laws.  Rhode Island General Laws
11-47-1 et seq.





South Carolina
A Brady  State: 3,486,703  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED),
the CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits handgun sales to persons who are habitually
intoxicated, are members of subversive organizations,
or have been adjudged by a court as unfit to possess
a handgun.  Purchases of handguns are limited to one
in each 30-day period.

Limitations on Use.  South Carolina places
limitations on carrying concealed handguns and
forbids carrying or discharging firearms within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase 
handguns or long guns.  Permits are required for
concealed handguns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in the State.

Scope of Sales Covered.  South Carolina licenses all
firearms dealers.  Background checks are required for
handgun sales by dealers and pawnshops, but not for
sales between private individuals.  Pawnshop
redemptions are not presently covered, but will be
checked after November 30, 1998. 

Restoration of Rights.  South Carolina allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored if the person receives a pardon or an
expungement of the conviction, unless the offense
committed was a crime of violence. 

Background Checks.  Handgun sellers call the
CLEO for background checks by using a 1-800
number.  On November 30, 1998, the CLEO will begin
checking long gun purchasers.

Information on the Application.  South Carolina's
application includes the following information: name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, eye
color, date of birth, Social Security, driver's license
and telephone  numbers, State or military
identification number, fingerprints (optional), business
address, place of birth, date of request plus the type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon. 

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require  no
research, the process normally is completed in less
than 5 minutes.  Applications requiring research can
take up to 5 days, but are normally processed in less
than 15 minutes.

Fees Charged.  South Carolina charges $5 for an
approved background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence misdemeanor, and
juvenile  data via the statewide computer network. 
Information on domestic violence restraining orders
became available in May 1997.  In addition, the State
maintains a "30-day, one handgun purchase" file. 
These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  South Carolina keeps
approved applications for 20 days and rejected
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  The State maintains statistics
on handgun accidents which result in death and on
events which involve handguns and homicides, gangs
and other specific activities.

Current Activity.  In 1997 South Carolina processed
50,789 applications; 2,650 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 5.2%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new article established
procedures for permits to carry concealable weapons.

Relevant Laws.  South Carolina Code of Laws 
16-23-10 et seq; 23-31-10 et seq.




South Dakota
A Brady  State: 696,004  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the South Dakota Attorney General's Office, which is
not a CLEO.  The CLEOs are 66 local sheriffs.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits transfer of a firearm to a person under the
age of 18 if the transferor knows or reasonably
believes that the minor recipient intends to use the
firearm to commit a crime of violence.

Limitations on Use.  South Dakota places limitations
on carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying
or discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in South Dakota.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of handguns by
Federal Firearm Licensees are subject to background
check requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  South Dakota allows a
convicted felon's right to possess a firearm to be
restored through a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
when requested by firearms dealers.  The results of
the checks are reported to the dealers.  The State
requires a 2-day waiting period for handgun
purchasers, except for holders of valid, concealed
handgun permits.

Information on the Application.  South Dakota uses
the standard BATF form. 

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the local
CLEOs.

State Data.  South Dakota makes fugitive, criminal
history, probation/parole, and domestic violence
protective order data available to each CLEO via the
statewide computer network.  A driver's history file is
available to check for additional data.  These files are
fully automated.  Domestic violence misdemeanors
can be identified by researching criminal history.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs are required
by State law to retain their copies of handgun
purchase applications for a period of 1 year.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  A new statute prohibited
transfer of a firearm to a person under the age of 18 if
the transferor knows or reasonably believes that the
minor recipient intends to use the firearm to commit a
crime of violence.

Relevant Laws.  South Dakota Codified Laws 
23-7-1 et seq.




Tennessee
A Brady-Alternative  State: 4,877,185  population

Source of Information.  Information was  provided by
the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation, which is not a
CLEO.  The CLEOs  in the State are 95 local sheriffs
and the  Nashville Metropolitan Police Department.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits handgun sales to persons who are addicted
to alcohol or intoxicated while  attempting a purchase,
or have been convicted of violent assaults or illegal
sales of alcoholic beverages.

Limitations on Use.  Tennessee limits carrying
concealed handguns and forbids carrying handguns
or long guns within certain areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns. A permit is required
to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Tennessee.

Scope of Sales Covered.   In addition to handgun
sales by Federal Firearms Licensees, background
checks are required for pawnshop sales /
redemptions and for sales between individuals.

Restoration of Rights.  Tennessee allows a
convicted felon to own a handgun if the person was
pardoned, the conviction was expunged or set aside,
or the person's civil rights were restored by a State
circuit court.

Background Checks.  CLEOs conduct checks on
handgun purchase applicants.  Firearm sellers
request checks by sending applications to the CLEOs
in person or via mail or fax.  Tennessee has a 15-day
waiting period.


Information on the Application.  The State's
application includes the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, eye color, hair
color, date of birth, Social Security number,
thumbprint, previous names, previous addresses,
scars, marks and tattoos, date of request, date action
taken, action taken, plus the type, make, model, and
serial number of the weapon, and proof of completion
of an approved handgun safety course. 

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 5
days.  Applications requiring research normally take
less than 2 weeks.

Fees Charged.  The CLEOs may charge a
reasonable fee, not to exceed $10, for a background
check.

State Data.  Tennessee makes criminal history,
fugitive, and domestic abuse misdemeanor /
restraining order data available to each CLEO through
the State Law Enforcement  Communications
Network. 

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep the
approved and rejected applications for 1 year.

Statistics Maintained.  Tennessee does not maintain
statistics on handgun incidents.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  An amendment prohibited
handgun sales to persons convicted of offenses
punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1
year, and allowed felons to regain the right to
purchase a handgun by pardon, expungement, or
restoration of civil rights.  Two new statutes made it
an offense to provide a handgun to a prohibited
juvenile.  An amendment allowed CLEOs to charge a
reasonable fee, not to exceed $10, for investigation of
a purchaser.

Relevant Laws.  TN. Code 39-17-1301 et seq.




Texas
A Brady  State: 16,986,510  population

Source of Information.  Information was  provided by
the Texas Department of Public  Safety, which is not a
CLEO.  The CLEOs in the  State are 991 local sheriffs
and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  A handgun
cannot be knowingly sold to a person  who intends to
use it unlawfully or is intoxicated.

Limitations on Use.  Texas requires that any
handgun which is carried must be concealed.  
Carrying concealed handguns or discharging firearms
is forbidden in certain areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A license is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Texas.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only handgun sales by
Federal Firearms Licensees are subject to
background check requirements in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  A convicted felon's right to
possess a handgun on the premises where he or she
lives can be restored 5 years after completion of the
sentence with no additional violations.

Background Checks.  Firearms dealers request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
by sending the applications to the CLEOs.  The
results of checks are reported to the dealers.

Information on the Application.  Texas uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are within the discretion of  the local
CLEO.

State Data.  Texas makes fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor,
juvenile, and probation/parole  data available to each
CLEO via the statewide computer network.  These
files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep 
approved applications for a maximum period of  20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.  The rejected
applications are kept at the discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Two amendments made it
a criminal offense to transfer a handgun to a person
restrained by a protective order or to receive a
handgun while subject to a protective order.  CLEOs
were required to check for active protective orders
upon receiving an application for a handgun purchase. 
New statutes prohibited carrying a handgun openly or
on certain premises, and regulated the discharge of
firearms within municipal limits.

Relevant Laws.  Texas Penal Code 30.06; 42.12;
46.01 et seq; Family Code 71.18.




Utah
A Brady-Alternative  State: 1,722,850  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification, which is the
State  s CLEO.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Utah does
not place additional restrictions on the purchase of
handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  The State places limitations on
carrying or discharging handguns and long guns
within school property, vehicles, and other locations. 
It is illegal to use or threaten to use a dangerous
weapon in a fight or quarrel.

Permits.  Utah does not require a permit to purchase
handguns or long guns.  A permit is required to carry
a concealed firearm.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Utah.

Scope of Sales Covered.  In addition to handgun
sales by Federal Firearm Licensees, a background
check is required for pawnshop sales and
redemptions in the State.

Restoration of  Rights.  Utah does not allow a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored.

Background Checks.  The CLEO conducts instant
checks on handgun purchase applicants. Dealers
request instant checks by using a 1-800 number or
regular telephone.  The results of the checks are
reported  to the dealers.

Information on the Application.  Utah's application
includes the following information: name, address,
race, sex, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of
birth, Social Security number, date of request, and the
action taken.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 5
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally
take less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  The CLEO charges $7.50 for a
background check.

State Data. The CLEO has access to fugitive, criminal
history, domestic abuse restraining
order/misdemeanor, and motor vehicle data  from the
statewide computer network.  These files are fully
automated.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO, in
accordance with State law, retains the approved
applications for a maximum period of 20 days.  The
rejected applications are retained for 1 year.

Statistics Maintained.  Utah maintains statistics on
stolen or recovered handguns, as well as statistics on
events which involve a handgun and homicides,
drugs, and other specific activities.  

Current Activity.  In 1997 Utah processed 32,389
applications; 792 were disapproved, a rejection rate of
2.4%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The Federal restrictions on
the purchase of handguns were incorporated into
State law.  A new law established an instant check
system for handgun transfers, and a subsequent
amendment increased the fee charged to $7.50. 
Possessing firearms in the secure area of an airport
was prohibited.

Relevant Laws.  Utah Code 53-5-702 et seq;
76-10-501 et seq.




Vermont
A Brady  State: 562,758  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Vermont Department of Public Safety.  The
CLEOs in the State are 21 local sheriffs and police
departments and, for some unincorporated areas, the
Vermont State Police.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
does not place additional restrictions on the purchase
of handguns or long guns.

Limitations on Use.  Vermont limits the right to  carry
handguns and long guns within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase or carry handguns or long guns.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Vermont.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of handguns by
Federal Firearms Licensees require a background
check in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  Vermont allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  Firearms dealers can  request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
from the CLEOs by fax or certified mail.  The CLEOs
normally report the results of the checks by fax, mail,
or telephone.


Information on the Application.  Vermont uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 2
days.  Applications requiring research normally are
processed in less than 4 days.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  The CLEOs have access to automated
files containing fugitive and domestic abuse
misdemeanor information.  Criminal history,
probation/parole, and court restraining order data is
also available at the State level.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs retain the
approved applications for a maximum period of 20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected
applications are retained at the discretion of the
CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  Vermont Statutes 13-4001 et seq.




Virginia
A Brady-Alternative  State: 6,187,358  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Virginia State Police, which is the CLEO for the
State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Handguns
cannot be purchased by persons who have been
convicted of two misdemeanor drug offenses within
36 months.  An individual cannot purchase more than
one handgun every 30 days, unless authorized by the
State Police.

Limitations on Use.  Virginia limits carrying
concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  Virginia does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit issued by
a State circuit court is needed to carry a concealed
handgun.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Virginia.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Background checks are
required in the State for all firearm sales by Federal
Firearms Licensees and pawnshops.  

Restoration of Rights.  Virginia allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored by an
order of the State circuit court or through a pardon or
removal of political disabilities by the governor.

Background Checks.  Dealers request instant
checks on handgun and long gun purchase applicants
by using a 1-800 number or the mail to contact the
CLEO.  In addition to the toll-free number, some 
high-volume dealers have direct access to the
Firearms Transaction Program through a terminal. 
Results of the checks are reported to the dealer.

Information on the Application.  Virginia's
application contains the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, Social
Security number, place of birth, and the number of
firearms per transaction. 

Inquiry Process.  Applications without disqualifiers or
which require no research are normally processed in
less than 2 minutes.  Illegal attempts to purchase
firearms are investigated, with prosecution pursued in
every instance where there is sufficient evidence.

Fees Charged.  Fees are $2 for a check on a State
resident and $5 for a non-resident.

State Data.  The CLEO can access fully automated
files with criminal history, fugitive, capias, juvenile,
mental health, domestic violence protective
order/misdemeanor, and 30-day State law gun
limitation data.  In addition, the State will have access
to the NICS index.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO keeps the
approved applications for 30 days and the rejected
applications for 2 years. 

Statistics Maintained.  Virginia tracks events
involving handguns and homicides.

Current Activity.  In 1997 Virginia processed 180,527
applications; 2,384 were disapproved, a rejection rate
of 1.3%

Post-Brady Legislation.  New laws prohibited
persons who are legally incompetent, mentally
incapacitated, involuntarily committed or subject to a
protective order from purchasing any firearm. Persons
convicted of two misdemeanor drug offenses within
36 months were barred from purchasing a handgun
by a new law.

Relevant Laws.  Code of Virginia 18.2-279 et seq.




Washington
A Brady-Alternative  State: 4,866,692  population


Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Washington State Patrol, which is not a CLEO. 
The CLEOs in the State are 291 local sheriffs and
police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  Washington
prohibits purchases of handguns and long guns by
certain persons who have been convicted of
misdemeanors specified in State law.

Limitations on Use. The State places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging firearms within certain areas and
premises.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase
handguns or long guns.  A license is required to carry
a concealed handgun.

Handgun Registration.  The State does not register
handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All handgun and long gun
sales by Federal Firearm Licensees and pawnshops
require a background check.  Pawnshop redemptions
and sales between private individuals are not covered
by State law.

Restoration of Rights.  Washington allows a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored by an order from the court of record or a
governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  The CLEOs conduct  checks
on handgun and long gun purchasers upon receiving
applications from dealers in person, by fax, or by
regular or certified mail.  A handgun can be delivered
to the purchaser when the dealer is notified of an
approval or 5 business days have elapsed.

Information on the Application.  The State's
application includes the following: name, address,
race, sex, height, weight, eye color, date of birth,
place of birth, drivers license or ID number, date of
request, and the type, make, model, and serial
number of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  Checks normally are completed
within 5-business days, but the time allowed can be
extended when the applicant cannot satisfy
identification or residency requirements or has a
record which lacks certain dispositions.

Fees Charged.  No fees are charged.

State Data.  The State makes fugitive, criminal history
and domestic violence restraining order data available
to each CLEO via the statewide computer network. 
These files are fully automated.  Some domestic
violence misdemeanor and juvenile data is also
available.  Mental health data can be accessed
manually.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEOs keep 
approved applications for a maximum period of 20
days.  Rejected applications are maintained for a
minimum period of 6 years.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  Two amendments
redefined circumstances under which conviction for
enumerated offenses or involuntary commitment for
mental health treatment would restrict the right to
possess a firearm.  An amendment redefined the
state's waiting period and revised procedures,
including a provision for using the NICS.  A new
section outlined procedures by which the right to
possess a firearm can be restored for persons
involuntarily committed for mental health treatment.

Relevant Laws.  Washington Revised Code 9.41.010
et seq.


West Virginia
A Brady  State: 1,793,477  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the West Virginia State Police, which is the CLEO for
the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
prohibits sales of firearms to persons who are
addicted to alcohol.

Limitations on Use.  West Virginia places limitations
on carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying
or discharging handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to
purchase  handguns or long guns.  A license is
required to carry a concealed deadly weapon.

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in West Virginia.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of handguns by
Federal Firearms Licensees require a background
check in the State.

Restoration of Rights.  West Virginia allows a
convicted felon to regain the right to own a firearm by
petitioning the circuit court of the county in which he or
she resides.

Background Checks.  Dealers request background
checks on handgun purchase applicants from the
regional center in West Virginia via fax.  The results of
the checks are reported to the dealers.


Information on the Application.  West Virginia's
application contains the following information: name,
date of birth, Social Security number, address, date of
request, date action taken, action taken plus, the type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Inquiry Process.  The background check process
normally takes less than 5 days.

Fees Charged.  No fee is charged for a background
check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence restraining
order data from the statewide computer network. 
These files are fully automated.  The State manually
maintains some domestic abuse data.

Retention of Applications.   Approved applications
are retained by the CLEO for a maximum period of 20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.  Rejected
applications are kept indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  West Virginia maintains
statistics on events which involve a handgun and
homicides.

Current Activity.  In 1997 West Virginia processed
20,577 applications; 295 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 1.4%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  The statute governing
licenses to carry concealed deadly weapons was
substantially amended.

Relevant Laws.  West Virginia Code 61-7-1 et seq.




Wisconsin
A Brady-Alternative  State: 4,891,769  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Wisconsin Department of Justice, which is the
CLEO for the State.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The State
restricts handgun purchases by certain persons who
were adjudicated delinquent for  acts that would be
felonies if committed by an adult.  Wisconsin also
places some limits on persons with developmental
disabilities.

Limitations on Use.  Wisconsin places limitations on
carrying, storing, transporting, pointing and
discharging handguns and long guns.  Carrying
concealed firearms is not permitted.

Permits.  Wisconsin does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns. 

Handgun Registration.  Handguns are not registered
in Wisconsin.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All handgun sales by
Federal Firearm Licensees as well as sales by
pawnshops require a background check.   However,
redemptions by the person who pawned a gun are not
covered by State law.

Restoration of Rights.  Wisconsin requires a pardon
from the governor to restore the right to own a
handgun, or restoration can occur under the Relief
from Disabilities Act.

Background Checks.  Dealers request instant
checks on handgun purchase applicants by using a 
1-800 number to contact the Department of Safety. 
Routine checks must be completed during a 48-hour
waiting period.  The time allowed for a check can be
extended by 3 days for felony charges with no
recorded disposition.


Information on the Application.  Wisconsin's
application contains the following information:  name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, hair
color, eye color, previous names, date of request,
date action taken, and the action taken.

Inquiry Process.  For applications which require no
research, the process normally takes less than 2
minutes.  Applications requiring research normally
take less than 1 day.

Fees Charged. The CLEO charges $8 for a
background check.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, juvenile, domestic violence
misdemeanor/restraining order, and mental health
data from the statewide computer network.   These
files are fully automated.  Probation and parole files
are kept manually.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO retains the
approved applications for 30 days and the rejected
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  Wisconsin maintains
statistics on events which involve handguns and
homicides, violence against a police officer, or family
violence. 

Current Activity.  In 1997 Wisconsin processed
31,030 applications; 444 were disapproved, a
rejection rate of 1.4%.

Post-Brady Legislation.  An amendment prohibited
possession of a firearm by persons who were
adjudicated delinquent for an act that if committed by
an adult would be a felony; or were involuntarily
committed for treatment of mental illness, drug
dependency or a developmental disability.  Another
amendment provided that while a domestic violence
injunction is in effect, a court can order the
respondent not to possess firearms.

Relevant Laws.  Wisconsin Statutes 175.35;
813.125; 941.25 et seq; 948.55; 948.60.




Wyoming
A Brady  State: 453,588  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Wyoming Attorney General.  The CLEOs in the
State are 40 local sheriffs and police departments.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase. Wyoming
does not place any additional restrictions on the
purchase of handguns.

Limitations on Use.  The State places limitations on
carrying concealed handguns and forbids carrying or
discharging handguns and long guns within certain
areas and premises.

Permits.  Wyoming does not require a permit to
purchase handguns or long guns.  A permit is
required to carry a concealed dangerous weapon.

Handgun Registration.  The State does not  register
handguns.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Only sales of  handguns
by Federal Firearm Licensees are subject to
background check requirements in Wyoming.

Restoration of Rights.  Wyoming allows a convicted
felon's right to own a handgun to be restored through
a governor's pardon.

Background Checks.  Firearms dealers request
background checks on handgun purchase applicants
from the local CLEOs.  The results of background
checks are reported to the dealers.


Information on the Application.  Wyoming uses the
standard BATF form.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  There are no State-mandated fees. 
Any fees charged are at the discretion of the CLEOs.

State Data.  Wyoming makes fugitive (felony and
misdemeanor) and criminal history data available to
each CLEO via the statewide computer network. 
These files are fully automated.

Retention of Applications.  The local CLEOs retain
the approved purchase applications for a maximum
period of 20 days, as permitted by the Brady Act. 
Rejected purchase applications are retained at the
discretion of the CLEOs.

Statistics Maintained.  No statewide information is
available.

Current Activity.  No statewide information is
available.

Post-Brady Legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant Laws.  Wyoming Statutes 6-8-101 et seq.




American Samoa
46,773 population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the American Samoa Department of Public Safety,
which is the CLEO for the Territory.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The Territory
of American Samoa does not allow handguns on the
island.  Even local police officers do not carry
handguns.  A person's baggage is checked for
firearms upon arrival.   Shotguns and .22-caliber rifles
are allowed, but cannot be sold to habitual drunkards
or intoxicated persons.

Limitations on Use.  The Territory prohibits carrying
concealed firearms and limits the carrying or
discharge of firearms on certain premises.

Permits.  A license is required to own or possess long
guns.

Handgun Registration.  Not applicable.

Scope of Sales Covered.  All transfers of firearms
require a license.

Restoration of Rights.  Restoration of firearm rights
may be given based on the expressed discretion of
the Attorney General or the CLEO, upon review of the
application.

Background Checks.  Background checks on
purchasers of shotguns and .22-caliber rifles are
performed by the police.  After the weapon is
purchased, the person must take the sales receipt
and the weapon to the police.  The police will run a
background check and issue a license.  The
background check includes checking with police
departments on neighboring islands.

Information on the Application.  Territorial law
allows requests for any information as may be
reasonably required.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  A fee of $10 is charged for first time
applicants, and $2 is charged for renewals.

State Data.  Information is maintained manually.

Retention of Applications.  No information is
available.

Statistics Maintained.  Information is compiled
through UCR data collection.

Relevant Laws.  American Samoa Code 46.4201 et
seq.




Guam
A Brady-Alternative Jurisdiction: 133,152  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Guam Police Department, which is the CLEO for
the Territory. 

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  In addition to
following the Federal restrictions, Guam prohibits
issuing a Firearms Identification Card to any person
who has been convicted of any misdemeanor where
personal injury or use of firearms was an element or
factor of the offense, or who appears to suffer from a
physical or mental disease which would adversely
affect the safe use of the firearm applied for.

Limitations on Use.  Guam does not place any
limitations on where handguns can be carried or used. 
However, an identification card must be in the
possession of the holder when carrying or using a
firearm.

Permits.  The Territory requires a Guam Firearms
Identification Card to purchase handguns and long
guns.

Handgun Registration.  After purchasing a weapon,
the receipt is taken to the Guam Police Department. 
The weapon is inspected by the duty armorer and
registered by the department.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Transfers of weapons
between individuals, purchases from dealers and
pawnshops, and redemptions require that the person
receiving the firearm holds an identification card.  

Restoration of Rights.  Guam does not allow a
convicted felon's right to own a handgun to be
restored.

Background Checks.  Background checks on
firearms purchasers are conducted by the Guam
Police Department.  Applicants request identification
cards from the police, who check FBI data and local
files.


Information on the Application.  Guam's application
includes the following information: name, address,
previous address, place of birth, date of birth, home
phone, duty phone, Social Security number,
occupation, employer, race, sex, height, weight, eye
color, and hair color.

Inquiry Process.  The process can take as much as
6 to 10 weeks while the applicant's background is
being checked. 

Fees Charged.  First time applicants must submit a
money order or bank draft payable to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in the amount of $24 for the
FBI background information fee.  Once the
background check is cleared and the application is
approved, the applicant is charged a fee of $15 for the
Identification Card (renewable every 3 years).   There
is also a fee of $20 for the registration of each firearm.

State Data.  The CLEO has access to fugitive,
criminal history, and mental health data.

Retention of Applications.  Guam keeps all
applications indefinitely.

Statistics Maintained.  No information is available.

Relevant Laws.  Guam Code 10-60100 et seq.




Puerto Rico
A Brady Jurisdiction: 3,522,037  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Chief of the Weapons Registry for the Police of
Puerto Rico, the CLEO for the Commonwealth. 

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The CLEO
will not issue a license to have or possess firearms to
any person who has been convicted of any of the
following offenses: murder in any degree,
manslaughter, kidnaping, rape, mayhem, intent to
commit any felony, or aggravated assault and battery. 
Nor will the CLEO issue a license to any person who
is mentally unbalanced, a habitual drunkard, or a
narcotics or drug addict, or has been convicted of a
violation of Section 427, Title 25 of the Penal Code.

Limitations on Use.  Carrying firearms is only legal
within a residence, place of business, or farm.

Permits.  Puerto Rico requires a license to purchase
or carry a handgun or long gun.

Handgun Registration.  The Commonwealth
registers handguns in the General Police
Headquarters.

Scope of Sales Covered.  The Weapons Law
establishes that no dealer in firearms or ammunition
shall deliver a firearm or issue the corresponding
delivery permit to a purchaser without the latter
producing a license to have and possess a firearm. 
No weapon is sold to the holder of a license from
which the sales permit has been removed.  Licensing
requirements apply to all firearm sales.

Restoration of Rights.  No regulations cover
restoration of rights.

Background Checks.  License applications require
background checks conducted by the Police of Puerto
Rico.  Applications are received by certified mail or in
person by the Police.  For denied applicants, the
Police have an internal appeals process with written
procedures, and there is an external appeals process
that involves the court system.

Information on the Application.  Fingerprints are
required, and the standard BATF form is used.

Inquiry Process.  The background check process
can take from 6 to 12 months.

Fees Charged.  Commonwealth law requires fees of
$50 for a license and $15 for a renewal every 3 years.

State Data.  The Police Department maintains a
manual database.

Retention of Applications.  The CLEO retains
approved applications for a maximum period of 20
days, as permitted by the Brady Act.

Statistics Maintained.  The Police maintain a log of
firearms transactions, including dealer names,
licenses awarded or revoked, and renewals by month
and year.

Relevant Laws.  Laws of Puerto Rico 25-411 et seq.



Virgin Islands
A Brady-Alternative Jurisdiction: 101,809  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Virgin Islands Police Department, which is the
CLEO.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  A license to
possess a firearm cannot be issued to a person who
has been convicted of any crime of violence, is an
habitual drunkard, or is deemed to be an improper
person by the CLEO.

Limitations on Use.  The Virgin Islands limits the
carrying of firearms.

Permits.  A license is required to possess, transport,
or carry a firearm.  A purchase coupon is issued with
the license, and retained by the firearm dealer.

Handgun Registration.  After purchase, the bill of
sale and the weapon are brought to the police, where
all the information is recorded.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Licensing  requirements
apply to all firearm sales.

Restoration of Rights.  No information is available.

Background Checks.  License applications require a
check by the CLEO.  The applicant completes and
returns a notarized application.  If no problems are
found during the background check, the application is
forwarded to the Police Commissioner, who approves
or disapproves the application.  Firearm transfers
require a 48-hour waiting period.

Information on the Application.  A license
application is accompanied by four photographs and
notarized statements from character references. 
Fingerprints are required.  Other data required varies
with the type of application.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged. The Virgin Islands charges a $30
application fee, a $50 registration fee per weapon, 
and a $15 late registration fee. The license must be
renewed every three years, with a $100 renewal fee. 
New photographs are required with each renewal.

State Data.  No information is available. 

Retention of Applications.  No information is
available.

Statistics Maintained.  No information is available.

Relevant Laws.  Virgin Islands Code 23-451 et seq.


Washington, DC
606,900  population

Source of Information.  Information was provided by
the Metropolitan Police Department of Washington
D.C.

Additional Restrictions on Purchase.  The laws of
Washington D.C. no longer allow the purchase of
handguns, except by police.  Additional restrictions on
long gun transfers include prohibiting persons who
were adjudicated chronic alcoholics; suffer physical
defects and are unable to use a firearm safely; or
were adjudicated negligent in a firearm mishap
causing death or serious injury.  Applicants between
the ages of 18 and 21 are required to have a
notarized statement from a parent or guardian.  All
applicants are required to demonstrate adequate
vision and a satisfactory knowledge of District firearm
laws.

Limitations on Use.  Firearms must be unloaded and
disassembled, or bound by a trigger lock, unless they
are kept at a place of business or being used for
lawful recreation.

Permits.  A valid registration certificate is required for
possession or transfer of any firearm.

Handgun Registration.  All handguns owned prior to
September 24, 1976 are required to be registered. 
Long guns must also be registered.

Scope of Sales Covered.  Registration requirements
apply to all firearms transactions.

Restoration of Rights.  Persons convicted of certain
offenses involving drugs, assaults or threats can
regain the right to register a firearm 5 years after
conviction.

Background Checks.  The Chief of Police conducts
background checks and issues registration
certificates.

Information on the Application.  Registration
information includes the applicant's name, present
address, previous addresses, occupation, business
address, date and place of birth, sex,  history with
firearms, intended use and location of the firearm plus
information about the firearm to be transferred and the
transferor.  Fingerprints may be required and two
recent photographs must be submitted.

Inquiry Process.  No information is available.

Fees Charged.  No information is available.

State Data.  No information is available.

Retention of Applications.  No information is
available.

Statistics Maintained.  No information is available.

Relevant Laws.  District of Columbia Code 6-2301 et
seq; 22-3201 et seq.

Appendix A
State FIST Contact
                                    
Alabama
Isaac Kervin
Criminal Justice Info. Center
770 Washington Ave. 
Room 350
Montgomery AL  36130
(334) 242-4900

Alaska
Leetta Franklin
Department of Public Safety
Division of Adm. Services 
5700 East Tudor Road
Anchorage AK  99507
(907) 269-5708

Arizona
Teresa Fuentes
Department of Public Safety
Instant Check Unit
P.O. Box 6638
Phoenix AZ  85005
(602) 223-2702

Arkansas
T. J Farley
Attorney General's Office
200 Tower Building
323 Center Street
Little Rock AR  72201
(501) 682-2007

California
Mike Broderick
Department of Justice
Firearms Program
P.O Box 820200
Sacramento CA  94203
(916) 227-3500

Colorado
Matt Heap
CBI Instant Check Unit
CO Dept. of Public Safety
690 Kipling Street, Rm. 3000
Denver CO  80215
(303) 239-4648

Connecticut
Robert Kiehm
Department of Public Safety
License & Firearms Unit
1111 Country Club Road
Middletown CT  06457
(860) 685-8160

Delaware
Tracey Lewis
State Police, BOI
Firearms Trans. Program
P.O. Box 430
Dover DE  19903
(302) 739-2933

Florida
Martha Wright
Dept. of Law Enforcement
Criminal Justice Info. Systems
P.O. Box 1489 
Tallahassee FL  32302
(850) 488-4931

Georgia
Charles A. Severs
Bureau of Investigation
Crime Information Center
P.O. Box 370748
Decatur GA  30037
(404) 244-2605

Hawaii
Liane Moriyama
Criminal Justice Data Center
Kekuanao'a Building
465 South King St., Rm. 101
Honolulu HI  96813
(808) 587-3101

Idaho
Bob Taylor
Bur. of Criminal Identification
Criminal History Unit
700 South Stratford
Meridian ID  83642
(208) 884-7133 

Ilinois
George Murphy
State Police Div. of Adm.
100 Iles Park Place
Springfield IL  62708
(217) 782-5015


Indiana
Karen Butt
State Police Firearms Div.
Indiana Govt. Center North
100 N. Senate Ave, Rm. 312
Indianapolis IN  46204
(317) 232-8264

Iowa
Carroll L. Bidler
Office of Public Safety
Div. of Criminal Investigation
Wallace State Office Building
Des Moines IA  50319
(515) 281-8422

Kansas
Charles Sexson
Bureau of Investigation
1620 Southwest Tyler
Topeka KS  66612
(785) 291-3029


Kentucky
Carol Bowman
State Police
Information Services Center
1250 Louisville Road
Frankfort KY  40601
(502) 227-8700

Louisiana
Mike Noel
Office of State Police
Bur. of Criminal Identification
P.O. Box 66614
Baton Rouge LA  70896
(504) 925-6095

Maine
Barry Hathawy
State Police
Dept. of Public Safety
36 Hospital Street
Augusta ME  04333
(207) 624-7062

Maryland
Frank Smith
State Police
Firearms License Section
7751 Washington Boulevard
Jessup MD  20794
(410) 799-0191

Massachusetts
Maureen W. Chew
Crim. History Systems Board
200 Arlington Street
Boston MA  02150
(617) 660-4600


Michigan
Debbie Smith
Department of State Police
Central Records Division
7150 Harris Drive
Lansing MI  48913
(517) 322-5518

Minnesota
Karen R. McDonald
Criminal Justice Info. System
Department of Public Safety
1246 University Avenue
St. Paul MN  55104
(612) 642-0687

Mississippi
Judy M. Tucker
Department of Public Safety
Records and Ident. Division
P.O. Box 958
Jackson MS  39205
(601) 987-1592

Missouri
Robert E. Gartner
State Highway Patrol
Criminal Records Division
P.O. Box 568  
Jefferson City MO  65102
(573) 526-6160


Montana
Walt Joyce
Department of Justice
Law Enforcement Services
Scott Hart Building, Rm. 374
Helena MT  59620
(406) 444-2966

Nebraska
Lathan Rohren
State Highway Patrol
P.O. Box 94907
Lincoln NE  68509
(402) 479-4938


Nevada
Grace L. George
Highway Patrol
555 Wright Way
Carson City NV  89711
(702) 687-6675

New Hampshire
Patrick Poirier
Department of State Police
James H. Hayes Safety Bldg.
10 Hazen Drive
Concord NH  03305
(603) 271-3575

New Jersey
Joseph Hahn
Department of State Police
River Road
West Trenton NJ  08628
(609) 882-2000


New Mexico
Paul V. Herrera
Department of Public Safety
Tech. & Emergency Support
P.O. Box 1628
Sante Fe NM  87504
(505) 827-9191

New York
Clyde DeWeese
Div. of Crim. Just. Services
Off. of Identification Systems
Stuyvesant Plaza
Albany NY  12203
(518) 457-6050

North Carolina
David P. Bryan
Bureau of Investigation
407 North Blount Street
Raleigh NC 27601 
(919) 733-3171


North Dakota
Robert J. Helten
Bur. of Criminal Investigation
Information Services Division
P.O. Box 1054
Bismarck ND  58502
(701) 328-5500

Ohio
Lonnie Rudasill
Bur. of Criminal Identification
P.O. Box 365
London OH  43140
(740) 852-2556


Oklahoma
Ronald R. Young
Bureau of Investigation
6600 North Harvey, Suite 300
Oklahoma City OK  73116
(405) 848-6724

Oregon
Clifford W. Daimler
State Police
Identification Services
3772 Portland Road NE
Salem OR  97303
(503) 378-3070

Pennsylvania
John Thierwechter
State Police
Records and Info. Services
1800 Elmerton Avenue
Harrisburg PA  17110
(717) 783-5592

Rhode Island
Kenneth Cote
Dept. of the Attorney General
Bur. of Criminal Investigation
150 South Main
Providence RI  02903
(401) 421-5268



South Carolina
Joseph Means
Law Enforcement Division
4400 Broad River Road
Columbia SC  29221
(803) 896-7005


South Dakota
Thomas J. Del Grosso
Div. of Criminal Investigations
Administration Services
500 East Capitol Avenue
Pierre SD  57501
(605) 773-3331

Tennessee
Doug Woodlee
Bureau of Investigation
1148 Foster Avenue
Nashville TN  37210
(615)726-7809 

Texas
David Gavin
Department of Public Safety
Crime Records Division
P.O. Box 4143
Austin TX  78765
(512) 424-2077

Utah
Todd Peterson
Bur. Criminal Identification
4501 South 2700 West
Salt Lake City UT  84119
(801) 965-3810

Vermont
Max Schleuter
Criminal Information Center
Department of Public Safety
P.O. Box 189
Waterbury VT  05676
(802) 244-8727


Virginia
R. Lewis Vass
State Police Records
Management Division
P.O. Box 27472
Richmond VA  23261
(804) 674-2148

Washington
Jannice Gordon
State Highway Patrol
Identification Section
P.O. Box 42633
Olympia WA  98504
(360) 705-5102

West Virginia
Thomas A. Barrick
Department of State Police
725 Jefferson Road
South Charleston WV  25309
(304) 746-2177

Wisconsin
Mary Studevant
Department of Justice
Criminal Records Section
123 West Washington Ave.
Madison WI  53702 
(608) 267-2776

Wyoming
James M. Wilson
Division of Criminal Investigation
316 West 22nd Street
Cheyenne WY  82002
(307) 777-7523

American Samoa
Jacinta Brown
Department of Public Safety
P.O. Box 4567
Pago Pago AS  96799
(684) 633-2827


Guam
Ray Fernandez
Police Department
287 West Obrien Drive
Agana GU  96910
(671) 475-8459


Puerto Rico
Julio L. Rosa
Department of Justice
Post Office Box 192
San Juan PR  00693
(787) 729-2465


Virgin Islands
Susan M. McDonald
Records Bureau
V. I. Police Department
Criminal Justice Complex
St. Thomas VI  00802
(809) 774-2211

Washington, D.C.
Susie Schaeffer
Pre-Trial Services Agency
400 F. Street, N.W.
Suite 310
Washington DC  20001
(202) 727-2911


-----------------------------------------


Appendix table 1.  Applications for presale handgun checks processed by States 
providing complete counts, 1997

                                              Applications
                                                          Rejection
State                Population  Received     Rejected    rate
Arizona                  3665228        62266        2277      3.7
Arkansas                 2350725        14556         202      1.4
California              29760021       204409        1839      0.9
Colorado                 3294394        46853        2476      5.3
Delaware/a                666168        11369         491      4.3
Florida                 12937926       198922        7348      3.7
Georgia                  6478216        83673        7136      8.5
Idaho                    1006749        22761         790      3.5
Illinois/a              11430602       171865        1943      1.1
Indiana/b                5544159       207611        1167      0.6
Maryland                 4781468        31599         275      0.9
Nevada                   1201833        24765         686      2.8
New Hampshire            1109252        12557         232      1.8
New Jersey               7730188        25386         214      0.8
Ohio                    10847115        55074         473      0.9
South Carolina           3486703        50789        2650      5.2
Utah                     1722850        32389         792      2.4
Virginia/a               6187358       180527        2364      1.3
West Virginia            1793477        20577         295      1.4
Wisconsin                4891769        31030         444      1.4


Note: Each State had 1 CLEO that reported complete State-wide data for applications 
and reject Kentucky reported 79,574 applications and 1,973 rejections, but excluded 
data from 4 counties.
a Counts for these States include handguns and long guns.
b Counts are for handgun licenses and purchase applications.  To ensure comparability, 
BJS is conducting a separate study to determine the extent of the relationship between 
rejected licenses and applications.

------------------------------------------------------

Appendix table 2.  Handgun presale check procedures, by State, 1997

                                 Presale check procedures       State waiting
                                 in Brady-alternative State     period before  Additional
                     State                                      handgun can    State          Number
                     Status                  Instant  Permit    be delivered   purchase        of
State                Brady  Alternative/a    check    or other  to buyer       restrictions/d CLEOs


Alabama                  X         ---          ---        ---          2 days         4       67
Alaska                   X         ---          ---        ---             ---       3,4       35
Arizona                  X/e       ---          ---        ---             ---       1,3        1
Arkansas                 X/e       ---          ---        ---             ---       ---        1
California             ---                      ---        Yes        10 days/f     1,2,3        1
Colorado               ---       03/94          Yes        ---             ---         2        1
Connecticut            ---                      ---        Yes         14 days       1,2        1
Delaware               ---                      Yes        ---             ---       2,3        1
Florida                ---                      Yes        ---          3 days         1        1
Georgia                ---       01/96          Yes        ---             ---         1        1
Hawaii                 ---                      ---        Yes         14 days     1,2,4        4
Idaho                  ---       06/94          Yes        Yes             ---       ---        1
Illinois               ---                      Yes        Yes          3 days       1,3        1
Indiana                ---                      ---        Yes          7 days       3,4        1
Iowa                   ---                      ---        Yes          3 days       1,4      100
Kansas                   X         ---          ---        ---             ---         3      123
Kentucky                 X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---        5
Louisiana                X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---       64
Maine                    X         ---          ---        ---             ---         3      129
Maryland               ---                      ---        Yes          7 days     1,2,4        1
Massachusetts          ---                      ---        Yes             ---     1,3,4      270
Michigan               ---                      ---        Yes             ---         1      595
Minnesota              ---       08/94          ---        Yes             ---         3      568
Mississippi              X         ---          ---        ---             ---         1      262
Missouri               ---                      ---        Yes             ---     1,2,4      115
Montana                  X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---       56
Nebraska               ---                      ---        Yes             ---       ---       95
Nevada                   X/e       ---          ---        ---             ---       ---        1
New Hampshire          ---       01/95          Yes        ---             ---       ---        1
New Jersey             ---                      ---        Yes          7 days       1,4      506
New Mexico               X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---      113
New York               ---                      ---        Yes             ---       1,2       58
North Carolina         ---       12/95          ---        Yes             ---       1,4      100
North Dakota             X         ---          ---        ---             ---         2       53
Ohio                     X/e       ---          ---        ---             ---       3,4        1
Oklahoma                 X         ---          ---        ---             ---       1,3      440
Oregon                 ---                      Yes        Yes             ---     1,2,3        1
Pennsylvania             X         ---          ---        ---          2 days     1,2,3       67
Rhode Island             X         ---          ---        ---          7 days       1,4       39
South Carolina           X/e       ---          ---        ---             ---     1,2,4        1
South Dakota             X         ---          ---        ---          2 days         1       66
Tennessee              ---       05/94          ---        Yes         15 days     1,2,4       96
Texas                    X         ---          ---        ---             ---         1      991
Utah                   ---       03/94          Yes        ---             ---       ---        1
Vermont                  X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---       22
Virginia               ---                      Yes        ---             ---       1,2        1
Washington             ---       06/96          ---        Yes             ---         2      291
West Virginia            X         ---          ---        ---             ---         4        1
Wisconsin              ---                      Yes        ---          2 days       1,3        1
Wyoming                  X         ---          ---        ---             ---       ---       40
 Total                  23          27           11         19                               5390


---Not applicable
( )States classified as the original Brady-alternative States by the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco and Firearms (BATF).
a/Dates reflect when States switched from Brady to Brady-alternative status.
b/BATF classified the States.
c/Where a waiting period is indicated for a Brady State, it represents additional requirements 
under State law.
d/1-General restrictions.  2-Purchaser must not be under indictment or arraignment or have
 been convicted of a 
misdemeanor (specific misdemeanors vary by State). 3-Purchaser must not have committed 
juvenile-related offenses 4-Purchaser must not be habitually intoxicated (addicted to alcohol).
e/The State reports that it maintains a central 1-800 or 1-900 telephone number that 
Federal firearms licensees may call to make an immediate background check.
f/California's presale waiting period was 15 days until April 1, 1997.


-------------------------------------------------------
Table 3. Amount of fees for background checks and
how long handgun purchase applications are retained, by State, 1997


                         Maximum fee    Additional or   Fingerprint           The period for  which
                         charged for    other fees for  accompanies           processed applications
                         name check*     name check     application          are retained by the CLEO

State                                                                       Approved         Rejected
Alabama                          ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Alaska                           ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Arizona                          ---            ---          ---            20 days          5 years
Arkansas                       15.00     $ 3.00 (1)      Yes (2)            20 days          Indefinitely
California                 14.00 (3)      10.00 (4)          ---            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
Colorado                       10.00            ---          ---            2 days           2 years
Connecticut                    35.00            ---          ---            Not kept         10 years
Delaware                         ---            ---          ---            60 days          Indefinitely
Florida                         8.00            ---          ---            2 days           Indefinitely
Georgia                         5.00            ---          ---            Not kept         90 days
Hawaii                     24.00 (5)            ---          Yes            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
Idaho                            ---            ---          ---            5 days           6 months
Illinois                        2.00       5.00 (6)          ---            1 year           5 years
Indiana                          ---            ---      Yes (2)            Not kept         Indefinitely
Iowa                             ---            ---          ---            4 years          3 years
Kansas                           ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Kentucky                         ---            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
Louisiana                        ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Maine                            ---            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
Maryland                       10.00            ---          ---            Indefinitely     3 years
Massachusetts                   2.00            ---      Yes (2)            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
Michigan                        5.00            ---          ---            6 years           
Minnesota                        ---            ---          ---                     
Mississippi                      ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Missouri                       10.00            ---          ---            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
Montana                          ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Nebraska                        5.00            ---          ---                     
Nevada                         15.00            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
New Hampshire                   7.00            ---          ---            20 days          3 years
New Jersey                51.00 (5) ( 54.00 (5) (8)          Yes            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
New Mexico                     20.00            ---          ---            20 days           
New York                  74.00 (5) (           ---          Yes            Indefinitely     Indefinitely
North Carolina                  5.00            ---          ---            5 years          Indefinitely
North Dakota                   10.00            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
Ohio                           15.00            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
Oklahoma                         ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Oregon                         10.00            ---     Yes (10)            5 years          5 years
Pennsylvania                3.00 (11)           ---          ---            20 days           
Rhode Island                     ---            ---          ---            30 days          Indefinitely
South Carolina                  5.00            ---      Yes (2)            20 days          Indefinitely
South Dakota                     ---            ---          ---            1 year           1 year
Tennessee                      10.00            ---     Yes (10)            1 year           1 year
Texas                            ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Utah                            7.50            ---          ---            20 days          1 year
Vermont                          ---            ---          ---            20 days           
Virginia                        2.00      5.00 (12)          ---            30 days          2 years
Washington                       ---            ---          ---            20 days          6 years
West Virginia                    ---            ---          ---            20 days          Indefinitely
Wisconsin                       8.00            ---          ---            30 days          Indefinitely
Wyoming                          ---            ---          ---            20 days           



--- No State mandated fee.
Local CLEO may charge a fee at its discretion.
*Covers all parts of the check process, including issuance of any required permits.
( )Applications are retained at the discretion of the local CLEO.

(1) Fee for using CLEO's 1-900 number.                               (7) Fee for permit to purchase handgun.
(2) Fingerprints are used only if identity is questioned.            (8) Fee for long gun identification card.
(3) Covers single handgun or unlimited number of long guns.          (9) Fees may be higher for some jurisdictions.
(4) Fee for each handgun purchased in addition to the first.        (10) Only thumbprint is taken, but not used for check.
(5) Includes fee for FBI fingerprint check.                         (11) Fee is being used to fund a new statewide system.
(6) Fee for identification card issued after checked                (12) Fee for a check on a non-resident of the State.


-----------------------------------------------


Appendix table 4. Databases searched by CLEOs for background checks, 1997


                               Computerized                        Domestic
                               criminal         Restrain   Mental  violence
                     Fugitive  history (CCH)/b  ing orders health  misdemeanor  Other/c
State/a                                                                        

Alabama                   Y          Y             Y          -         -          Y
Alaska                    Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Arizona                   Y          Y             -          -         -          -
Arkansas                  Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
California                Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Colorado                  Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Connecticut               Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Delaware                  Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Florida                   Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Georgia                   Y          Y             -          Y         Y          -
Hawaii                    -          Y             -          Y         Y          -
Idaho                     Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Illinois                  Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          -
Indiana                   -          Y             -          -         -          -
Iowa                      Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Kansas                    -          Y             -          -         Y          Y
Kentucky                  Y          Y             Y          -         -          -
Louisiana                 Y          Y             -          -         -          -
Maine                     Y          Y             Y          -         -          Y
Maryland                  Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Massachusetts             Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Michigan                  Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Minnesota                 Y          Y             Y          Y         -          Y
Mississippi               -          -             -          -         -          -
Missouri                  Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Montana                   Y          Y             -          -         -          -
Nebraska                  Y          Y             -          -         -          Y
Nevada                    Y          Y             -          -         Y          -
New Hampshire             Y          Y             Y          -         Y          -
New Jersey                Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
New Mexico                -          Y             -          -         Y          Y
New York                  Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          -
North Carolina            Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
North Dakota              Y          Y             Y          -         -          -
Ohio                      Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Oklahoma                  -          Y             -          -         -          -
Oregon                    Y          Y             Y          Y         -          Y
Pennsylvania              Y          Y             -          -         -          Y
Rhode Island              Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
South Carolina            Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
South Dakota              Y          Y             Y          -         -          Y
Tennessee                 Y          Y             Y          -         Y          -
Texas                     Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Utah                      Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Vermont                   Y          Y             Y          -         Y          Y
Virginia                  Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Washington                Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
West Virginia             Y          Y             Y          -         Y          -
Wisconsin                 Y          Y             Y          Y         Y          Y
Wyoming                   Y          Y             -          -         -          -
 Total                   44         49            36         15        34         33



a/All States check Federal databases at the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) 
for "Wanted" and the "Interstate Identification Index (III)," a national system 
which points to State(s) having a criminal history record on an individual.
b/Computerized Criminal History records contain at least felony arrests and dispositions 
and may also contain disposition or other data describing domestic violence or other 
misdemeanors.
c/"Other" includes data on such areas as probation and parole, juvenile, and motor vehicle.
CLEOs may check local data as well.
- No database search.









-----------------------------------------------


Appendix table 5.  Information provided on applications, and types of firearm purchases 
or transactions covered by background check requirements, 1997

                       Application information provided to the CLEO                           Types of transactions covered
                                                                                               Firearms Pawnshop    Private
State                  Required data                               Optional data               dealer   redemptions sales

Alabama                1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,13,17,18                                                   Y        N          N
Alaska*                1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        Y          Y
Arizona*               1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Arkansas*              1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
California             1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,18                                                          Y        Y          Y
Colorado               1,2,3,4,8                                   10                              Y        N          N
Connecticut            1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,18                                                         Y        Y          Y
Delaware               1,2,3,4,8,10,18                                                             Y        N          N
Florida*               1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        Y(1)       N
Georgia                1,3,4,8                                     18                              Y        Y(2)       N
Hawaii                 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16,17,18                                   Y       (3)         Y
Idaho                  1,3,4,8                                                                     Y        N          N
Illinois               1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,18                                                        Y        Y          N
Indiana                1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,13,16,17,18               11                              Y        N          Y
Iowa                   1,2,8,10                                                                    Y       (3)         Y
Kansas*                1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Kentucky               1,2,8,10                                    4,5,6,17                        Y        N          N
Louisiana*             1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Maine*                 1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Maryland               1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,13,17,18                  10                              Y        N          Y
Massachusetts          1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,17,18                                          Y       (3)         Y
Michigan               1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,18                                                          Y       (3)         Y
Minnesota              1,2,4,5,6,8,9,18                                                            Y        Y          Y
Mississippi*           1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Missouri               1,2,5,7,8,9,10,12,13,18                                                     Y        N          Y
Montana*               1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Nebraska               1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,18                                                       Y        N          Y
Nevada*                1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
New Hampshire          1,3,4,8                                     10                              Y        N          N
New Jersey             1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,17,18                                      Y       (3)        Y
New Mexico*            1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
New York               1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,15,18                                         Y        Y          Y
North Carolina         Varies from county to county                                                Y        N          Y
North Dakota*          1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          Y
Ohio                   1,8,14,18                                   2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,12,13,15,17    Y        N          N
Oklahoma*              1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Oregon*                1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,11,17                  Y        N          N
Pennsylvania           1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,13,18                                                  Y       (3)         Y
Rhode Island           1,2,5,6,7,8,9,16,17,18                                                      Y        Y          Y
South Carolina         1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,17,18               11                              Y        N          N
South Dakota*          1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Tennessee              1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,14,15,16,18                                         Y        Y          Y
Texas*                 1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Utah                   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10                                                        Y        Y          N
Vermont*               1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N
Virginia               1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,17,18                                                      Y        Y          N
Washington             1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,17,18                                                       Y        N          N
West Virginia          1,2,8,10,18                                                                 Y        N          N
Wisconsin              1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,14                                                        Y        N          N
Wyoming*               1,2,8                                       4,5,6,10,17                     Y        N          N



Note: Information describes requirements and procedures pursuant to both Federal and State law.
Data elements:
1. Name                   10. Social Security number          *The State uses the standard BATF
2. Address                11. Fingerprint                     From: Required=1,2,8 Opitonal=4,5,6,10,17
3. Race                   12. Business address           
4. Sex                    13. Occupation                    
5. Height                 14. Previous names                  (1) Y indicates redemptions are covered after 90 days.    
6. Weight                 15. Previous address                (2) Y indicates redemptions are covered after 1 year.
7. Hair color             16. Scars, marks, tattoos           (3) Handguns cannot be pawned.
8. Date of birth          17. Place of birth          
9. Eye color              18. Other data     


--------------------------------------------------------


Appendix table 6.  State firearm laws, 1997

State                        Title of laws                     Relevant sections

Alabama                      Code                              13A-11 et seq.
Alaska                       Statutes                          11.61.190 et seq; 18.65.700 et seq.
Arizona                      Revised Statutes                  13-905 et seq; 13-3101 et seq.
Arkansas                     Code                              5-73-101 et seq.
California                   Penal Code                        417.3;626.9;12000 et seq.; Family code 6389
Colorado                     Revised Statutes                  12-26.5-101 et seq; 18-12-101 et seq.
Connecticut                  General Statutes                  29-27 et seq; 53-202 et seq; 53a-217
Delaware                     Code                              11-1441 et seq.
Florida                      Statutes                          790.001 et seq.
Georgia                      Official Code                     16-11-101 et seq.
Hawaii                       Revised Statutes                  134-1 et seq.
Idaho                        Code                              18-3302 et seq; 19-5401 et seq. 
Illinois                     Compiled Statutes                 430:65/0.01 et seq; 720:5/24-1 et seq; 725:5/11
Indiana                      Code                              35-47-1 et seq.
Iowa                         Code                              702.7;724.1 et seq
Kansas                       Statutes                          21-4201 et seq.
Kentucky                     Revised Statutes                  237.030 et seq; 431.064; 527.010 et seq.
Louisiana                    Revised Statutes                  14:91; 14:95; 14:95.1; 40:1379.3; 40:1751 et se
Maine                        Revised Statutes                  15.393;17A.554;25.2001 et seq.
Maryland                     Code                              27-36A et seq; 27-441 et seq.
Massachusetts                Laws                              140-121 et seq.
Michigan                     Compiled Laws                     28.421 et seq; 750.234a et seq.
Minnesota                    Statutes                          609.224;624.711 et seq.
Mississippi                  Code                              45-9-101; 624.711 et seq
Missouri                     Revised Statutes                  571.010 et seq.
Montana                      Code                              45-8-301 et seq; 46-18-801
Nebraska                     Revised Statutes                  28-1202; 69-2401; et seq
Nevada                       Revised Statutes                  202.253 et seq.
New Hampshire                Revised Statutes                  159:1 et seq.
New Jersey                   Statutes                          2C:39-1 et seq; 2C:58-1 et seq.
New Mexico                   Statutes                          30-7-1 et seq.
New York                     Penal Law                         265.00 et seq; 400.00 et seq.; Crim. Pro. Law 5
North Carolina               General Statutes                  16-23-10 et seq.;23-31-10 et seq
North Dakota                 Century Code                      62.1-01 et seq.
Ohio                         Revised Code                      2923.11 et seq.
Oklahoma                     Statutes                          21-1271.1 et seq.
Oregon                       Revised Statutes                  166.170 et seq.
Pennsylvania                 Statutes                          18-6101 et seq.
Rhode Island                 General Laws                      11-47-1 et seq.
South Carolina               Code of Laws                      16-23-10 et seq; 23-31-10 et seq.
South Dakota                 Codified Laws                     23-7-1 et seq.
Tennessee                    Code                              39-17-1301 et seq. 
Texas                        Penal Code                        30.06;42.12;46.01;et seq.; Family code 71.18
Utah                         Code                              53-5-702 et seq; 76-10-501 et seq.
Vermont                      Statutes                          13-4001 et seq.
Virginia                     Code                              18.2-279 et seq.
Washington                   Revised Code                      9.41.010 et seq.
West Virginia                Code                              61-7-1 et seq.
Wisconsin                    Statutes                          175.35813.125;941.25 et seq.; 948.55;948.60
Wyoming                      Statutes                          6-8-101 et seq.




--------------------------------------------------

View Adobe Acrobat file for Appendix 7.


PM   3/3/99

