U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Survey of State Procedures
Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 1999

Prepared by the
Regional Justice Information Service
St. Louis, Missouri

March 2000, NCJ 179022 


-------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs99.htm.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be available. 
To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ssprfs
-------------------------------------------------------------------


Introduction

History of the survey 
and related Bulletins

Survey methodology

Background

Brady Act provisions

Interim System

Permanent System:
National Instant Criminal
Background Check System

State involvement in 
firearm sale regulation 

Sources of additional 
Information

Firearm sales topics

Prohibited persons
 
Regulated sales     

Permits   

Background checks

Waiting periods     

Retention of records/ 
registration

Appeals of denials


Jurisdictional summaries



Information in summaries

Federal system

States

Alabama
Alaska    
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida      
Georgia           
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

American Samoa
Guam
Puerto Rico
The Virgin Islands
Washington, D.C.

Appendixes

Table 1. Applications for handgun            
checks processed by States, 
interim and permanent Brady
periods

Table 2. Prohibited persons: 
Statutory Basis for denial 
of firearm sale or 
possession

Table 3. Agencies conducting 
firearm background 
checks under Federal 
or State law

Table 4. National Instant Criminal
Background Check 
System (NICS):  Checking
agencies (FBI or State point
of contact) for firearm 
transfers

Table 5. Background check and 
permit procedures

Table 6. Fees, record retention 
and appeals 

Table 7. Databases accessed 
for firearm checks

Table 8. Firearm laws

Table 9.  Laws to restore rights,
regulate guns sales, and issue
permits

Table 10. Laws regarding 
background checks, waiting 
period, retention of sales records      
and appeals 

Table 11. Revisions of regulations
and other significant changes
in State firearm laws

State contacts for the 
FIST Project

Introduction
Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
1999 is the fourth in a series of Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) reports.  This report describes laws, regulations,
procedures, and information systems related to sales and other
transfers of firearms, which were in effect as of June 30, 1999.
 
History of the survey and related Bulletins.  This national
survey is produced by the BJS Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST)
project, a component of the National Criminal History
Improvement Program (NCHIP).  The FIST project was established
in 1995 to collect data that describes the scope of presale
firearm checks required under Federal or State law.  

Three previous editions of the survey primarily described
procedures related to background checks on handgun purchasers in
each of the 50 States and other United States jurisdictions,
especially those required by the interim provisions of the Brady
Act.  (See Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
NCJ 160763, May 1996; Survey of State Procedures Related to
Firearm Sales, 1996, NCJ 165705, September 1997; Survey of State
Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 1997, December 1998, NCJ
173942.)  

This updated, expanded edition describes procedures related to
transfers of handguns and other types of firearms (effective
11/30/98), which are required by the permanent provisions of the
Brady Act or State law.

Data collected and analyzed by the FIST project is also reported
in BJS Bulletins.  Four bulletins have reported counts of
firearm sale applications/inquiries and denials for parts of the
Brady interim period.  (See Presale Firearm Checks, NCJ 162787,
February 1997; Presale Handgun Checks 1996, NCJ 165704,
September 1997; Presale Handgun Checks, 1997, NCJ 171130, June
1998; and Presale Handgun Checks, the Brady Interim Period,
1994-1998, NCJ 175034, June 1999.)  The most recent bulletin
included cumulative counts of firearm sale
applications/inquiries and denials, and summarized significant
events that occurred during the Brady interim period (02/28/94 -
11/29/98) (for further detail see the Interim period section on
page 2).

Changes in the number of firearm sale inquiries and denials, and
the rate of overall or specific categories of rejections may
reflect a variety of factors, including revisions in State laws,
policies or organization, and the availability of different
categories of records. The regular release of updated
information in these BJS documents is intended to highlight such
changes.  BJS anticipates that the procedural information
presented in this report will be used with the statistical
information about firearm checks to provide a more thorough
understanding of the impact of presale firearm check
requirements.

Survey Methodology.  Information for this report was collected
from hundreds of Federal, State and local agencies, including
law enforcement organizations, statistical analysis centers, and
legislative research bureaus. Descriptions of procedures and
statistical data were voluntarily provided. Data analysis and
supplementary legal research were provided by the Regional
Justice Information Service (REJIS), the organization conducting
the study under an award from BJS. 

To ensure accuracy, a copy of each State's summary in this
publication was forwarded to a State contact for review, and
clarifying comments were used to refine the summary.

Consistent with privacy protection procedures, the information
collected did not disclose the identity of any individual
involved in a firearm transaction.  Additionally, the software
provided to help agencies submit statistical data contains a
purging mechanism that destroys data in accordance with
applicable Federal or State law.

Background

Brady Act Provisions.  The Federal Gun Control Act (GCA), as
codified at 18 U.S.C. 922, prohibits the transfer of any firearm
to any person who --

*  is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime
   punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year 
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a
   mental institution
*  s a juvenile (less than 18 years of age for long guns and
   less than 21 years of age for handguns)  
*  is an alien unlawfully in the United States
*  was discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable
   conditions 
*  has renounced United States citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him or her from
   harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child 
*  has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of
   domestic violence, or 
*  an alien admitted to the United States under a nonimmigrant
   visa.

The Brady Act, PL 103-159 (107 Stat. 1536), amended the Gun
Control Act of 1968 (GCA), 18 U.S.C Chapter 44, and included
interim and permanent provisions.  

Interim System
From February 28, 1994, until November 30, 1998, the interim
provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), prohibited sale
of a handgun by a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) for up to five
days or until the licensee had been advised that, based on a
background check, a prospective purchaser was not prohibited
under Federal or State law.  Checks were conducted by the Chief
Law Enforcement Officer (CLEO) of the jurisdiction where the
licensee operated.  Thirty-two States (called "original Brady
States") and Puerto Rico were required to follow the review
procedures set forth in the interim provisions when they became
effective.  



The interim provisions of the Brady Act also allowed States with
prohibitory statutes comparable to Federal law to follow a
variety of alternative procedures. 

State laws that qualified under these alternatives required that
before any licensee completed the transfer of a handgun to a
non-licensee, a government official verified that possession of
a handgun by the transferee would not be a violation of law. 
These "Brady-Alternative States" generally employed either an
"instant check" or a "permit or other approval-type" system, as
designated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF).
 
By the end of the interim period, the number of States following
the Brady Act review procedures, rather than alternative State
statutes, had dropped to 23 (called "Brady States").

Permanent System:
National Instant Criminal Background Check System.  The
permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t),
required establishment of the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) by November 30, 1998.  The U.S.
Department of Justice, with the States, developed the system
during the 57-month interim Brady Act period.  

The Act allows a licensee to contact the system by telephone or
other electronic means for information, to be supplied
immediately, on whether receipt of a firearm by a prospective
transferee would violate Federal or State law.

In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the Brady Act, under
its permanent provisions, mandates that licensees request
background checks on long gun purchasers and persons who redeem a 
pawned firearm.  Licensees have the option of requesting a NICS check 
on persons who attempt to pawn a firearm.

Prospective transferees undergo a NICS check requested by a
dealer or present a State permit that ATF has qualified as an
alternative to the point-of-transfer check.  Qualifying permits 
are those which:

1) allow a transferee to possess, 
acquire or carry a firearm,and 

2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State in
which the transfer is to take place, after verification by an
authorized government official that possession of a firearm by
the transferee would not be a violation of law.  

A permit issued after November 30, 1998, qualifies as an
alternative only if the information available to the State
authority includes the NICS.

Prior to transferring a firearm subject to the permanent Brady
requirements, a licensee must receive a completed Firearm
Transaction Record (ATF Form 4473) and verify the transferee's
identity through a government-issued photo identification. The
transferee may also be required to complete a State disclosure
form.  

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI
or a point of contact (POC) agency designated by State
government.  The FBI or the POC checks Federal and State
databases and responds with a notice to the licensee that the
transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or is delayed pending
further review of the transferee's record.  If further review of
a record indicates the transfer would not violate Federal or
State law, the checking agency notifies the licensee that the
transfer may proceed.  If the licensee does not receive a
response within three business days, the transfer may proceed. 

All NICS checks by the FBI are without charge; POC fees are
determined by State law.

Under FBI regulations, persons prohibited from purchasing a
firearm may request the reason for denial from the denying
agency (FBI or POC), which has 5 business days to respond.  The
applicant may then submit information to correct the record on
which the denial was based and may be required to contact the
agency where the record originated.  

As an alternative, the applicant's challenge to the record can
be directed to the FBI, which will contact the denying agency or
the source of the record.  Persons denied by a POC may also have
appeal rights under State law.

State involvement in firearm sale regulation.  Each State
determines  its involvement in the NICS process.  Three basic
forms of State involvement currently exist:

1) a POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers
originating in the State;

2) a POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers;
licensees in the State are required to contact the FBI for
approval of long gun transfers; or

3) the State does not maintain a point of contact (POC);
licensees are required to contact the FBI for NICS checks 
on all firearm transfers originating in the State.

Participation in the NICS by POC agencies includes conducting
checks on persons who apply for State permits.  In a few States,
the FBI conducts the NICS check on certain pawn transactions
instead of the POC. 

Most States have designated a single agency as their NICS point
of contact; some States have multiple points of contact.  

The background check requirements of  the Brady Act are the
prevailing minimum for all States.  Some States have enacted
more stringent requirements.  The NICS process does not
automatically supplant State firearm sales regulations.  State
background check and permit statutes that existed before the
effective date of the NICS remain in force unless repealed by
legislative action or allowed to expire.  

The POC agencies conduct any checks and issue any permits
required by State law in addition to following procedures
mandated under the NICS. The POC agencies also conduct most
checks required by State laws; however, purchasers in six States
are required to undergo a State check and a NICS check by
different agencies (Table 5).  If agencies that conduct checks
under State law are unable to access the NICS Index, licensees
in that State are required to contact the FBI for the NICS
check.  Thus, prospective transferees in some States are
required to undergo a permit or point-of-transfer check by a
State agency and a NICS check by the FBI.

Sources of additional information. Regulations applicable to the
operation of the NICS have been promulgated by the FBI (28 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 25) and ATF(25 CFR 178).  Further
information on Federal law and BJS-related publications is
available from the following Internet sites:

ATF: http://www.atf.treas.gov/core/ 
firearms/firearms.htm

FBI: http://www.fbi.gov/programs/ 
nics/index.htm

BJS: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/


Firearm sale topics

Prohibited persons

State laws

Many States have enacted similar or additional prohibitions. The
most common categories of prohibited persons are described
below.  The number of States that have enacted prohibitions in
each category is listed in parentheses (also see table 2).

The Federal Gun Control Act's categories of prohibited persons
are the prevailing minimum for all States.  State statutes may
included more restrictive prohibitions (see Background for
Federal categories of prohibited persons).

Felons (48 States) -  Although statutory definitions vary
widely, legislation in 48 States prohibits firearm purchases by
at least some categories of felons.  Prohibitions may include
persons arrested or indicted for, or convicted of, a felony. 
Some States disqualify all felons from firearm possession. 
Other States disqualify persons who committed specific felonies,
which may be enumerated in a statute or categorized by terms
such as "crimes of violence," "serious offenses" or "firearm
offenses."  Many States extend the prohibition to persons
convicted of a felony or a similar offense in other
jurisdictions.  Only Vermont lacks a statute that bars firearm
possession by felons.  Tennessee does not have a statute that
lists disqualifying State felonies, but prohibits transfer of a
firearm to a person ineligible under Federal law.



A criminal offender's ineligibility to possess a firearm may be
temporary.  Nearly all States allow at least some offenders to
regain possession rights by executive pardon, court order,
administrative proceeding or the passage of a certain number of
years after conviction or discharge from a sentence without
further violations.  Many States require several steps before
rights are restored.  For example, persons who obtain a pardon
or maintain a clean record for a number of years may be required
to petition a court for an order restoring rights.  In some
States, certain offenders cannot regain the right to possess a
firearm.

Misdemeanor offenders (17 
States) - Generally, a misdemeanor is a crime punishable by
incarceration for less than one year.  The types of
misdemeanor-level offenses included in prohibitory statutes vary
widely.  Several State statutes prohibit firearm possession by
persons who have been convicted of a domestic violence
misdemeanor.  Other States include misdemeanors within
categories such as "crimes of violence" or "firearm offenses." 
Requirements for misdemeanor offenders to regain firearm rights
are generally less stringent than for felons.

Fugitives (12 States) - This category normally includes persons
with outstanding felony warrants and may include all wanted
persons. The Federal Gun Control Act defines "fugitives from
justice" as any person who has fled from any State to avoid
prosecution for a crime or to avoid giving testimony in a
criminal proceeding (18 U.S.C. Sec. 921 (a)(15).

Mentally Ill (32 States) - Persons prohibited under this
category are most often defined as adjudicated mentally
defective or committed to a mental institution.  In some States
the prohibition extends to persons found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity.  A person subject to
this prohibition may be able to regain firearm rights a number
of years after discharge from a mental institution, or by
presenting documentation from a mental health professional that
shows their condition has stabilized.

Subject to a Restraining Order (18 States) - Persons prohibited
under this category are usually subject to court orders intended
to prevent domestic violence.  The applicable orders (with a
variety of titles) commonly restrain the subject from contacting
or harming a spouse, former spouse, child, domestic partner or
other intimately-related person.  In a few States, the
prohibition attaches if the order specifically bars the subject
from possessing firearms.  A statute may provide that the order
becomes prohibitory when it is issued after a hearing with the
subject present (instead of ex parte) or entered into a law
enforcement information network.

Drug (28 States) or Alcohol (19 States) Abusers and Offenders -
Many States prohibit persons convicted of drug sale or
possession offenses, either through a statute that lists a
variety of disqualifying offenses or by way of a separate
statute.  A few statutes disqualify persons who committed
alcohol-related offenses such as driving while intoxicated. 
Generally, drug and alcohol offenders may regain firearm rights
in the same manner as other prohibited offenders.  Another
common prohibition involves persons addicted to drugs or
alcohol, who are described by terms such as "addicted to a
controlled substance," "habitually intoxicated," or "chronic
alcoholics."  In several States, a firearm cannot be transferred
to or possessed by a person who is intoxicated.

Juvenile Offenders (24 States) - Statutes in this category
prohibit persons who were adjudicated delinquent or committed an
act as a juvenile that would have been a disqualifying offense
if committed by an adult.  The prohibitions usually continue
into early adulthood or until the person regains firearm rights
through a pardon, court order or other process.  

In several States, persons who committed juvenile offenses must
follow the same restoration of rights procedures available to
adult offenders.

Minors (49 States) - The firearm rights of minors are often
restricted solely on the basis of age.  In most States,
restrictions apply to persons under the age of 18, with a few
States restricting persons under the age of 21.  Some States
limit only handgun possession by minors, while others limit
possession of any type of firearm.  State statutes describe many
circumstances under which minors are allowed to possess
firearms.  Generally, possession is permissible when a minor is
supervised by a parent, guardian or certified firearms
instructor.  Federal restrictions prohibit the sale of long guns
to persons under the age of 18, and under the age of 21 for
handguns.  

Other categories of prohibited persons are also defined in 
State statutes. 

Restrictions on the timing or quantity of firearm purchases
include residency rules and handgun purchase limits.  Several
States prohibit licensed dealers from selling certain firearms
to nonresidents.  Four States (Georgia, Maryland, Missouri and
Virginia) require fixed periods of residency, ranging from   1
to 6 months, before a person can purchase certain firearms. 
There are no Federal restictions on the frequency or quantity of
firearms purchased.  

Residency rules prevent nonresidents from purchasing and
reselling firearms banned in their home State.  A handgun
purchase limit of one per month prevails in Maryland, South
Carolina, and Virginia (the same limit had been enacted in
California as this publication went to press).  The limits are
intended to deter persons who would purchase large quantities of
handguns for resale to prohibited persons.

After passage of the Brady Act, many States enacted legislation
that included new categories of prohibited persons.  During the
Brady interim period (February 1994 to November 1998) the most
frequent subjects of new prohibitions were felons and other
specified offenders (14 States); minors (11 States); mentally
ill persons (10 States); domestic violence offenders, either
convicted or restrained (10 States); drug addicts or offenders
(10 States); and juvenile offenders (6 States).  Several States
modified procedures for restoration of the right to possess a
firearm, with a few States restricting the ability of certain
persons to regain their rights.  (See Presale Handgun Checks,
the Brady Interim Period, 1994-98, NCJ 175034, June 1999.)
                                                          
Regulated sales

State statutes

Firearms are sold either by dealers licensed under Federal (and
State) law, or by unlicensed persons (private sales).  Most
sales occur at the business premises of licensed dealers or at
gun shows, which may include licensed and unlicensed sellers. 
In addition to sales, firearms can be transferred in pawn
transactions, where a weapon is pledged as collateral for a loan
and can be redeemed when the loan is repaid.  Redemptions of
pawned firearms are often regulated in the same manner as sales.

Federal law requires a check through the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) of all persons who
purchase firearms from a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) or
redeem the firearm after a pawn transaction.  Licensees have the
option of requesting checks on persons who attempt to pawn a
firearm.  (See Background for further details on the NICS.)

In addition to the Brady Act, statutes or executive orders in 31
States regulate sales by federally- or State-licensed dealers. 
These States require background checks of persons seeking either
to purchase firearms or obtain State permits required for
purchase.  Of these States, 18 regulate dealer sales of all
types of firearms, 2 regulate dealer sales of handguns and
assault weapons, and 11 regulate only handgun sales by dealers. 
(See Table 5.)   

14 States regulate private sales by requiring that purchasers
obtain a permit or undergo a background check at the premises of
a licensed dealer or a law enforcement agency.  Of these States,
six regulate private sales of all types of firearms, one
regulates private sales of handguns and assault weapons, and
seven regulate only handgun sales.  (See Table 5.)  Generally,
these regulations apply to transfers initiated at any location,
whether it be a person's home, a gun show or anywhere else.  

California and Maryland are the only States with statutes that
specifically regulate gun shows.  California  requires a show
organizer to obtain a certificate of eligibility from the State
Department of Justice and provide local law enforcement with a
list of all the show's sellers.  Maryland requires that
unlicensed gun show sellers obtain a temporary transfer permit
from the State and comply with all restrictions imposed upon
sales by licensed dealers.

Several States regulate redemptions of pawned firearms in the
same manner as sales.  The pawning of any firearm is prohibited
in New Jersey, while six other States ban the pawning of
handguns (Table 4).

Statutes requiring background checks of purchasers usually allow
exceptions for certain types of persons or transactions.  Common
exemptions are those for purchases by law enforcement officers,
transfers of antique and replica firearms, and gifts or loans of
firearms from parents to minor children.

Permits

State statutes

12 States administer purchase permit systems, which vary
according to the types of weapons regulated, the duration of
permits and the number of firearms that can be purchased at one
time or during the tenure of a permit.  11 of these States
require a permit to purchase a handgun.  

In Minnesota, purchasers of handguns and assault weapons have
the option of undergoing a background check to obtain a 1-year
permit or submitting to a check each time they attempt a
purchase.

Most handgun permits have a duration of between 10 days and 1
year, with a few remaining in effect for a longer duration.  

For long gun purchases, four States require permits, which
generally remain effective for a longer period than handgun
permits.  

New Jersey's identification card for long guns remains in effect
until revoked for a violation of law; among the other three
States, the duration of the permits ranges from 1 to 5 years. 
(States with purchase permit systems are indicated in Table 5.)

The number of handguns that can be purchased by one person is
sometimes limited by a State permit.  In seven States, only one
handgun can be purchased with a permit.  Six of these States
mandate a new permit for a second handgun, with New York
requiring an amendment to the purchaser's handgun license. Five
States allow unlimited handgun purchases during the effective
period of a permit.  Unlimited purchases of rifles and shotguns
are allowed in the four States which issue long gun permits. 
Connecticut and Illinois allow unlimited purchases with a 5-year
permit, but attempt to screen out disqualified permit holders by
requiring that dealers request a check on every purchase.

Federal law does not mandate a permit to purchase firearms. 
However, State permits for purchase, carrying or other
activities can be used to exempt the holder from the national
instant check if the applicable permit meets certain
requirements of the Brady Act, in the judgment of ATF (see the
summary of the NICS in Background).

States which issue carry permits are generally categorized as
having either a "shall issue" or a "discretionary" system.  The
former system mandates issuance of a permit if no statutory
reason for denial is revealed during a background check of the
applicant.  The latter system allows a law enforcement officer
to consider the applicant's history, character and intended
purpose for carrying a firearm.

At least some carry permit holders in 35 States are exempt from
Federal or State checks (or both) when purchasing firearms
(Table 4).  In addition, a few States exempt certain permit
holders from waiting period requirements.

Concealed firearm permits usually regulate the carrying of a
handgun outside of the holder's residence or business premises. 
Restrictions on permit holders vary considerably in regard to
open carry and the premises where carrying is forbidden.  

Carry permits are required in 42 States; Vermont allows carrying
without a permit, and 7 States prohibit concealed firearms. 
With the exception of New Mexico, all of the States which
prohibit concealed firearms are in the Midwest.  

Background checks

State systems

Procedures for determining the eligibility of prospective
firearm purchasers are generally classified by ATF as "instant
check," "permit," or "other approval-type" systems. 

Instant check systems allow licensed dealers to contact a
checking agency by telephone or other electronic means and
receive a response immediately, or as soon as possible without
delay, as to whether a prospective purchaser is ineligible under
law.  

Permit systems require prospective purchasers to present
government-issued documents which verify their eligibility to
the seller (see Permits).

In other approval-type systems, sellers convey purchaser
information to a law enforcement agency by mail, telephone or
other electronic means.  The agency is not required to respond
immediately, but usually must complete checks within a statutory
time limit.

Instant check systems include the FBI's NICS operation and the
procedures of 17 States; 12 States require permits and 4 States
maintain other approval-type systems (Table 5).  (Illinois and
New Jersey are each counted twice because these States operate
permit and instant check systems.)

All instant check systems allow a firearm transfer to proceed as
soon as the checking agency informs the seller that no
disqualifying record was found on the purchaser, unless the
applicable State law requires a waiting period.  Three of the
four other approval-type systems require a mandatory waiting
period after a firearm purchase application is filed with a
seller and before the transfer can be completed (see Waiting
Periods), regardless of when the checking agency completes the
background check.  

Almost all systems limit the time allowed for an agency to
conduct a check, either by State statute or application of the
3-day limit in the Brady Act.  Some statutes permit an extension
of time for specific circumstances such as a felony arrest
without a recorded disposition.  Time limits for instant check
systems are usually 3 days or less, with longer limits common in
permit and other approval-type systems (Table 5). Background
check statutes usually allow a transfer to proceed if the seller
has not received a response from the checking agency by the end
of the applicable period.  In the past, some checking agencies
did not communicate approvals to sellers, forcing all purchasers
to wait the maximum length of time permitted.

In some States, checking agencies search local records for
disqualifying factors such as restraining orders and mental
health commitments.  (For information on State criminal history
record automation see the Survey of State Criminal History
Information Systems, 1997, NCJ 175041, April 1999).

Waiting period

State statutes

Waiting periods provide a "cooling-off" period and allow 
sufficient time for checking agencies to investigate and resolve
questions about an applicant's background.

13 States require waiting periods (Table 5), which range in
length from 1 day to 14 days.  All of these States require a
waiting period for handgun permits or purchases, with seven
States including long guns or assault weapons as well.  

Waiting periods are utilized in every region of the Nation and
are most often found in States with extensive firearm
regulations.  Exemptions from waiting periods have been enacted
in some States for law enforcement officers, holders of valid
carry permits or other specific classes of persons who have
demonstrated the ability to handle a firearm responsibly.  

Several States mandate both a waiting period and a time limit on
inquiries by a checking agency, which may or may not be the same
length of time.  The Federal instant check law (NICS) has 3 days
to respond to an inquiry, but does not mandate a waiting period
for purchasers.

The development of national and State instant check systems has
paralleled a decline in the number of States which employ a
waiting period.  Since the inception of the Brady Act in
February 1994, Oregon, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Tennessee
implemented instant check systems and eliminated State waiting
periods, with the latter three States making the change during
1998.  In addition, California reduced the length of its waiting
period in 1997.  

Retention of 
records/registration

State statutes

Requirements relating to retaining information from approved and
denied firearm transactions (including limitations on the types
of information that can be maintained or the length of time such
records can be retained) vary among States.

Retention of information on approved firearm transactions is
limited by Federal and State laws.   In contrast, retention of
information on denied transactions is seldom limited, due to its
usefulness in facilitating appeals and the future identification
of prohibited persons.

33 States require a permit, point-of-sale background check or
waiting period before a firearm transfer can be completed. 
Checking agencies in nearly half these States retain records of
approved transactions for less than 90 days, under State law or
agency regulations.  In contrast, nearly all agencies retain
records of denied transactions indefinitely or for a specific
length of time longer than 90 days.  (See Table 6.)  In some
States, retention periods vary by type of data.  Eight States
either require registration (for at least some firearms) or
retain all records from approved transactions.  Several State
statutes prohibit registration of firearms.

Appeals of denials 

State statutes

Appeal procedures for firearm denials provide specific means by
which citizens can challenge decisions relating to firearm
purchase eligibility.  These appeals often serve the practical
purposes of resolving questions of identity and updating
incomplete criminal history records.

Specific appeal procedures are codified in Federal law and in
the laws of nearly all States which require background checks of
prospective firearm purchasers.  The most common State procedure
provides an appeal to the checking agency and a subsequent
appeal to a court.  

Procedures for the initial appeal tend to be relatively
informal; some agencies allow a denied person to initiate a
review with a telephone request.  

In some States, a government agency or officer not affiliated
with the checking agency performs an administrative review at
the first or second appellate level.  Other agencies involved in
firearm appeals are those maintaining criminal history,
restraining order, mental health or other records which could
disqualify an applicant.

Appeals often arise when a denied person claims that he or she
is not the individual named in a disqualifying record found by
the checking agency.  To resolve the identity question, the
appellant will ordinarily submit fingerprints (if they are not
already on file) which will be checked against Federal and/or
State arrestee print records.  If the appellant's prints do not
match any records on file, the denial can be reversed.  


Another common appeal issue arises when a denied person claims
that a disqualifying record is incomplete.  For example, if a
background check reveals a felony charge without a recorded
disposition, the checking agency may issue a denial.  The
applicant can have the denial reversed by submitting court
records to prove that the charge was subsequently dismissed.  

Alternatively, an appeal procedure may allow a denied person to
request that the appellate agency contact the agency of record
to inquire about a missing disposition.

Existing data indicates that the vast majority of disputed
firearm denials are resolved at the administrative level, and
are rarely appealed to the courts.  The paucity of court appeals
is not surprising because most disputes turn upon the accuracy
of records, not upon an interpretation of the law. (For Federal
provisions see the Federal System section on page 13.)

Information included in the Federal 
and State summaries

References on this page to "State" include all jurisdictions
summarized (the United States and each State, Territory,
Commonwealth and District).  Topics listed are not alphabetized;
they follow the order of presentation used in the summaries. 
Laws that apply nationwide are included in the Federal summary
and generally not repeated elsewhere.  State participation in
the NICS is described in sub-headings for the summaries.

Prohibited persons.  Categories of persons prohibited
permanently or temporarily from purchasing or possessing
firearms.  Includes residency rules, handgun limits and other
restrictions on purchase.

Restoration of rights.  Pardons, court procedures or other means
by which adult or juvenile offenders can regain the right to
possess or purchase firearms.

Regulated sales.  Transfers of firearms that cannot be completed
until the transferee has obtained a permit or undergone a
background check at the point of sale.  Includes types of
transferors (licensed or unlicensed), firearms (handguns, long
guns, etc.) and transactions (sale, redemption, etc.) regulated.

Permits.  Documents (whether entitled permit, license,
identification card etc.) issued by a law enforcement agency
which are required for the purchase, possession or carrying of
firearms.

Background checks.  Procedures and requirements for conducting
criminal history and other checks on firearms purchasers or
permit applicants under Federal and State laws, including time
limits imposed on checking agencies.

Waiting period.  A period of time after a firearm purchase
application is filed with a seller or a permit application is
filed with a law enforcement agency, which must expire before
transfer of the firearm or issuance of the permit can be
completed.

Information from applicants.  Required or optional information
provided by persons applying for a purchase from a firearm
seller or for a purchase permit from a law enforcement agency.

Purchaser fees.  The amounts charged to firearms purchasers for
background checks or the issuance of documents needed for
purchase.

State data.  Databases maintained by State agencies which are
normally available to checking agencies during the course of a
background check on a prospective firearm purchaser.

Check processing time.  The length of time needed, on average,
for checking agencies to complete background checks on routine
transactions and those which require additional research on
missing dispositions and other questions.

Retention of records.  Time limits on retention of data from
approved and denied firearm transactions by checking agencies
and other agencies, based on Federal or State law or agency
policies.

Registration.  State procedures for maintaining permanent
records on firearms and firearms owners.

Appeals of denials.  Statutory or administrative procedures for
appealing a denial of the right to purchase a firearm or obtain
a permit required for purchase.

Arrests of denied persons.  Arrest and notification procedures
followed by checking agencies in regard to persons who are
denied a firearm or a permit because they submitted false
information or have an outstanding warrant.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  The number of firearm applications
(point-of-sale or permit) and denials, and the denial rate for
States that maintained statewide data, during the interim
(1/1/98 to 11/29/98) or permanent (11/30/98 to 6/30/99) Brady
period.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Summaries of revisions of
Brady-related procedures and other significant changes in State
firearms laws which became effective between January 1, 1998 and
June 30, 1999.

Relevant laws.  Citations to statutes governing the transfer,
possession and use of firearms.

Source of information.  State agencies that contributed to the
survey.

Jurisdictional summaries

Federal system

Prohibited persons.  Federal law prohibits transfer of a firearm
to a person who is: under indictment for or convicted of a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year; a fugitive; an
unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance;
adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a mental
institution; an illegal alien; dishonorably discharged from the
armed forces; a renounced U. S. citizen; restrained by court
order from harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate
partner or child; convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime
of domestic violence; or less than 18 years of age (long guns)
or less than 21 years of age (handguns).

Restoration of rights.  Federal firearm rights can be restored
by a presidential pardon or by ATF; agency decisions can be
appealed to Federal district court.

Regulated sales.  Record checks through the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) are required on persons
who purchase firearms or redeem pawned firearms from
federally-licensed dealers.  The dealers have the option of
requesting a check when a firearm is pawned.

Permits.  Federal law does not require a permit to purchase 
a firearm.

Background checks.  NICS checks are conducted by the FBI and
State point of contact (POC) agencies. Dealers contact the
system by telephone or other electronic means and receive an
immediate response as to whether a transfer may proceed, may not
proceed or will be delayed pending further review.  If no
response is received within 3 business days, the transfer may
proceed.

Waiting period.  No Federal requirements.

Information from applicants.  The standard ATF form used by
licensed dealers requires the purchaser's first name, last name,
date of birth, place of birth, current address, sex, height,
weight, and race.  A social security, alien registration or
military identification number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  NICS checks by the FBI are without charge; 
POC fees are determined by State law.

Federal data.  The three major Federal databases are Interstate
Identification Index (III), containing criminal histories;
National Crime Information Center (NCIC), containing fugitive,
protection order and deported felons data; NICS Index,
containing denied person, dishonorable discharge, renunciation
of citizenship, mental health, drug abuser and illegal alien
data.

Check processing time.  For NICS checks by the FBI, immediate
"proceed" responses are provided, on average, within 30 seconds;
80% of delayed checks are completed within 2 hours.  Overall,
73% of the checks result in an immediate proceed and 95% are
completed within 2 hours.

Retention of records.  Information on applicants denied by the
FBI is retained indefinitely.  Information on transfers allowed
by the FBI is not retained, except for certain items which may
be retained not more than 6 months for auditing purposes.

Registration.  No Federal requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied by a NICS check can appeal
to the denying agency (FBI or POC), and may be required to
contact the agency which originated the disqualifying record. 
As an alternative, the appellant can ask the FBI to review a POC
denial.  A further appeal may be filed in Federal district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  The FBI refers Federal law violators
to ATF.

1998/1999 firearm checks handled by the FBI.  11/30/98 to
6/30/99: 2,295,013 applied; 49,160 denied by the FBI (does not
include denials by States serving as POCs), 2.1% denial rate for
checks by the FBI.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  The NICS took effect on
11/30/98, adding long gun and pawn redemption checks.

Relevant laws.  United States Code 18-922 et seq. 

Source of information. FBI, NICS Program Office.

Alabama

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Alabama law prohibits delivering a handgun
to any person under the age of 18 or to one who the seller has
reasonable cause to believe has been convicted of a crime of
violence or is a drug addict, an habitual drunkard or of unsound
mind.

Restoration of rights.  State law does not provide for
restoration of firearm rights.

Regulated sales.  Background check on firearms purchasers are
not required by State law.  Pawning handguns is prohibited.

Permits.  Alabama does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  Alabama requires a 48-hour waiting period
(beginning when application is filed) before completion of a
handgun transfer, regardless of when a background check is
completed.

Information from applicants.  The State's form requires a
handgun purchaser's first name, last name, place of birth,
current address, occupation and race, and a statement that the
person has never been convicted of a crime of violence.  The
form also contains the date and hour of application plus the
make, model, caliber and manufacturer's weapon number.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Alabama makes fugitive, criminal history,
probation/parole, and domestic violence restraining order data
is available to State and local checking agencies and the FBI
via the statewide computer network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Under State law, handgun sellers are
required to forward copies of purchaser statements by registered
or certified mail to the chief of police of the municipality or
the sheriff of the county where the seller is a resident, and to
the director of public safety.  State law does not specify a
retention period.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI may
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Code of Alabama 13A-11-50 et seq.

Source of information.  Alabama Bureau of Investigation; Alabama
Criminal Justice Information Center.

Alaska

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Alaska law prohibits handgun possession by
or sale to a person who was convicted of a felony or adjudicated
a delinquent minor for conduct that would constitute a felony if
committed by an adult.  It is illegal for a firearm to be
possessed by or sold to a person whose physical or mental
condition is substantially impaired by intoxicating liquor or
controlled substances.  An unemancipated minor under 16 years of
age cannot possess a firearm without the consent of a parent or
guardian.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to own a handgun to be restored if the conviction is
pardoned or set aside.  If at least 10 years have elapsed since
the offender's unconditional discharge, firearm rights are
restored except for those who committed felony "crimes against
persons."

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers.

Permits.  Alaska does not require a permit to purchase firearms.
A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks. The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows a concealed handgun
permit to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Alaska maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history and domestic violence restraining order data on a
statewide network.  Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions
can be identified from records created after January 15, 1998.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm may 
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information 
is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments prohibited
possession of a firearm within a school bus, courthouse, or
State-funded domestic violence or sexual assault shelter.  The
background check, qualifications, fees, suspension and
exemptions sections of the concealed weapon statutes were
amended, and a reciprocity section was added.

Relevant laws.  Alaska Statutes 11.61.190 et seq; 18.65.700 
et seq.

Source of information.  Alaska Department of Public 
Safety.

Arizona

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Arizona law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person previously convicted of a felony or
adjudicated delinquent.  It is illegal to knowingly transfer a
firearm to a person who intends to use the firearm in the
commission of any felony.  A firearm cannot be transferred to or
possessed by a minor except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Adult felons convicted of "dangerous
offenses" cannot regain the right to possess firearms.  All
other felons discharged from probation must wait a certain
length of time, depending on the offense, before applying for a
court order to restore firearm rights.  For adult felons, the
waiting period is 10 years for "serious offenses" and 2 years
for other offenses.  For juvenile felons, the waiting period is
until age 30 for dangerous and serious offenses and 2 years for
most other offenses.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Arizona does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  Carrying a concealed weapon requires a permit.

Background checks.  The Arizona Department of Public Safety is a
point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required
by Federal and State law.  Dealers contact the Department's
Firearm Clearance Center (FCC) by 1-800 number, regular
telephone or fax.  Transactions can be delayed up to 3 business
days.  ATF allows a concealed weapon permit to be used for a
purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Purchasers complete the standard
ATF form.  No separate State form is required.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Arizona maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history (including probation/parole) data on a
statewide network.  In addition, FCC has access to sex offender
registration and department of corrections data.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes.  Transactions requiring
additional research normally are completed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  Records are retained for a maximum period
of 20 days on approved transactions  and 5 years on disapproved
transactions.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm may appeal to the
Arizona FCC.

Arrests of denied persons.  FCC notifies ATF of applicants who
submit false information.  Applicants denied because of a felony
warrant are reported to the State Police Fugitive Detail. 
Persons with non-felony warrants are informed that they must
clear the warrants in order to receive firearms.

1998/1999 firearm checks. 1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 54,754 applied;
1,950 denied; 3.6% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 83,122
applied; 2,549 denied; 3.1% denial rate.


1998/1999 legislative developments.  An amendment changed the
checking agency's name to the Firearm Clearance Center and
authorized it to conduct checks on all firearms (as defined by
Federal law).

Relevant laws.  Arizona Revised Statutes 13-905 et seq; 13-3101
et seq.

Source of information.  Arizona Department of Public Safety.

Arkansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Arkansas law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who are under the age of 18 (except in
limited circumstances) or who have been convicted of felonies,
adjudicated mentally ill or committed involuntarily to any
mental institution.  It is illegal to furnish a firearm to a
minor without  the consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  The governor can restore a felon's right
to own a firearm upon a recommendation from a chief law
enforcement officer if the underlying offense did not involve
the use of a weapon and occurred more than 8 years ago. 
Restoration of rights can also occur with a pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  Arkansas does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Arkansas contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS. ATF allows a concealed handgun
permit issued before 11/30/98 to be used for a purchase without
a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history and
domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor data are
available on the statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI may
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks. 1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 28,835 applied;
1,397 denied; 4.8% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: No
statewide information available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Arkansas Code 5-73-101 et seq.

Source of information.  Arkansas State Police and the Office of
the Attorney General.

California

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  California prohibits possession of firearms
by certain persons who were convicted of  felonies or
misdemeanors specified in State law; are addicted to any
narcotic drug; are prohibited as a condition of probation; are
subject to restraining orders; were adjudged wards of the
juvenile court (until age 30); or are mentally ill as defined in
State law.  A firearm cannot be transferred to a minor except in
limited circumstances.  Handgun buyers must complete a safety
course or show proof of exemption.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights can be restored if the
subject is granted a governor's pardon or if the underlying case
is reopened and the subject is allowed to plead to a lesser
charge.  Persons convicted of specified misdemeanors can have
their rights restored by the proper court; those who committed
disqualifying acts as juveniles can have their right to possess
a firearm automatically restored at age 30 if no additional
violations occur.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by state-licensed dealers and unlicensed individuals
(including gun shows), and for pawnshop redemptions processed
through dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase handguns or long
guns.  Carrying a concealed firearm requires a license.  A
permit is required to possess a machine gun or an assault weapon.

Background checks.  The California Department of Justice (DOJ)
is a NICS point of contact and conducts all checks required by
Federal and State law.  Private sales are processed through a
licensed dealer or a law enforcement agency.  Dealers contact
DOJ by telephone or computerized "point-of-sale device."

Waiting period.  Ten days for all firearms, regardless of when a
background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  The Dealer's Record of Sale (DROS)
standardized form requires a buyer's name, alias, sex, home
address, local address if traveling, California driver's
license, California ID card or military ID card number (with
duty orders showing a station in the State), Basic Firearms
Safety Certificate or exemption number, height, weight, descent,
hair color, eye color, responses to questions concerning
potential prohibited status, and date of application.

Purchaser fees.  DOJ charges $14 for a check on a single handgun
or an unlimited number of long guns and $10 for additional
handguns purchased at the same time.

State data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history,
domestic abuse restraining order/conviction, probation/parole,
juvenile and mental health data.

Check processing time.  Background checks are processed within
the 10-day waiting period.

Retention of records.  Data on approved long gun transactions
can be retained for 5 days; data on prohibited long gun
transfers is retained indefinitely.  Other transaction data are
retained indefinitely on microfiche if entered prior to April 1,
1997, or in an automated file if entered after that date.

Registration.  Handguns are not registered, but the automated
files maintain a record of handgun transfers.  New residents
must report handgun ownership.  Assault weapons are registered.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm can appeal to
California DOJ.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified
applications or outstanding warrants, DOJ informs the agency
with jurisdiction over the individual.  Persons with warrants
cannot receive a firearm if a conviction would disqualify them.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 304,188 applied;
2,889 denied; 0.9% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 251,820
applied; 2,601 denied; 1.0% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments included
authorization for the State to participate in the NICS.

Relevant laws.  California Penal Code 417.3; 626.9; 12000 et
seq; Family Code 6389.

Source of information.  California Department of Justice.

Colorado

FBI conducts NICS checks (through 7/31/99)
State requests NICS checks (beginning 8/1/99)

[Note: This summary includes procedures for Colorado's instant
check system which was not operating as of 6/30/99 but was
reinstated effective 8/1/99.  See 1998/1999 legislation below.]

Prohibited persons.  Colorado law forbids transfer of a firearm
to any person who is prohibited under local, State or Federal
law from possessing a handgun; convicted of crimes involving
force against a spouse or child; or subject to a restraining
order.  Firearms cannot be possessed by certain previous
offenders and by persons adjudicated for acts which would be
felonies if committed by adults.  Handguns cannot be possessed
by persons under the age of 18 except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Felons and juvenile offenders can regain
firearm rights if they receive a pardon from the president or
the governor.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Colorado does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Colorado Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by Federal and State law.  Dealers request instant
checks by using a 1-800 number.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Colorado's application includes
the purchaser's name, address, race, sex, and date of birth.  A
Social Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  No fees are charged.

State data.  Colorado maintains  fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole and domestic abuse
restraining order/misdemeanor data on a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are processed in
less than 1 minute; transactions requiring additional research
are processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  The CBI purges information from approved
transactions within 48 hours; information from denied
transactions is purged after 2 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm can appeal to the
CBI.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 41,383 applied;
2,804 denied; 6.8% denial rate. 11/30/98 to 3/31/99:  35,561
applied; 2,412 denied; 6.8% denial rate .

1998/1999 legislative developments.  An amendment changed the
instant check statute's repeal date to coincide with the 
implementation date of the NICS.  Under an executive order, CBI
operated as a NICS point of contact from 11/30/98 to 3/31/99. 
The FBI conducted all NICS checks for the State from 4/1/99 to
7/31/99.  An executive order effective 8/1/99 reinstated CBI as
the point of contact.

Relevant laws.  Colorado Revised Statutes 12-26.5-101 et seq;
18-12-101 et seq.

Source of information.  Colorado Bureau of Investigation.  

Connecticut

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Connecticut prohibits issuing eligibility
certificates or pistol permits for handguns to persons who did
not complete a firearm safety course; have been convicted of a
felony, a domestic violence misdemeanor or any of 11 other
specified misdemeanors; have been discharged from custody within
the preceding 20 years after having been found not guilty of a
crime by reason of mental disease; were confined to a hospital
for mental illness within the preceding 12 months by court
order; are subject to a restraining or protective order; are
illegal aliens; are under the age of 21; or were convicted as
delinquent for the commission of a serious juvenile offense.

Restoration of rights.  An offender's firearm rights can be
restored if he or she previously possessed a pistol permit and
the Board of Pardons clears the conviction from the record.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who apply for permits, redeem firearms or make a
purchase from a licensed dealer or an unlicensed individual.

Permits.  An eligibility certificate or pistol permit is
required to purchase handguns without a 14-day waiting period. 
Both documents are valid for 5 years and allow unlimited
purchases.  An authorization number is also required at the time
of sale.  A permit is not required to purchase long guns;
however, a 14-day waiting period is required without a pistol
permit, eligibility certificate or hunting license.  The pistol
permit is also required to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  The Connecticut State Police (CSP) is a NICS
point of contact, conducting all checks required by Federal and
State law.  Checks are conducted on applicants for pistol  and
eligibility certificates and on firearm purchasers.  ATF allows
a pistol permit issued before 11/30/98 to be used in lieu of a
NICS check (State law still requires a check at the time of
purchase).  CSP can be contacted in person or by an in- State
number (1-888-335-8438), regular telephone, mail, certified mail
or fax.

Waiting period.  A 14-day waiting period is required for all
firearm transfers without proper permits (beginning when
application is filed), regardless of when a background check is
completed.

Information from applicants.  A firearm purchase application
requires the buyer's, name, address, race, sex, height, weight,
date of birth, operator's license numbers, and date of
application.   Dealer information and the sale authorization
number is also included.  A Social Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  A maximum fee of $35 will be charged for pistol
permits and eligibility certificates.

State data.  The State maintains fugitive, criminal history,
probation/parole, domestic abuse restraining order/misdemeanor,
mental health and juvenile data.

Check processing time.  Routine purchase transactions are
normally processed in less than 15 minutes; those which require
additional research normally are processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  The State retains denied applications to
buy firearms for 10 years.  Dealers keep approved applications
for at least 5 years.

Registration.  The state's firearm registration form includes
sale, weapon, buyer and seller information.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied permits can appeal to the
CSP and further to the Board of Firearm Permit Examiners.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified
applications or outstanding warrants, CSP informs the agency
with jurisdiction over the individual.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 26,981 applied;
153 denied; 0.6% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 27,159
applied; 123 denied; 0.5 % denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  An amendment barred issuing
a pistol permit or an eligibility certificate to a person who
has been convicted as delinquent for the commission of a serious
juvenile offense.

Relevant laws.  Connecticut General Statutes 29-27 et seq;
53-202 et seq; 53-217a.

Source of information.  Connecticut State Police, Special
Licensing and Firearms Unit (860-685-8290).

Delaware

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Delaware law prohibits purchase or
possession of firearms by certain persons who are convicted of 
felonies or crimes of violence; committed for mental disorders
to any hospital, mental institution, or sanitarium; convicted
for unlawful use, possession, or sale of narcotics; subject to
protection from abuse orders; or adjudicated delinquent for
conduct which if committed by an adult would constitute a
felony.  Juveniles cannot own, possess or control handguns
without adult supervision.


Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a
firearm may be restored through a governor's pardon.  Persons
who committed disqualifying misdemeanors regain firearm rights 5
years after conviction; those who committed disqualifying
juvenile offenses regain their rights at age 25.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required for sales of
handguns and rifles by licensed dealers, and are optional for
private sales.  Shotgun purchases are exempt.

Permits.  Delaware does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  Licensed dealers call the Delaware State
Police (DSP)  for instant checks under State law, by using a
1-800 number.  DSP has a maximum of 3 days to complete a check. 
Holders of concealed handgun permits are exempt from the check
required by State law.  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS; dealers must contact the FBI for all NICS checks.  ATF
allows a concealed handgun permit issued before 11/30/98 to be
used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Delaware requires an applicant's
name, address, race, sex, date of birth, Social Security number
and date of application.  If the application is rejected, the
type, make, model and serial number of the weapon are recorded.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Delaware maintains fugitive, criminal history,
probation/parole, juvenile, mental health and domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor data on a statewide network. 
These files are  fully automated except for mental health, which
is partially automated.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 6 minutes.  Transactions requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 14
minutes.

Retention of records.  DSP retains records of approved
transactions for 60 days and records of denied transactions
indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied under State law can appeal
to DSP and further to superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified
applications, DSP informs the agency with jurisdiction over the
individual.  When a person is denied because of an outstanding
warrant, the agency with jurisdiction over the dealer is
notified in order to apprehend the suspect.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 9,745 applied;
443 denied; 4.5% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: No statewide
information available. 

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments added persons
subject to protection from abuse orders or convicted of 
domestic violence misdemeanors to those barred from purchasing
or possessing firearms.

Relevant laws.  Delaware Code 11-1441 et seq.

Source of information.  Delaware State Police.

Florida

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Florida prohibits the sale of firearms to
persons who have been convicted of  felonies, delinquent acts
that would be felonies if committed by an adult, or a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence; had adjudication of
guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on a felony
charge and 3 years have not elapsed since the completion date of
any court provisions; have been indicted for a felony; are
subject to a protective order; have been arrested for a
"dangerous crime," or other offenses enumerated in State law; or
are under  the age of 18.  

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to own firearms to be restored through a pardon from the
jurisdiction where the felony conviction occurred.  A person
convicted of a delinquent act that would be a felony if
committed by an adult can regain firearm rights when the
jurisdiction of the court expires.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by licensed importers, manufacturers and dealers. 
Pawnshop redemptions are also subject to checks.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms.  A license
is needed to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Florida Department of Law Enforcement
(FDLE) is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks
required by Federal and State law.  Checks on firearms redeemed
within 90 days of being pawned are conducted by the FBI; if
redeemed after 90 days, the check is conducted by FDLE.  ATF
allows concealed firearm licenses issued before 11/30/98 to be
used for purchases without a NICS check.  Under State law, if a
purchaser is not disapproved within 3 business days, the
transaction can be completed.

Waiting period.  Handgun purchases require a 3-day waiting
period (beginning when application is filed), regardless of when
a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  State law requires the purchaser's
name, date of birth, gender, race, and Social Security or other
identification number.


Purchaser fees.  FDLE charges $8 for the background check.

State data.  The State maintains fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence misdemeanor/restraining order, juvenile and
probation/parole data.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 4 minutes.  Transactions requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  Information on approved transactions is
destroyed within 2 days after the day of the response to the
licensee's request.  Information on denied transactions is
retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied firearms can 
appeal to FDLE.

Arrests of denied persons.  FDLE reports persons who falsify
their applications to ATF and the State agency with jurisdiction
over the individual.  Persons with outstanding warrants are
reported to the agency with jurisdiction over the person and to
the agency with jurisdiction over the dealer.  Denied persons
are reported to ATF, special agency personnel and local police
(monthly, by the Office of Statewide Intelligence).

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 160,438 applied;
5,499 denied; 3.4% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 134,026
applied; 3,637 denied; 2.7% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative.developments.  A new statute prohibited
firearm possession by a person restrained from committing acts
of domestic violence by a final injunction.  An amendment
extended the duration of carry licenses.

Relevant laws.  Florida Statutes 790.001 et seq.

Source of information.  Florida Department of Law Enforcement.

Georgia

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Georgia law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who have been convicted of felonies. 
Persons under the age of 18 can possess handguns in certain
circumstances unless they have been adjudicated delinquent. 
Firearms cannot be sold to persons who are prohibited by State
or Federal law or who have not resided in the State for at least
3 months.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon can regain the right
to possess firearms if the person is granted a pardon and the
Pardon and Parole Board specifically restores possession rights.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
firearm sales by licensed dealers and on redemptions which occur
more than 1 year after the firearm is pawned.

Permits.  Georgia does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) is
a point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks required by
Federal and State law.  Holders of concealed handgun permits are
exempt from sale checks under an ATF ruling and State law. 
Dealers request instant checks by using a 1-800 number.  The GBI
is allowed 1 day under State law to complete a check.  The time
allowed can be extended if the applicant's criminal history
record is not immediately available (no extension limit is
stated in the statute).

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The state's form requires the
purchaser's name, sex, race and date of birth, plus a Social
Security or other identification number.

Purchaser fees.  GBI charges $5 for the background check.

State data.  The State maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation and parole, mental health, and
domestic violence misdemeanor data.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes; transactions requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  The Georgia Consent Form is attached to
ATF 4473 and retained by the dealer.  The GBI does not retain
information on approved sales; data on denied transactions is
retained for 90 days.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied firearms can appeal to the
GBI and further to superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons who falsify applications or
have outstanding warrants are reported by the GBI to the agency
with jurisdiction over the individual.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to11/29/98: 74,977 applied;
6,326 denied; 8.4% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 138,849
applied; 8,972 denied; 6.5% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  An executive order allowed
the State to participate in the NICS.

Relevant laws.  Official Code of Georgia 16-11-101.1 et seq;
16-11-170 et seq.

Source of information.  Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Crime
Information Center.

Hawaii

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Hawaii law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who is a fugitive; indicted for or convicted
of a felony, a crime of violence or an illegal drug sale;
addicted to drugs or alcohol; acquitted of a crime on grounds of
mental disease; diagnosed as having significant behavioral,
emotional or mental disorders; or subject to a restraining
order.  A U.S. citizen must be 21 or more years of  age to apply
for a permit to acquire.  A long gun cannot be transferred to a
person under the age of 18 except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to own a handgun to be restored through a governor's
pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law requires a permit for all purchases
from licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  A permit to acquire, valid for 10 days, is needed for
every purchase of a handgun. A permit to acquire, valid for one
year, is needed for unlimited purchases of long guns.  A license
is needed to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  Four police departments are points of
contact for the NICS and conduct checks required by Federal and
State law on applicants for permits to acquire.  Under State
law, all permit applications must be approved or denied within
20 days.  ATF allows permits to acquire and licenses to carry to
be used for purchases in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  A 14-day waiting period is required (beginning
when application is filed) before issuance of a permit to
acquire, regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  Hawaii requires a permit
applicant's name, home address, business address, race, sex,
height, weight, date and place of birth, hair and eye color,
Social Security number, photograph, and mental health history. 
Occupation, aliases, nicknames, maiden name, and scars, marks
and tattoos are optional.  First-time applicants must submit
fingerprints.

Purchaser fees.  First-time applicants are charged $24 to
subsidize the FBI fingerprint check.

State data.  The State maintains an automated control repository
which includes criminal history and domestic violence
misdemeanor data.  Mental health data are recorded manually.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Data on approved and denied applications
is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  All firearms are required to be registered in
Hawaii.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide an appeal
procedure.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is
available.  

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Hawaii Revised Statutes 134-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Hawaii Criminal Justice Information
Center; Honolulu Police Department.

Idaho

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Idaho law does not allow convicted felons
to ship, transport, possess or receive firearms.  A firearm
cannot be sold to or possessed by a minor under the age of 18
without the consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  Certain felons regain possession rights
upon completion of imprisonment, probation or parole.  Other
felons, except for those convicted of specified offenses, may
apply to the commission of pardons and parole for restoration 5
years after final discharge.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms.  A permit
is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Idaho contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Idaho maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history and domestic violence protective
order/misdemeanor data on a statewide network, as well as a sex
offender registry.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.


Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 18,539 applied;
772 denied; 4.2% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: No statewide
information available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  An amendment added crimes
for which conviction will suspend the right to ship, transport,
possess or receive a firearm.  The state's instant background
check law expired on 11/30/98.

Relevant laws.  Idaho Code 18-3302 et seq.

Source of information.  Idaho Department of Law Enforcement.

Illinois

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Firearm Owners Identification (FOID) cards
cannot be issued to persons who are prohibited by any Illinois
State statute or Federal law.  State law prohibits persons who
are under 21 years of age and have been convicted of 
misdemeanors other than a traffic offenses or adjudged
delinquent; under 21 and lack parental consent to possess
firearms; convicted felons; drug addicts; mentally ill or
retarded; illegal aliens; subject to protective orders; or
convicted of firearm or domestic violence offenses.

Restoration of rights.  Convicted felons may regain firearm
rights if they are granted relief from Illinois convictions. 
Persons who committed forcible felonies must complete their
sentence and 20 years without additional violations before
applying for relief.  Applications for relief are made to the
director of the State Police, whose decision can be appealed to
the circuit court.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required on permit
applicants, and on persons who purchase or redeem firearms from
licensed dealers.  Checks are not required for sales between
unlicensed individuals; however, records of such transactions
must be retained for 10 years.

Permits.  Illinois requires residents to possess a valid FOID
card in order to purchase firearms or ammunition.  The card is
valid for 5 years with no limit on the number of firearms
purchased.  The State does not issue concealed firearm permits. 

Background checks.  The Illinois State Police (ISP) is a  point
of contact for the NICS and conducts background checks required
by Federal and State law.  Checks are conducted on applicants
for FOID cards, with a maximum of 30 days allowed to process an
application.  When a valid card is used for a purchase, the
dealer requests an instant check through the Firearm Transfer
Inquiry Program (FTIP) Unit of ISP, using one of two 1-900
numbers.

Waiting period.  The wait is 24 hours for a long gun and 72
hours for a handgun (beginning when application is filed),
regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  A FOID card application includes
the name, address, date of birth, race, sex height, weight, eye
color, hair color, recent picture and answers to specific
questions regarding eligibility factors. An FTIP transaction
requires the dealer and FOID card numbers.

Purchaser fees.  ISP charges $5 for a FOID card and $2 for an
FTIP inquiry at the time of purchase.

State data.  Automated files with fugitive, criminal history and
conviction data are maintained on a statewide network.  Other
files cover mental health, juveniles, and domestic violence
orders and convictions.

Check processing time.  FTIP purchase inquiries requiring
limited analysis are completed in less than 1 minute.  Inquiries
requiring complete analysis are completed within 24-72 hours,
depending on the type of firearm.  

Retention of records.  Data on approved FTIP transactions from
1-900 calls are retained for 3 months; data  on denied
transactions is retained indefinitely.  FOID card applications
are retained on microform.

Registration.  Firearms are registered by some local
governments, but not by the State.

Appeals of denials.  A denial or revocation of a FOID card can
be appealed to the director of the State Police, and further to
the circuit court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are reported by ISP to the agency with jurisdiction over the
fugitive.  Denied persons are referred to a unit within ISP,
which ananlyzes denial information and reports significant
violations to ATF.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98:  146,970 applied;
1,490 denied; 1.0% denial rate.  11/29/98 to 6/30/99:  99,912
applied; 861 denied; 0.9% denial rate (FTIP transactions).

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments barred domestic
violence offenders and federal law violators from receiving a
FOID card.

Relevant laws.  Compiled Statutes 430:65/0.01 et seq; 720:5/24-1
et seq; 725:5/112A-14.5.

Source of information.  Illinois State Police.

Indiana

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Indiana law prohibits transfers of handguns
and assault weapons to persons under 21 years of age, except in
limited circumstances.  Further, it is unlawful to transfer a
handgun to a person who is convicted of a felony; adjudicated a
delinquent child for an act that would be a felony if committed
by an adult; a drug abuser; an alcohol abuser; or mentally
incompetent.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a
handgun can be restored by post-conviction relief or a
governor's pardon.  Persons who have been adjudicated delinquent
can regain their rights at age 23.

Regulated sales.  Background checks on handgun purchasers are
required under State law for sales by licensed dealers. 
Handguns cannot be pawned in the State.

Permits.  Indiana does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A handgun license is required for personal protection
(carrying concealed), hunting and target shooting.

Background checks.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the
FBI for checks of persons purchasing or redeeming long guns. 
The Indiana State Police (ISP) is a partial point of contact for
the NICS and conducts telephone instant checks of handgun
purchasers.  A maximum of 1 business day is allowed to complete
a check.  ATF and State rules allow personal protection, hunting
and target permits to be used for purchases in lieu of the NICS
check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Handgun purchasers must provide
the following: name, address, sex, race, place of birth, date of
birth, height, weight, Social Security number and fingerprints
plus the date and hour of the transfer.

Fees charged.  The ISP charges $3 for an instant check, $5 for a
hunting and target license, and $15 for a personal protection
license.

State data.  Indiana maintains fully automated criminal history
data on a statewide network.

Inquiry process.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  Limited data on approved transactions can
be retained by ISP for not more than one year; other data on
approvals can be retained for up to 30 days.  Data on denied
transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns are voluntarily registered in Indiana;
there are no State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a handgun can appeal to ISP
or the agency with the disqualifying record.  A further appeal
lies to the circuit court.

Arrests of denied persons.  ISP reports persons who falsify
their applications to ATF.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are reported to the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 79,022 applied;
998 denied; 1.3% denial rate.  11/29/98 to 6/30/99: 49,736
applied; 1,373 denied; 2.8% denial rate.  

1998/1999 legislative developments.  A new chapter established a
statewide instant check system for handgun sales.

Relevant laws.  Indiana Code 35-47-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Indiana State Police.

Iowa

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Applicants for permits to acquire pistols
and revolvers must meet all Federal requirements for possessing
firearms.  Additionally, Iowa law prohibits handgun sales to
persons who are less than 21 years of age; convicted of
felonies; addicted to alcohol or a controlled substance; have 
histories of repeated acts of violence; have been convicted of
certain misdemeanor crimes of assault; or have been adjudged
mentally incompetent.

Restoration of rights.  Iowa allows a convicted felon's right to
own a handgun to be restored through a pardon or a special
restoration of rights with firearms privileges.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun
sales by licensed dealers, pawnshops and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  Iowa requires an annually renewed permit to acquire
handguns unless the purchaser holds a valid permit to carry
firearms.  An unlimited number of handguns can be purchased with
either permit.

Background checks.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the
FBI for checks on long gun purchasers.  Ninety-nine county
sheriffs and the Iowa Department of Public Safety (for State
employees and non- residents) are the partial points of contact
for the NICS, conducting checks of applicants for permits to
acquire handguns.  The sheriffs check handgun redemptions by
persons with State permits; all other redemptions are checked by
the FBI.  ATF allows permits to acquire or carry to be used for
a purchase in lieu of a NICS check.

Waiting period.  An Iowa permit becomes valid 3 days after the
date of application.


Information from applicants.  Permit applicants must provide the
following: name, address, date of birth, application date and a
form of identification with a color photograph.  A Social
Security number is optional.

Fees charged.  Fees are at the discretion of the county 
sheriffs.

State data.  Iowa maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, and domestic abuse restraining order/misdemeanor data
on a statewide network.  Checking agencies also have access to
some probation, parole, and juvenile data.

Inquiry process.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  Sheriffs retain approved permit
applications for 4 years and denied permit applications for 3
years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a State permit can 
appeal to the denying agency.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested by the checking agency in some cases.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Iowa Code 702.7; 724.1 et seq.

Source of information.  Iowa Department of Public Safety. 

Kansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Firearms cannot be transferred to or
possessed by persons who are both addicted to and unlawful users
of controlled substances, and persons who have been convicted of
certain felonies or a controlled substances act violation, or
were adjudicated a juvenile offender because of the commission
of an act which if done by an adult would constitute a
disqualifying offense.  Handguns cannot be transferred to or
knowingly possessed by persons less than 18 years of age except
in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to own a firearm to be restored after 5 or 10 years
(depending on the type of crime) from the date of conviction or
release from imprisonment (whichever period is longer). 
Restoration is not allowed if the offense involved possession of
a firearm.

Regulated sales.  Kansas law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. The
State does not issue permits to carry concealed firearms.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Kansas contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Kansas maintains criminal history, domestic
violence misdemeanor, and juvenile offender data on the
statewide computer network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information available.  

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Kansas Statutes 21-4201 et seq.

Source of information.  Kansas Bureau of Investigation.

Kentucky

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Kentucky law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who have been convicted of felonies, as well
as any youthful offender convicted of a felony.  Handguns cannot
be  possessed by or provided to persons under the age of 18
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to possess firearms to be restored through a governor's
pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  Kentucky does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A license is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Kentucky contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows concealed firearm
licenses issued after July 15, 1998 to be used for purchases
without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Kentucky maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history and domestic violence restraining order data on
a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments to the concealed
firearm license law included a provision which requires use of
the NICS index as part of the record check on applicants.

Relevant laws.  Kentucky Revised Statutes 237.030 et seq;
431.064; 527.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Kentucky State Police.

Louisiana

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Louisiana law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who have been convicted of certain felonies.
It is unlawful to sell or otherwise deliver a firearm to any
person under the age of 18.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm can be restored in Louisiana through a governor's pardon
or by a sheriff.  Except for certain offenders, persons without
additional violations for 10 years after completion of their
sentences may apply to the sheriff of their parish of residence
for a permit to possess firearms.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.


Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Louisiana contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows concealed firearm
licenses issued before November 30, 1998 to be used in lieu of a
NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Louisiana maintains a statewide computer network
with fugitive data and criminal histories that include domestic
violence offenses and some mental health data.  These files are
fully automated.  Other mental health data are maintained by
local coroners.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:91; 14:95;
14:95.1; 40:1379.3: 40:1751 et seq.

Source of information.  Louisiana State Police.

Maine

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Maine law prohibits possession of a firearm
by a person who committed a crime punishable by imprisonment for
one year or more; committed a firearms offense; engaged in
conduct as a juvenile that if committed by an adult would have
been a disqualifying offense; or is subject to a domestic
violence restraining order.  It is unlawful to transfer a
firearm to a person under the age of 16, except for a parent or
guardian of the minor.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights may be restored by the
commissioner of public safety, a court order or a governor's
pardon.  A person convicted of a disqualifying offense can apply
to the commissioner for a permit to carry a firearm 5 years from
the date of final discharge from the sentence.  The
commissioner's decision can be appealed to superior court. 
Nonviolent juvenile offenders regain firearm rights 3 years
after completion of their dispositions or upon reaching 18 years
of age, whichever is later.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  Maine does not require a permit to purchase firearms. 
A permit is required to carry a concealed weapon.  Persons with
restored rights are issued possession permits, but cannot carry
a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Maine contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS. 

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  State agencies maintain fugitive, criminal history,
motor vehicle and domestic violence restraining order data. 
These files are maintained manually and are accessed via
teletype.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Maine Revised Statutes 15.393; 17A.554; 25.2001
et seq.

Source of information.  Maine State Police.

Maryland

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A "regulated firearm" (handgun or assault
weapon) cannot be transferred to or possessed by a person who is
convicted of a crime of violence, a felony or any common law
offense or misdemeanor that carries more than a 2-year term of
imprisonment; a fugitive; a habitual drunkard; addicted to a
controlled substance; mentally disordered as defined in State
law; under 21 years or age; or subject to a protective order. 
In addition, it is illegal to transfer a regulated firearm to a
person who is visibly under the influence of alcohol or drugs or
a participant in a straw purchase.  Regulated firearm purchasers
must have resided in the State for 90 days, and are limited to
one purchase every 30 days.

Restoration of rights.  The right to own a firearm may be
restored by a governor's pardon.

Regulated sales.  Background checks. are required for sales of
"regulated firearms" (handguns and assault weapons) by licensed
dealers and unlicensed persons.  A dealer is required to have a
State regulated-firearms license in addition to a Federal
license.  An unlicensed person selling at a gun show must obtain
a temporary transfer permit, have a fixed display and comply
with the same restrictions imposed upon licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
permit issued by the secretary of the Maryland State Police is
required to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  The Maryland State Police (MSP) is a partial
point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on regulated
firearms buyers.  Dealers transmit applications to the MSP by
certified mail or fax.  Private sales are processed through
dealers or State police installations.  Checks must be completed
within 7 days unless placed on hold because of a criminal
proceeding without a disposition.  The FBI checks all
redemptions, and sales of long guns not regulated by State law. 
ATF allows concealed handgun permits issued after November 30,
1998, to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  A 7-day waiting period is required for
transfers of regulated firearms (beginning when application is
filed), regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  The State requires the purchaser's
name, address, race, sex, height, weight, hair and eye color,
date and place of birth, driver's identification number, Social
Security number, occupation and date of application, plus the
caliber, make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  A $10 application fee is charged by the State.

State data.  Maryland maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history files, plus domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor and probation/parole data. 

Check processing time.  Routine applications are processed in
approximately 5 days.   Applications which require additional
research are normally processed in less than 1 month.

Retention of records.  A permanent record of all completed
transactions of regulated firearms is maintained by MSP.  Denied
applications are maintained indefinitely.

Registration.  Permanent transaction records contain the
caliber, make, model, serial number and special characteristics
of each regulated firearm transferred.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a regulated firearm can
appeal to MSP and further to State court.

Arrests of denied persons.  All denied persons are reported to
the MSP Firearms Investigation Unit.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 25,222 applied;
236 denied; 0.9% denial rate.  11/29/98 to 6/30/99: 17,774
applied; 258 denied; 1.5% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Code of Maryland 27-36A et seq; 27-441 et seq.

Source of information.  Maryland State Police Firearms
Enforcement Division.

Massachusetts

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Massachusetts law prohibits issuing firearm
identification cards or licenses to carry to persons who were
convicted or adjudicated delinquent for the commission of
felonies, misdemeanors punishable by more than 2 years
imprisonment, certain violent crimes, or weapon or drug
offenses.  Others barred are mentally ill, drug or alcohol
addicts, under age, aliens, subject to protection orders, or
fugitives.  A permit to purchase may be issued to a person who
is not a minor if it appears that the purchase is for a proper
purpose.

Restoration of rights.  Persons who committed disqualifying
adult or juvenile offenses, except for certain offenders, can
regain the right to possess rifles and shotguns 5 years after
completion of the sentence or adjudication without additional
violations.  Rights can also be restored through a governor's
pardon.

Regulated sales. Permits are required for transfers of rifles,
shotguns and "firearms" by dealers and private persons.  Weapon
types are mainly distinguished by their barrel lengths: rifles,
equal to or greater than 16 inches; shotguns, equal to or
greater than 18 inches; "firearms," less than 16 inches or a
shotgun less than 18 inches.  Firearms cannot be pawned in the
State.

Permits.  A license to carry (class A), valid for 4 years, is
required for unlimited purchases of rifles, shotguns and
firearms. A firearm identification card can be used for the
purchase of non-large capacity rifles, shotguns or ammunition. 
A permit to purchase, valid for 10 days, is required for firearm
transfers.

Background checks.  Licensing authorities (351 police
departments) forward identification card applications to the
Massachusetts State Police (MSP), which conducts criminal
history and fingerprint checks.  MSP informs a licensing
authority of check results within 30 days; the authority renders
a decision within 40 days from the date of application.  The
State is not a point of contact for the NICS.  Dealers contact
the FBI for all checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows
licenses to carry issued before 11/30/98 to be used for
purchases without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Identification card applicants
must provide the following: name, aliases, mother's maiden name,
father's name, date and place of birth, home and business
addresses, employer, occupation, telephone number, build,
complexion, eye and hair color, height, weight, fingerprints,
photograph and references.  A Social Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  A $25 fee is charged for identification cards,
licenses to carry and permits to purchase.

State data.  The State maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, juvenile, misdemeanor
conviction (over 2 years imprisonment) and domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor data on a statewide network. 
Manual files are kept on mental health data.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available

Retention of records.  Licensing authorities keep copies of
approved and denied applications indefinitely.  Information on
applicants is also maintained in the Firearms Record Bureau
database.

Registration.  Rifles, shotguns and firearms purchased in the
State are registered.  New residents have 60 days to register
their firearms.

Appeals of denials.  Identification card and license to carry
denials can be appealed to State district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Identification card and
permit requirements were substantially revised.

Relevant laws.  Massachusetts General Laws 140-121 et seq.

Source of information.  Massachusetts Department of Public
Safety.

Michigan

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 

State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Michigan prohibits issuing licenses to
purchase handguns to persons who the licensing agency has
probable cause to believe will use the gun to harm themselves or
others, or to violate the law.  Further, licenses cannot be
issued to persons who are subject to various orders and
dispositions; under the age of 18; not U.S. citizens and legal
residents of the State; charged with or convicted of  felonies;
adjudged legally insane or incapacitated; or involuntarily
committed due to mental illness.

Restoration of rights.  Persons convicted of nonviolent or drug
offenses regain the right to own a handgun 3 years after
completion of their sentences.  Violent offenders may have their
rights restored 5 years after completion of a sentence, if
approved by a county Concealed Weapons Licensing Board, or upon
appeal to  circuit court.  Rights can also be restored if a
conviction is expunged or set aside or the person is pardoned.

Regulated sales.  For sales, gifts and loans of handguns by
licensed dealers and unlicensed individuals, Michigan law
requires the receiver to possess a license.  Handguns cannot be
pawned.

Permits.  Michigan requires a license, which is valid for 10
days, for every purchase of a handgun.  A separate license is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  Checks on applicants for handgun purchase
licenses are conducted by 595 sheriffs and police departments,
which are partial points of contact for the NICS.  Larger
agencies generally have their own automated inquiry system,
while other agencies use the statewide system to check on
license applicants.  Dealers in Michigan must contact the FBI
for checks on sales and redemptions of long guns required by the
NICS.  ATF allows handgun purchase licenses to be used at the
point of sale in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The state's application for a
license to purchase includes the person's name, address, race,
sex, height, hair and eye color, and date of birth.  At the time
of registration, the make, caliber, type, model, and serial
number of the handgun are recorded.

Purchaser fees.  Any fee not exceeding $5 can be charged for a
license to purchase a handgun.

State data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order, probation/parole,
adjudicated mentally defective and juvenile (if reportable to
the State) data are available statewide.  Some corrections data
are also available.  Domestic violence misdemeanors can be
located  through an automated pointer that requires manual
research.


Check processing time.  Routine license applications are
normally processed by non-automated agencies in less than 1
hour, and by automated agencies in less than 5 minutes. 
Applications requiring additional research are normally
processed in less than 5 days.

Retention of records.  State law requires that sheriffs and
police departments retain approved license applications for 6
years.  Denied applications are kept at the discretion of the
licensing agencies.

Registration.  Michigan requires registration of handguns.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a handgun license can
appeal to the denying agency and further to circuit court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested in some cases.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Michigan Compiled Laws 28.421 et seq; 123.1101
et seq; 750.222 et seq.

Source of information.  Michigan State Police.

Minnesota

FBI conducts NICS checks 
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Minnesota firearm possession laws include
restrictions on certain persons who are minors, violent
offenders, mentally ill, drug addicts, fugitives or illegal
aliens, as well as those who have been dishonorably discharged
from the military or have renounced U.S. citizenship.

Restoration of rights.  Persons convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for committing crimes of violence may possess
firearms if 10 years have elapsed since restoration of civil
rights or expiration of the sentence or disposition (whichever
occurs first) and the person has not been convicted of or
adjudicated for any other crime of violence.  Civil rights can
be restored by an expungement or a pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on all
persons attempting to obtain a permit or purchase handguns or
assault weapons from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Minnesota allows its citizens to obtain a transferee
permit which is valid for 1 year and can be used to purchase an
unlimited number of handguns and assault weapons.  A permit to
carry is required to possess a concealed firearm and also
constitutes a transferee permit.  In the alternative, citizens
can undergo a background check each time they purchase an
unlimited number of handguns or assault weapons.

Background checks.  Five-hundred sixty-eight sheriffs and police
departments conduct checks after receiving transferee permit
applications or transfer reports (on persons without permits)
from dealers.  A permit shall be issued or denied within 7 days
of application.  After a transfer report is filed, a dealer can
complete the transaction if a notice of disqualification from
the checking agency is not received within 5 business days.  In
addition, dealers in Minnesota contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  A wait of 5 business days (7 days) is required
for purchases of handguns or assault weapons without a permit,
regardless of when a background check is completed.  All or part
of the waiting period can be waived by the checking agency
because of a threat to the life of the transferee or a member of
the transferee's household.

Information from applicants.  A permit application or transfer
report requires the transferee's name, address, telephone
number, driver's license number, sex, date of birth, height,
weight, eye color and distinguishing physical characteristics. 
Applicants must show an identification card with a color
photograph.

Purchaser fees.  State law does not allow any fees to be charged.

State data.  Minnesota maintains fully automated criminal
history, fugitive, juvenile and domestic violence restraining
order data on a statewide network.  Manual files contain
information on mental health and chemical dependency. 
Automation of mental health and domestic violence misdemeanor
data are underway.

Check processing time.  Background checks are normally completed
in less than 5 days.

Retention of records.  Approved and denied applications are kept
at the discretion of the checking agencies.  However, a sheriff
or chief of police will not maintain any record of an approved
transferee's identity if that person requests return of the
transfer report.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a permit or firearm can
appeal to the county or municipal court.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who makes a false statement
on a permit or transfer application can be charged with a gross
misdemeanor.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Minnesota Statutes 609.165; 609.224; 624.711 et
seq.


Source of information.  Minnesota Department of Public Safety.

Mississippi

FBI conducts NICS checks 

Prohibited persons.  Mississippi law makes it unlawful to
transfer a firearm to a person whom the transferor knows to be a
minor under the age of 18 or in a State of intoxication.  A
person convicted of a felony cannot  possess a firearm, and a
person under the age of 18 cannot possess a handgun except in
limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored by a governor's pardon or a certificate
of rehabilitation from the sentencing court.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Mississippi contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows a concealed handgun
license to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  The State maintains an automated message switch
that allows local agencies to access the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and the Interstate Identification
Index (III).  Arrest and disposition data on felonies and
misdemeanors became available online during 1998.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Mississippi Code 45-9-201; 97-37 et seq.

Source of information.  Mississippi Department of Public Safety.

Missouri

FBI conducts NICS checks 
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Missouri law requires that an applicant for
a permit to acquire a handgun be at least 21 years of age, a
U.S. citizen and a State resident for at least 6 months.  A
permit cannot be issued to a person who is convicted of a felony
or misdemeanor specified in State law; a fugitive or someone
charged with a crime; dishonorably discharged from U.S. armed
forces; habitually intoxicated or drugged; adjudged mentally
incompetent; or found to have rendered a false statement on the
application.  It is unlawful to recklessly transfer a firearm to
a person who is intoxicated or to a person less than 18 years
old without consent of the child's parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a
handgun can be restored through a governor's pardon.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun
sales by licensed dealers, pawnshops and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  Missouri mandates a permit to acquire which is valid
for 30 days and can be used to purchase one handgun.  The State
does not issue concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  One-hundred-fourteen county sheriffs and the
St. Louis County Police Department conduct background checks on
applicants for permits to acquire handguns.  A maximum period of
7 business days is allowed to complete the process.  The State
is not a point of contact for the NICS.  Licensed dealers in
Missouri contact the FBI for all checks required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A permit applicant  must provide
the following: name, residence and business addresses, height,
hair and eye color, date of birth, Social Security number,
occupation, date of application and reason for desiring a
permit, plus the type, make, model and serial number of the
handgun obtained.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $10 is charged for a permit.

State data.  Missouri maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor and probation/parole data on a statewide
computer network.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available

Retention of records.  Approved and denied permit applications
are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns are not registered by the State, but are
registered by some counties and municipalities.


Appeals of denials.  A person denied a permit can appeal to
small claims court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments allowed
probation and parole personnel to carry firearms at all times
and exempted transfer of certain firearms from permit
requirements.

Relevant laws.  Missouri Revised Statutes 571.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Missouri State Highway Patrol.

Montana

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Montana law prohibits possession of
firearms by convicted felons.  It is unlawful for persons under
14 to carry firearms in public without adult supervision.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored by a governor's pardon or upon
completion of the sentence (except for certain offenders who
must apply to the court for a permit to purchase firearms).

Regulated sales. State law does not require background checks on
firearms purchasers. 

Permits.  Montana does not require a permit to purchase
firearms, but does require concealed weapon permits.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Montana contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows concealed weapon
permits to be used for purchases in lieu of a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Montana maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history data on a statewide network.  Some domestic
violence data are also available.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Montana Code 45-8-301 et seq; 46-18-801.

Source of information.  Montana Department of Justice.

Nebraska

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Nebraska prohibits issuing a transfer
certificate to any person who may not purchase or possess a
handgun under any applicable Federal, State, or local law. 
State law forbids the possession of a handgun by a person who is
under the age of 18 (except in limited circumstances), a
convicted felon or a fugitive from justice.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
handgun can be restored by a pardon.

Regulated sales.  A transfer certificate is required for handgun
sales by licensed dealers and unlicensed persons, with limited
exceptions.

Permits.  The transfer certificate needed to purchase handguns
is valid for up to 3 years and can be used for unlimited
purchases.  The State does not issue concealed firearm permits

Background checks.  Ninety-three county sheriffs and the Lincoln
and Omaha Police Departments are partial points of contact for
the NICS.  These agencies conduct checks required by Federal and
State law on applicants for handgun transfer certificates.  A
maximum period of 2 days is allowed under State law to
investigate and decide on an application.  Licensed dealers in
Nebraska contact the FBI for checks on long gun purchasers
required by the NICS.  ATF allows a transfer certificate to be
used in lieu of a NICS check at the point of sale.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A transfer certificate application
includes the person's name, address, race, sex, height, weight,
hair color, date of birth, and Social Security number plus the
date of application.

Purchaser fees.  The State agencies charge $5 for a background
check.

State data.  Nebraska maintains a statewide network with
automated data on fugitives, criminal history,  probation/parole
and mental health commitments without a discharge in the last 5
years.


Check processing time.  Routine applications are normally
processed in less than 1 day.  Applications requiring additional
research normally are processed in less than 2 days.

Retention of records.  Approved and denied applications are kept
at the discretion of the checking agencies.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a transfer certificate can
appeal to the county court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested in some cases.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Nebraska Revised Statutes 28-1202; 69-2401 et
seq.

Source of information.  Nebraska State Patrol. 

Nevada

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Nevada law prohibits possession of firearms
by persons who are under 14 years of age and are not supervised
by an adult, or have been convicted of a felony.  It is illegal
to sell a handgun to a child under the age of 18.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to possess firearms to be restored if the person is
honorably discharged from probation.  Restoration can occur
through a governor's pardon that does not restrict the right to
bear arms.  If a pardon does not restore civil rights, the
person may apply to a board of pardon commissioners, whose
decision can be appealed to State district court.

Regulated sales.  Pursuant to an executive order of the
governor, Nevada enforces the Brady Act's requirement of
background checks on transfers by licensed dealers.  Under State
law, unlicensed sellers have the option of requesting a check on
the purchaser from the Nevada Point-Of-Sale Firearms Program.

Permits.  State law does not require a permit to purchase
firearms; a permit is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Nevada Highway Patrol (NHP) is a point
of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by
Federal law in addition to checks requested by unlicensed
sellers.  Firearms dealers request instant checks by using a
1-800 number or regular telephone number.  ATF allows concealed
firearm permits to be used for purchases without subsequent NICS
checks.


Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Licensed dealers in Nevada use the
ATF forms when preparing to conduct a firearm transaction.  No
separate State form is required.

Purchaser fees.  The fee for a firearms background check is $15.

State data.  The State maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence misdemeanor data on a
statewide network.  A protective order registry is currently
under development.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 3 minutes.  Transactions requiring
additional research normally are processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  Information from approved transactions is
retained for a maximum period of 20 days; information from
denied transactions is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Firearms are not registered in Nevada except in
Clark County.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a firearm can appeal to NHP
and further to the Hearings Office of the Department of Motor
Vehicles and Public Safety.

Arrests of denied persons.  NHP notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information on purchase forms.  When a person is
denied because of an outstanding warrant, the NHP notifies the
agency with jurisdiction over the site of the transaction.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 21,097 applied;
734 denied; 3.5% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 33,376
applied; 1,106 denied; 3.3% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Nevada Revised Statutes 202-253 et seq.

Source of information.  Nevada Highway Patrol.

New Hampshire

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  New Hampshire law provides that firearms
cannot be possessed by or transferred to persons convicted of 
certain felonies.  Handguns cannot be transferred to minors except 
in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  State law does not provide 
for restoration of a convicted felon's right to possess 
firearms.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required 

on persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The New Hampshire Department of Safety (DOS)
is a partial point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks
required by Federal and State law.  Licensed dealers request
instant checks on sales and redemptions of handguns by using a
1-800 number.  The maximum period allowed for DOS to complete a
background check is 3 days.  Dealers contact the FBI for checks
on sales and redemptions of long guns.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  New Hampshire's application
includes the purchaser's name, race, sex, date of birth and
Social Security or driver's license number, plus the date of
application.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  The State maintains fugitive, criminal history and
domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor data on a
statewide computer network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes.  Transactions requiring
additional research normally are processed in less than 4 hours.

Retention of records.  Information on an approved transaction is
retained by DOS for a maximum period of 20 days; information on
denied transactions is retained for 3 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  State law provides that a person denied a
handgun by DOS can appeal to that agency, and further to
superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  DOS notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information.  In cases of outstanding warrants, DOS
notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 13,186 applied;
250 denied; 1.9% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 6,610
applied; 134 denied; 2.0% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  New Hampshire Revised Statutes 12:159:1 et seq.

Source of information.  New Hampshire State Police.

New Jersey

State conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Firearm permits cannot be issued to persons
who are convicted of crimes; drug dependent; confined for 
mental disorders;  habitual drunkards; physically unable to
handle firearms; under age 18; found to have submitted false
information; or barred from firearm possession by court order. 
Issuance of a permit must not contravene the interest of public
health, safety, or welfare.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored if the offender's criminal record is
expunged by the court.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations pertain to firearm sales by
licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.  Firearms cannot be
pawned in the State.

Permits.  State law requires a permit to purchase a handgun,
which is valid for 90 days.  An unlimited number of long guns
can be acquired with a firearms purchaser identification card,
which is valid until revoked for a violation of law.  A permit
is required to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  Checks on applicants for permits and
identification cards are conducted by 505 local police
departments and the New Jersey State Police (for some
unincorporated areas).  If no cause for denial exists, a permit
or identification card shall be granted within 30 days (or 45
days for a non-resident application).  In addition, the State
police is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all
checks required by Federal law.  Licensed dealers call the State
police for instant checks on purchasers who have obtained a
permit or an identification card.

Waiting period.  Handgun transfers require a 7-day waiting
period (beginning when application is filed), regardless of when
a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  Permit and identification card
applications require the person's name, address, date and place
of birth, citizenship, Social Security number, sex, height,
weight, race, hair color, complexion, eye color, distinguishing
physical characteristics, occupation, name and address of
employer, date of application and two references.  Questions on
firearms disabilities must be answered.  First-time applicants
must submit fingerprints.

Purchaser fees.  The fingerprint fee is $49.  Document fees are
$2 for a permit to purchase a handgun and $5 for a firearms
purchaser identification card.

State data.  The State maintains fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence (restraining order and misdemeanor), juvenile,
and probation/parole data.  Mental health files are under
development and only partial data are available.

Check processing time.  Permit and identification card
applications are normally processed in less than 1 month;
applications which require additional research are normally
processed in less than 6 months.

Retention of records.  Permit and identification card
applications are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns are registered in New Jersey at the time
of purchase.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a permit or identification
card can appeal to the denying agency and further to superior
court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Local police departments arrest
denied persons in some cases.  The State police NICS Unit
reports denied persons to either the investigation unit or ATF
(Federal violations).  NCIC felony warrants are reported to the
fugitive unit; other felony warrants are reported to local
departments.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 18,995 applied;
198 rejected; 1.0% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 20,112
applied; 102 denied; 0.5% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Temporary transfers of
firearms from certified training instructors to participants in
their courses were allowed by an amendment.

Relevant laws.  New Jersey Statutes 2C:39-1 et seq; 2C:58-1 et
seq.

Source of information.  New Jersey State Police.

New Mexico

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  New Mexico law prohibits possession of
firearms by felons and possession of handguns by persons under
the age of 19.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to possess firearms to be restored by a governor's pardon
or upon the expiration of 10 years after completion of the
sentence without additional violations.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permit  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  The
State does not issue concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None. 

State data.  New Mexico maintains criminal history, domestic
violence misdemeanor and juvenile data on a statewide network. 
These files are 30% automated and 70% manual, with search
requests made by teletype to the Department of Public Safety.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  New Mexico Statutes 30-7-1 et seq.

Source of information.  New Mexico Department of Public Safety.

New York

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  New York will not issue a license to carry
or possess a handgun to any person who is not of good moral
character; has been convicted of a felony or a "serious
offense;" suffers from any mental illness or has been confined
to any hospital or institution for mental illness; or has had a
license revoked, or is under a suspension or ineligibility
order.  A person under 16 years of age cannot possess a firearm
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Certificates of relief from disabilities
and good conduct are issued at the discretion of the court of
conviction or the Board of Parole.  Even if relief from a
firearms disability is granted, a licensing official can rely on
the underlying conviction to deny the offender's application for
a handgun license.

Regulated sales.  Every person who receives a handgun must have
a license.  A dealer is required to have a State license.

Permits.  Each handgun purchased requires a license which
specifies conditions for possession and carrying.  A license is
valid throughout the State, except in New York City, where
additional rules of validity apply.  Licenses are valid until
revoked but have a fixed duration in New York City (3 years) and
in Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester counties (5 years). 
Purchasing additional handguns requires a license amendment.


Background checks.  Fifty-eight county judges issue handgun
licenses and are partial points of contact for the NICS. 
Applicants for licenses contact local sheriffs and police
departments, which conduct background checks on behalf of the
judges.  Fingerprints are forwarded to a State agency and to the
FBI for processing.  Applications must be acted upon within 6
months unless there is good cause for delay. A NICS check is
required for amendments to non-expiring licenses unless a check
on the holder occurred during the preceding 5 years.  Licensed
dealers in New York contact the FBI for checks on long gun sales
and on all firearm redemptions.  ATF allows handgun licenses to
be used for purchases without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A license applicant must provide
the following: name, address, race, sex, height, weight, hair
color, eye color, date of birth, Social Security number,
fingerprints, business address, previous address, occupation,
character references and date of application plus the type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  License fees vary by issuing authority, but are
at least $74, including a fingerprint processing charge.

State data.  The State maintains criminal history, fugitive,
mental health and domestic violence restraining
order/misdemeanor data.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Licensing authorities retain approved and
denied applications indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns are registered in New York.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide an appeal
procedure for handgun license denials.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments prohibited the
possession or use of a disguised gun and allowed certain minors
to possess long guns at shooting ranges if supervised by a
conservation agent.

Relevant laws.  New York Penal Law 265.00 et seq; 400.00 et seq;
Criminal Procedure Law 530.14.

Source of information.  New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services.

North Carolina

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  North Carolina law prohibits issuing a
handgun permit to any person who is not of good moral character;
under indictment for or convicted of certain felonies; a
fugitive; an unlawful user of drugs or a drug addict;
adjudicated mentally incompetent or committed to a mental
institution; an illegal alien; dishonorably discharged from the
armed forces; subject to a domestic violence restraining order;
or who has renounced U.S. citizenship.  A minor under the age of
18 cannot possess a handgun except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to obtain a
handgun permit can be restored by a Federal or State pardon.

Regulated sales.  Handgun permit requirements apply to all sales
by licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.

Permits. The State requires a permit, valid for 5 years, to
purchase a handgun.  A permit is required to carry a concealed
handgun.

Background checks.  One-hundred county sheriffs are partial
points of contact for the NICS and conduct checks on applicants
for handgun permits  Sheriffs are allowed 30 days to complete
checks.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for
checks on long gun sales and on all firearm redemptions.  ATF
allows handgun purchase and carry permits to be used at the
point of sale in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Information requested from permit
applicants is at the discretion of the county sheriff.

Purchaser fees.  The State mandates a charge of $5 for
processing a permit application.

State data.  North Carolina maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor and motor vehicle data on a
statewide network.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  County sheriffs retain data on approved
permits for 5 years; data on denied applications is retained
indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Handgun permit denials can be appealed to
State district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.


Relevant laws.  North Carolina General Statutes 14-269; 14-402
et seq.

Source of information.  North Carolina State Bureau of
Investigation.

North Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  North Dakota law provides that firearms
cannot be possessed by or transferred to persons who have been
convicted of felonies or misdemeanors involving violence or
intimidation or were diagnosed and confined or committed to
hospitals or institutions as a mentally ill persons.  Handguns
cannot be possessed by or transferred to persons under the age
of 18, except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored 5 or 10 years after completion of the
sentence with no additional violations, depending on the type of
offense committed.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  North Dakota does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry concealed firearms.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows concealed firearm
permits issued before 11/30/98 to be used for a purchase without
a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  North Dakota maintains partially automated fugitive
and criminal history data on a statewide network.  Court
restraining order data are also available.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.


1998/1999 legislative developments.  An amendment revised the of
definition of persons who cannot possess firearms because of
mental illness.

Relevant laws.  North Dakota Century Code 62.1-01 et seq.

Source of information.  North Dakota Bureau of Criminal
Investigation.

Ohio

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Ohio law prohibits possession of a firearm
by a person who is a fugitive; under indictment for or convicted
of any felony offense of violence; adjudicated as a delinquent
child for an offense that if committed by an adult would have
been a felony offense of violence; under indictment for or
convicted of any offense involving possession or sale of drugs;
adjudicated as a delinquent child for an offense that if
committed by an adult would have been an offense involving
possession or sale of drugs; drug dependent; a chronic
alcoholic; or under adjudication of mental incompetence. 
Handguns cannot be transferred to or purchased by persons under
21 years of age and firearms cannot be transferred to or
purchased by persons under 18 years of age, except in limited
circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A person convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for a felony offense of violence or a drug offense
can have firearm rights restored by a court of common pleas if
the person has been law abiding since completion of the sentence
or adjudication.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  The
State does not issue concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Ohio contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Ohio maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor and
probation/parole data on a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.


Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 53,713 applied;
481 denied; 0.9% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: No statewide
information available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  The legislature amended the
statute which prohibits conveying a deadly weapon onto the
grounds of certain facilities, and increased the penalty for
improperly discharging a firearm at or into a habitation or
school.

Relevant laws.  Ohio Revised Code 2923.11 et seq.

Source of information.  Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification.

Oklahoma

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Oklahoma law prohibits transfer of a
firearm to a person who is under 18 years of age (except in
limited circumstances); under adjudication of mental
incompetency; a convicted felon; an adjudicated delinquent;
under the influence of alcohol or drugs; or mentally or
emotionally unbalanced or disturbed.  It is unlawful for a
firearm to be possessed by a person who is a convicted felon,
adjudicated delinquent or subject to supervision, probation,
parole or inmate status.

Restoration of rights.  Oklahoma allows a convicted felon's
right to own a handgun to be restored if the person was
convicted of a non-violent offense and receives a complete
pardon from the proper authority.  Persons adjudicated
delinquent regain the right to possess firearms 10 years after
completion of the adjudication without additional violations.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms.  A permit
is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows exemptions from the
NICS check for holders of concealed handgun permits issued
between 5/16/96 and 11/30/98.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.


Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Oklahoma maintains fully automated criminal history
data on a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Oklahoma Statutes 21-1271.1 et seq.

Source of information.  Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.

Oregon

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Oregon law prohibits possession of a
firearm by certain persons who are minors, juvenile offenders,
felons or mentally ill.  It is illegal to transfer a firearm to
certain persons who are minors, felons, fugitives, under arrest,
mentally ill or guilty of misdemeanors involving violence.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a
firearm can be restored by Federal relief, expungement, or the
passage of 15 years since completion of a sentence for a felony
which did not involve criminal homicide or the use of a weapon,
provided there is only one felony conviction on the person's
record.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Oregon does not require a permit to purchase firearms
but does require a license to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The Oregon State Police Firearms Unit is a
partial point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on
handgun purchasers required by Federal and State law.  When
dealers call a 1-800 number for the firearms unit, queries are
processed on the purchaser and the handgun being sold; the
dealer is given a transaction number for an approval or informed
that the applicant is denied.  Dealers contact the FBI for
checks on long gun transfers required by the NICS.  ATF allows
concealed weapon permits issued before 11/30/98 to be used for
purchases without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Prospective purchasers submit the
ATF form and a State police thumbprint form.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $10 is charged for a background check.

State data.  Oregon maintains criminal history, fugitive, stolen
gun, domestic violence restraining order, juvenile and mental
health data on a statewide computer network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes; transactions which require
additional research are normally processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  The firearms unit retains records of
approved and denied transactions for 5 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a handgun can appeal to the
State Police, Identification Services Section.

Arrests of denied persons.  For persons who submit false
information or have outstanding warrants, the firearms unit
notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the individual.

1998/1999 firearm checks. 1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 42,523 applied;
1,069 denied; 2.5% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 33,922
applied; 918 denied; 2.7% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Oregon Revised Statutes 166.170 et seq.

Source of information.  Oregon State Police. 

Pennsylvania

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Pennsylvania law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who are convicted of "enumerated offenses;"
fugitives; convicted of certain drug offenses; convicted of 3
alcohol-related driving offenses in a 5-year period; adjudicated
incompetent or involuntarily committed to a mental institution;
illegal aliens; subject to a protection order which provides for
confiscation of firearms; adjudicated delinquent for certain
offenses; or under the age of 18 except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  For some prohibited persons, the court
may restore State firearm rights in the event of a governor's
pardon, Federal relief, vacation of the conviction, or
expiration of 10 years since conviction (not including
incarceration time).  Certain persons adjudicated delinquent
regain their rights 15 years after the last applicable
adjudication or upon reaching the age of 30, whichever is
earlier.

Regulated sales. Background checks are required on persons who
purchase firearms from state-licensed dealers.  Check
requirements also apply to transfers of handguns between
unlicensed persons, which must occur at the place of business of
a licensed importer, manufacturer or dealer, or at a county
sheriff's office.  Handguns cannot be pawned in the State.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to purchase
firearms; a license is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Pennsylvania State Police is a point of
contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by Federal
and State law.  Dealers contact the Pennsylvania Instant Check
System (PICS) by using a 1-800 number.  The review shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The state's record of sale
contains the purchaser's name, address, race, sex, height,
weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, Social Security
number, occupation and date of application plus the make, model,
serial number, caliber and barrel length of the firearm.

Purchaser fees.  The maximum fee that can be charged is $2 for a
background check and $3 for sale of a firearm subject to State
sales tax.

State data.  Pennsylvania maintains automated criminal history,
fugitive, protection order and probation/parole data on a
statewide network.  State law provides that juvenile delinquency
and mental health records shall be made available to the State
police no later than October 11, 1999.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed by PICS in less than 2 minutes.

Retention of records.  The State police do not retain data on
approved transactions but do retain records of denied
transactions.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a firearm may appeal to the
State police, with subsequent appeals available to the State
attorney general and commonwealth court.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified
applications or outstanding warrants, the State police notifies
the local agency with jurisdiction over the individual.  Persons
who submit false information are also reported to ATF.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 116,718 applied;
3,237 denied; 2.8% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 274,132
applied; 8,090 denied; 3.0% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Highlights included
authorization for PICS to begin operations on July 1, 1998.

Relevant laws.  Pennsylvania Statutes 18-6101 et seq.

Source of information.  Pennsylvania State Police.

Rhode Island

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Rhode Island law prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who are convicted of a crime of violence;
fugitives from justice; convicted of certain felonies; subject
to electronic surveillance or monitoring; mentally incompetent;
drug addicts; habitual drunkards; illegal aliens; or minors
(except in limited circumstances).  Handgun purchasers are
required to complete a firearm safety course.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own
firearms can be restored through a governor's pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks for
transfers of firearms by licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  Rhode Island does not require a permit to purchase
firearms.  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  Thirty-nine local police departments conduct
checks on firearms purchasers required by State law.  Sellers
transmit purchase applications by certified mail or in person to
the police departments.  If notice of denial is not received by
the seller within 7 days, a transfer can proceed.  The State is
not a point of contact for the NICS.  Licensed dealers in the
State contact the FBI for all checks required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  A 7-day waiting period is required for all
firearm transfers (beginning when application is filed),
regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  Rhode Island's application
includes the purchaser's name, address, date of birth, place of
birth, sex, height, weight, hair and eye color, scars, tattoos
and other identifying marks, and questions concerning
eligibility.

Purchaser fees.  Fees are not mandated by State law but are at
the discretion of the police departments.

State data.  Rhode Island maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor and mental health data on a
statewide network.

Check processing time.  Background checks are normally completed
within 5 days.

Retention of records.  The checking agency and the State
attorney general receive copies of each purchase application,
and are required by State law to retain approved applications
for no more than 30 days.  Denied applications are retained
indefinitely.  Original copies of applications must be retained
by sellers for 6 years. 

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide a procedure for
appealing firearm denials.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Rhode Island General Laws 11-47-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Rhode Island Department of the Attorney
General.

South Carolina

FBI conducts NICS checks (beginning 10/1/99)
State requests NICS checks (through 9/30/99)

[Note: On October 1, 1999, the State stopped serving as a POC,
and the FBI assumed responsibility for conducting NICS checks.]

Prohibited persons.  South Carolina law prohibits handgun sales
to or possession by any person who is convicted of a crime of
violence; a fugitive; a habitual drunkard or drug addict;
adjudicated mentally incompetent; a member of a subversive
organization; under 21 years of age (with limited exceptions);
or adjudged unfit to carry or possess a pistol.  Persons who
purchase handguns from dealers must be State residents and they
are limited to one purchase in each 30-day period.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a
handgun can be restored if that person receives a pardon or an
expungement of the conviction, unless the offense committed was
a crime of violence.

Regulated sales.  Pursuant to an executive order of the
governor, South Carolina enforces the Brady Act's requirement of
background checks on persons who receive firearms from
federally-licensed dealers.  Retail dealers of handguns must
have a State license.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The South Carolina Law Enforcement Division
(SLED) is a point of contact for the NICS (effective until
10/1/99) and conducts all checks required by Federal law. 
Dealers contact SLED by using a 1-800 number.  ATF allows
concealed handgun permits to be used for a purchase without a
NICS check.


Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  South Carolina's application
includes the purchaser's name, home address, business address,
race, sex, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth,
place of birth, social security, driver's license and telephone
numbers, State or military identification number, and date of
application plus the type, make, model and serial number of the
weapon.  Fingerprints are requested when there is a question of
identity.

Purchaser fees.  SLED charges $5 for an approved background
check.

State data.  South Carolina maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence misdemeanor/restraining
order and juvenile data on a statewide network.  In addition,
the State maintains a "30-day, one handgun purchase" file.

Check processing time.  For routine transactions, the process
normally is completed in less than 5 minutes;  transactions
requiring additional research are normally processed in less
than 15 minutes.

Retention of records.  SLED retains data on approved
transactions for 20 days and for denied transactions
indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a firearm can appeal to
SLED.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving outstanding
warrants, SLED notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the
fugitive.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 42,123 applied;
2,098 denied; 5.0% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 79,234
applied; 8,554 denied; 10.8% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  An executive order
authorized the SLED to be a point of contact under the NICS and
to conduct background checks on handgun and long gun purchasers,
beginning 11/30/98 and effective until October 1, 1999.

Relevant laws.  South Carolina Code of Laws 16-23-10 et seq;
23-31-10 et seq.

Source of information.  South Carolina Law Enforcement Division.

South Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  South Dakota law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who has been convicted of a crime of
violence or a felony or who has a prior conviction for drug
possession.  A person under the age of 18 cannot possess a
handgun except in limited circumstances.  It is illegal to
transfer a firearm to a person under the age of 18 if the
transferor knows or reasonably believes that the minor recipient
intends to use the firearm to commit a crime of violence.

Restoration of rights.  The right to possess a firearm can be
restored through a governor's pardon or the passage of time.  A
person who was last discharged from prison, jail, probation or
parole for a crime of violence or a felony controlled
substances/marijuana violation (except mere possession) more
than 15 years ago regains the right to possess or control a
firearm.  For felony possession of controlled substances or
marijuana, the time period is 5 years.  However, no person
convicted of a crime of violence may ever lawfully purchase a
pistol at retail.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Dealers in the State contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.  ATF allows concealed handgun permits
issued before 11/30/98 to be used for purchases without a NICS
check.

Waiting period.  A 2-day waiting period is required for handgun
transfers (beginning when application is filed), regardless of
when a background check is completed.  Holders of valid,
concealed handgun permits are exempt from the waiting Period.

Information from applicants.  State law requires that handgun
purchasers provide the following information: name, date and
place of birth, address, occupation, physical description, and
date and hour of application.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  South Dakota maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation/parole, and domestic violence
protective order data on a statewide network.  A driver's
history file is available to check for additional data. 
Domestic violence misdemeanors can be identified by researching
criminal history.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  County sheriffs receive copies of handgun
purchase applications from licensed dealers and are required by
State law to retain their copies for a period of one year.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  A new chapter on unlawful
use of weapons provided that a person convicted of a crime of
violence or a felony drug possession offense cannot possess or
control a firearm unless the 

person was last discharged from prison, jail, probation or
parole for felony drug possession more than 5 years ago, or, for
other drug felonies or a crime of violence more than 15 years
ago.

Relevant laws.  South Dakota Codified Laws 22-14-15 et seq;
23-7-1 et seq.

Source of information.  South Dakota Attorney General's Office.

Tennessee

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Tennessee law prohibits firearm sales by
licensed dealers to persons who are minors, intoxicated,
addicted to alcohol or ineligible under Federal law.  Handguns
cannot be possessed by persons who are less than 18 years of age
(except in limited circumstances) or under the influence of
alcohol or any controlled substance.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored if the person was pardoned, the
conviction was expunged or set aside, or the person's civil
rights were restored by the circuit court.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm; a
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI)
is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by Federal and State law.  Dealers contact TBI by
telephone; 250 high volume dealers can also use computers with a
"point-of-sale device."

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The state's application includes
the purchaser's name, previous names,  date and place of birth,
address, Social Security number, race, sex, height, weight,
thumbprint and date of application.  The type, make, model and
serial number is recorded for each weapon purchased.

Purchaser fees.  TBI may charge a reasonable fee, not to exceed
$10, for a background check.


State data.  Tennessee's Law Enforcement Communications Network
maintains criminal history, fugitive, domestic abuse restraining
order, sex offender and stolen gun data.  Domestic abuse
misdemeanor convictions can be identified if annotated on a
fingerprint card by a local agency.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes; transactions which require
additional research are normally processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  Information on approved transactions is
not retained by TBI, except for approval numbers and dates
assigned.  Information on denied transactions is retained
indefinitely, but is destroyed if the decision is reversed on
appeal.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm can appeal to TBI.

Arrests of denied persons.  TBI notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information.  For outstanding warrants, TBI
notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the dealer's premises
and the agency which entered the warrant.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  11/1/98 to 11/29/98: 10,624 applied;
700 denied; 6.6% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 139,469
applied; 9,306 denied; 6.7% denial rate.  

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Amendments eliminated the
State waiting period and authorized instant checks by the
Tennessee Bureau of Investigation on persons who purchase or
redeem handguns or long guns, effective 11/1/98.

Relevant laws.  Tennessee Code 39-17-1301 et seq.

Source of information.  Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.

Texas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Texas law prohibits knowingly transferring
a handgun to a person who intends to use it unlawfully or is
subject to an active protective order.  A firearm cannot be
knowingly transferred to a person who is younger than 18 years
(without parental consent), intoxicated or a convicted felon.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
handgun on the premises where he or she lives can be restored 5
years after completion of the sentence if no additional
violations occur.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.


Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Texas contact the FBI for all checks
required by the NICS.  ATF allows an exemption from the NICS
check for holders of concealed handgun licenses or peace officer
licenses issued before 11/30/98.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Texas maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, domestic violence restraining order/misdemeanor,
juvenile and probation/parole data on a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Texas Penal Code 30.06; 42.12; 46.01 et seq;
Family Code 71.18.

Source of information.  Texas Department of Public Safety.

Utah

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Utah law prohibits possession of a firearm
by a person who is convicted of a crime of violence; addicted to
the use of any narcotic drug; declared mentally incompetent; or
on parole or probation for a felony.  A handgun may not be
purchased, possessed or transferred by a person who is convicted
of a felony; under indictment; an unlawful user of a controlled
substances; a drug dependent person; adjudicated as mentally
defective or committed to a mental institution; an illegal
alien; dishonorably discharged from the Armed Forces; or who has
renounced United States citizenship.  A firearm cannot be
possessed by or sold to a minor under 18 years of age except in
limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  The right to possess firearms can be
restored if a conviction is expunged or otherwise removed from
the record.


Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Utah does not require a permit to purchase firearms. 
A permit is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification
(BCI) is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by Federal and State law.  Dealers request instant
checks by using a 1-800 number or a regular telephone number. 
Holders of concealed firearm permits are exempt from
point-of-sale background checks under ATF rules and State law. 
BCI verifies the validity of permits presented to dealers.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Utah requires an applicant's name,
address, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date
of birth, Social Security number and date of application.

Purchaser fees.  BCI charges $7.50 for a background check.

State data.  Utah maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, domestic abuse restraining order/misdemeanor and motor
vehicle data on a statewide network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes.

Retention of records.  Under State law, BCI retains data on
approved transactions for a maximum period of 20 days.  Data on
denied transactions is retained for 1 year.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm can appeal to BCI
and further to a State review board.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who submits false
information or has outstanding warrants is reported by BCI to
the agency with jurisdiction over the offender.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 24,140 applied;
733 denied; 3.0% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 40,923
applied; 1,308 denied; 3.2% denial rate. 

1998/1999 legislative developments.  Check requirements for
handguns were extended by amendment to checks on other firearms
to begin when changes required by Federal law took effect.

Relevant laws.  Utah Code 53-5-702 et seq; 76-10-501 et seq.

Source of information.  Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification.

Vermont

State requests NICS checks


Prohibited persons.  A firearm cannot be furnished to a child
under 16 without the consent of a parent or guardian.  A handgun
cannot be possessed by a child under 16 without the consent of a
parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  No State requirements.

Regulated sales.  Vermont enforces the Brady Act's requirement
of background checks on persons who purchase or redeem firearms
from licensed dealers.

Permits.  The State does not require a permit to purchase or
carry firearms.

Background checks.  The Chittenden County Sheriff's Office is a
point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required
by Federal law.  Instant checks are conducted on persons who
purchase or redeem firearms from licensed dealers in the State.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Firearms purchasers submit the
standard ATF form.  No separate State form is required. 

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  The State maintains automated files containing
fugitive and domestic abuse misdemeanor information.  Criminal
history, probation/parole, and court restraining order data are
also available. 

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Data on approved transactions is retained
for a maximum period of 20 days; data on denied transactions is
retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm can appeal under
Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: No statewide data
available.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 9,944 applied; 314 denied; 3.2%
denial rate.  

1998/1999 legislative developments.  The State designated the
Chittenden County Sheriff's Office as the point of contact for
all firearm checks under the NICS.

Relevant laws.  Vermont Statutes 13-4001 et seq.

Source of information.  Vermont Department of Public Safety;
Chittenden County Sheriff's Office.

Virginia 

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Virginia law prohibits possession of
firearms by certain persons who are acquitted by reason of
insanity; adjudicated incompetent or incapacitated;
involuntarily committed; subject to a protective order;
convicted of a felony; found guilty as a juvenile of a
delinquent act which would be a felony if committed by an adult;
illegal aliens; or under the age of 18.  Handguns cannot be
purchased by certain persons who have been convicted of two
misdemeanor drug offenses within 36 months.  Firearms purchasers
must have resided in the State for at least 30 days.  An
individual cannot purchase more than one handgun every 30 days
unless authorized by the State Police.

Restoration of rights.  The governor  may grant a pardon or
removal of political disabilities to a person who committed a
felony or delinquent act and may condition reinstatement of
firearm rights.  The circuit court may issue a permit to carry a
firearm to a person whose civil rights have been restored.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
permit issued by a circuit court is needed to carry a concealed
handgun.

Background checks.  The Virginia State Police (VSP) is a point
of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by
Federal and State law.  Some dealers request instant checks by
using a 1-800 number or the mail to contact the Firearms
Transaction Program.  High-volume dealers in the Direct Access
Program use dial-in technology to request checks.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The purchaser's name, date and
place of birth, current address, Social Security or other
identifying number, race, sex, height and weight are required. 
The number of firearms purchased in each transaction is recorded
by categories (rifle, shotgun, pistol or revolver).

Purchaser fees.  VSP charges $2 for a check on a State resident
and $5 for a non-resident.

State data.  The State maintains fully automated criminal
history, fugitive, juvenile, mental health, domestic violence
restraining order/misdemeanor, and drug user data, plus a file
on misdemeanor drug convictions and a calendar file on handgun
purchases.

Check processing time.   Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 2 minutes; transactions which require
additional research are normally processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  Data on approved transactions may be
retained for 30 days; however, multiple handgun transaction
records and a log of requests (with purchaser name, dealer and
approval numbers, and date) may be maintained for 12 months. 
Records of denied transactions are retained for 2 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm may appeal to VSP
and further to circuit court.

Arrests of denied persons.  VSP arrests all persons denied
because of an outstanding warrant, and arrests persons who
submit false information in some cases.  Using set criteria, VSP
decides which denied persons should be prosecuted, in
conjunction with ATF and U.S. attorneys for Federal violations
or with commonwealth attorneys for State violations.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 148,278 applied;
2,251 denied; 1.5% denial rate.  

11/30/98 to 6/30/99: 108,254 applied; 1,708 denied; 1.6% denial
rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  The instant check law was
amended to clarify rules regarding transactions where a dealer
receives no response from the State Police.

Relevant laws.  Code of Virginia 18.2-279 et seq.

Source of information.  Virginia State Police.

Washington

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Washington law prohibits possession of
firearms by a person who is convicted of a serious offense,
felony or misdemeanor specified in State law; involuntarily
committed for mental health treatment; under eighteen years of
age; or free on bond or personal recognizance pending trial,
appeal or sentencing for a serious offense.

Restoration of rights.  An offender's right to possess firearms
may be restored by a governor's pardon.  Except for certain
offenders, persons without further violations for 5 years after
completing their sentences may petition the court of record for
restoration of firearm rights.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  Two hundred ninety-one sheriffs' and police
departments are partial points of contact for the NICS and
conduct checks on handgun purchasers required by Federal and
State law.  Checks are conducted upon receiving applications
from dealers in person, by fax, or by regular or certified mail.
A handgun can be delivered to the purchaser when the dealer is
notified of an approval or when 5 business days (7 days) have
elapsed.  The time allowed for a check under State law can be
extended up to 30 days when the applicant has a record which
lacks certain dispositions, or up to 60 days for persons who are
new State residents or lack the required identification. 
Dealers contact the FBI for checks required by the NICS on
persons purchasing long guns or redeeming pawned firearms.  ATF
and State rules allow holders of concealed handgun licenses
issued between 7/1/96 and 11/30/98 to make purchases without a
NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The State's handgun application
requires the purchaser's name, address, race, sex, height,
weight, eye color, date of birth, place of birth, driver's
license or ID number, and date of application plus the type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Washington maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history and domestic violence restraining order data on
a statewide network.  Some domestic violence misdemeanor and
juvenile data are also available.  Mental health records can be
accessed manually.

Check processing time.  Background checks are completed in less
than 60 days.

Retention of records.  State agencies retain approved
applications for a maximum period of 20 days and denied
applications indefinitely.  Dealers retain copies of
applications for 6 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a handgun may appeal to the
denying agency and further to superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases of outstanding warrants,
checking agencies normally notify the agency with jurisdiction
over the fugitive.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Washington Revised Code 9.41.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Washington State Patrol.

West Virginia

FBI conducts NICS checks


Prohibited persons.  West Virginia prohibits possession of
firearms by persons who are convicted 

of felonies; dishonorably discharged from the U.S. armed forces;
adjudicated as a mental incompetent or committed involuntarily
to a mental institution; illegal aliens; addicted to or unlawful
users of alcohol or  controlled substances or drugs; or minors
under the age of eighteen (except in limited circumstances).  

It is illegal to sell a firearm to a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights.  State law provides that prohibited
persons may petition the circuit court of the county where they
reside for an order which allows firearm possession.  The court
may enter an order if it finds such person capable of exercising
the responsibility concomitant with possession of a firearm.

Regulated sales.  The State does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms; a
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in the State contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  West Virginia maintains fully automated fugitive
and criminal history data on a statewide network.  The State
manually maintains some domestic abuse data.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI may
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 15,162 applied;
258 denied; 1.7% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99: no statewide
data available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  West Virginia Code 61-7-1 et seq.

Source of information.  West Virginia State Police.


Wisconsin

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Wisconsin law prohibits possession of
firearms by certain persons who are convicted of felonies;
adjudicated delinquent for acts that would be felonies if
committed by adults; found not guilty of a felony or a similar
offense in another State by reason of mental disease; committed
for treatment and ordered not to possess a firearm; or under
eighteen years of age.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms may be restored by a governor's pardon or Federal
relief.  A person who was adjudicated delinquent may regain
firearm rights if the court determines that the offender is not
likely to act in a manner dangerous to public safety.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  The
State does not issue concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The Wisconsin Department of Justice (DOJ) is
a point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on handgun
purchasers required by Federal and State law.  Dealers request
instant checks by using a 1-800 number to contact the Department
of Safety.  Checks must be completed within 48-hours under State
law; however, the time limit can be extended by 3 days for
felony charges with no recorded disposition.  Dealers contact
the FBI for checks required by the NICS on persons who purchase
long guns.  Pawnshops temporarily have the option of calling the
State agency for checks on persons who redeem handguns;
otherwise, redemption checks are processed by the FBI.

Waiting period.  A 2-day waiting period is required for handgun
sales (beginning when application is filed), regardless of when
a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  Handgun purchasers must provide
the following information: name, previous names, address, race,
sex, height, weight, date of birth, hair color, eye color, date
of application, and certification that no disqualifying grounds
exist.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $8 is charged for a background check.

State data.  Wisconsin maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, juvenile, domestic violence
misdemeanor/restraining order and mental health data on a
statewide network.  Probation and parole files are kept manually.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 2 minutes; transactions which require
additional research normally are processed in less than 1 day.


Retention of records.  Data on approved transactions are
retained for no more than 30 days; data on denied transactions
are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a handgun may appeal to DOJ
and further to State court.

Arrests of denied persons.  DOJ reports denied persons to ATF,
the Wisconsin Department of Investigation and local police.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  1/1/98 to 11/29/98: 30,022 applied;
457 denied; 1.5% denial rate.  11/30/98 to 6/30/99:  21,010
applied; 297 denied; 1.4% denial rate.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Wisconsin Statutes 175.35; 813.125; 941.25 et
seq; 948.55; 948.60.

Source of information.  Wisconsin Department of Justice.

Wyoming
Source of information.  Wyoming Attorney General.

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Wyoming prohibits possession of firearms by
persons convicted of violent felonies.

Restoration of rights.  A person convicted of a violent felony
may regain the right to possess firearms  through a governor's
pardon.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms.  A
license is required to carry a concealed dangerous weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS.  Licensed dealers in Wyoming contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  ATF allows holders of concealed
weapon licenses to purchase firearms without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Wyoming maintains a statewide network with fully
automated records of criminal histories and fugitives with
felony or misdemeanor warrants.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a firearm by the FBI may
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

1998/1999 firearm checks.  No statewide information is available.

1998/1999 legislative developments.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Wyoming Statutes 6-8-101 et seq.

Source of information.  Wyoming Attorney General.

American Samoa

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  The Territory of American Samoa does not
allow handguns on the island.  Even local police officers do not
carry handguns.  A person's baggage is checked for firearms upon
arrival.   Shotguns of various gauges and .22-caliber rifles are
allowed.  It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a person who
is prohibited from possession, less than 18 years old (except in
limited circumstances) or intoxicated.  A firearm cannot be
possessed by a person who has been convicted of or confined for
a dangerous felony in the preceding 5 years, or who is a
fugitive from justice, a habitual drunkard, a drug addict or
currently adjudged mentally incompetent.

Restoration of rights.  Restoration of firearm rights may be
given based on the expressed discretion of the attorney general
or the Department of Public Safety, upon review of the
application.

Regulated sales.  Licensing requirements apply to all transfers
of legal firearms.

Permits.  A license is required to possess, import or sell legal
firearms.

Background checks.   Checks required by territorial law on
purchasers of shotguns and .22-caliber rifles are performed by
the police.  After the weapon is purchased, the person must take
the sales receipt and the weapon to the police.  The police will
run a background check and issue a license.  The background
check includes checking with police departments on neighboring
islands.

Waiting period.  No requirements.

Information from applicants.  Territorial law allows requests
for any information as may be reasonably required.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $10 is charged for first time
applicants, and $2 is charged for renewals.

State data.  Information is maintained manually.

Check processing time.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  No information is available.

Registration.  Legal firearms are marked with a number
indicating the order of the license and registration as
specified in the license.

Appeals of denials.  Territorial law does not provide a
procedure for appealing a license denial.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

Relevant laws.  American Samoa Code 46.4201 et seq.

Source of information.  American Samoa Department of Public
Safety.

Guam

FBI conducts NICS checks 
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Guam law prohibits issuing a Firearms
Identification Card to a person who is  convicted of a felony;
an alien; charged with a felony; adjudicated incompetent or
committed to a mental institution; under the age of 18;
convicted of a drug offense or a misdemeanor where personal
injury or use of firearms was an element or factor of the
offense; or who appears to suffer from a physical or mental
disease which would adversely affect the safe use of the firearm
applied for.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to receive an
identification card cannot be restored.

Regulated sales.  All transfers of lawful firearms, except for
temporary transfers at shooting galleries, require that the
person receiving the firearm hold an identification card.

Permits.  A Firearms Identification Card is required to own,
possess, use, carry or acquire any lawful firearm.

Background checks.  The Guam Police Department (GPD) conducts
background checks on identification cards applicants.  FBI data
and local files are checked.  The territory is not a point of
contact for the NICS. Licensed dealers in Guam contact the FBI
for all checks required by the NICS.  An ATF ruling allows
identification cards issued before 11/30/98 to be used for a
purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No requirements.


Information from applicants.  Identification card applicants
must provide the following: name, current address, previous
address, place of birth, date of birth, home phone, duty phone,
Social Security number, occupation, employer, race, sex, height,
weight, eye color and hair color.

Purchaser fees.  First time applicants must submit a money order
or bank draft payable to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in
the amount of $24, for the FBI background information fee.  Once
the background check is cleared and the application is approved,
the applicant is charged a fee of $15 for the identification
card (renewable every 3 years).   There is also a fee of $20 for
the registration of each firearm.

State data.  Guam agencies maintain fugitive, criminal history
and mental health data.

Check processing time.  The identification card process can take
as much as 6 to 10 weeks while the applicant's background is
being checked.

Retention of records.  GPD retains all identification card
applications indefinitely.

Registration.  After purchasing a weapon, the receipt is taken
to the Guam Police Department.  The weapon is inspected by the
duty armorer and registered by the department.  Private sales
and transfers to or from pawnbrokers require a new registration.

Appeals of denials.  Territorial law does not provide a
procedure for appealing an identification card denial.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

Relevant laws.  Guam Code 10-60100 et seq.

Source of information.  Guam Police Department.

Puerto Rico

FBI conducts NICS checks
Commonwealth conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Puerto Rico law prohibits issuing a license
to have or possess firearms to any person who has been convicted
of any of the following offenses or of the attempt to commit the
same, in or outside Puerto Rico: murder in any degree,
manslaughter, kidnaping, rape, mayhem, intent to commit any
felony, aggravated assault and battery with a weapon, robbery,
burglary, misappropriation, arson, aggravated arson, incest or
violation of certain statutes.  Nor can a license be issued to
any person who is mentally unbalanced, a habitual drunkard, a
narcotics or drug addict, or has been convicted of a violation
of the provisions hereof.

Restoration of rights.  No regulations cover restoration of
rights.


Regulated sales.  The Weapons Law establishes that no dealer in
firearms or ammunition shall deliver a firearm or issue the
corresponding delivery permit to a purchaser without the latter
producing a license to have and possess a firearm.  No weapon is
sold to the holder of a license from which the sales permit has
been removed.  Licensing requirements apply to all firearm sales.

Permits.  Puerto Rico requires a license to purchase or carry a
firearm.

Background checks.  License applications require background
checks conducted by the Police of Puerto Rico.  Applications are
received by certified mail or in person.  The commonwealth is
not a point of contact for the NICS.  Dealers must contact the
FBI for all checks required by the NICS.

Waiting period.  No requirements.

Information from applicants.  Fingerprints are required, and the
standard ATF form is used.

Purchaser fees.  Commonwealth law requires fees of $50 for a
license and $15 for a renewal every 3 years.

State data.  The police department maintains a manual database.

Check processing time.  The background check process can take
from 6 to 12 months.

Retention of records.  Approved applications are retained by the
police for a maximum period of 20 days.

Registration.  Every firearm sold is registered with the
Superintendent of Police.

Appeals of denials.  For denied license applicants, the police
have an internal appeals process with written procedures, and
there is an external appeals process that involves the court
system.

Arrests of denied persons.  ATF is notified of persons who
submit false information on an application.

Relevant laws.  Laws of Puerto Rico 25-411 et seq.

Source of information.  Chief of the Weapons Registry for the
Police of Puerto Rico.

Virgin Islands

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Virgin Islands law provides that a license
to possess a firearm cannot be issued to a person who is
convicted of a crime of violence, a drug law violation or a
firearms law violation; mentally incompetent; a habitual
drunkard; a drug addict; or deemed to be an improper person by
the police.

Restoration of rights.  No information is available.

Regulated sales.  Licensing requirements apply to all firearm
sales.

Permits.  A license is required to possess, transport, or carry
a firearm.  A purchase coupon is issued with the license and
retained by the firearm dealer.

Background checks.  License applications require a background
check by the Virgin Islands Police Department.  The applicant
completes and returns a notarized application.  If no problems
are found during the check, the application is forwarded to the
Police Commissioner, who approves or disapproves the
application.  In addition, dealers contact the FBI for all
checks required by the NICS.  An ATF ruling allows a territorial
license to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  Firearm transfers require a 48-hour waiting
period, regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  A license application is
accompanied by four photographs and notarized statements from
character references.  Fingerprints are required.  Other
required information varies with the type of application.

Purchaser fees.  The Virgin Islands charges a $30 application
fee, a $50 registration fee per weapon,  and a $15 late
registration fee. The license must be renewed every three years,
with a $100 renewal fee.  New photographs are required with each
renewal.

State data.  No information is available. 

Check processing time.  No information is available. 

Retention of records.  No information is available. 

Registration.  After purchase, the bill of sale and the weapon
are brought to the police, where all the information is recorded.

Appeals of denials.  Persons denied a license can appeal to
territorial court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available. 

Relevant laws.  Virgin Islands Code 23-451 et seq.

Source of information.  Virgin Islands Police Department.

Washington, D.C.

FBI conducts NICS checks
District conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  District of Columbia laws no longer allow
the purchase of handguns, except by law enforcement officers,
retired district police officers, military personnel, licensed
dealers and organizations that employ special police.  A
registration certificate for a legal firearm cannot be issued to
certain persons who are under 18 years of age (applicants
between the ages of 18 and 21 are required to have a notarized
statement from a parent or guardian); convicted of or under
indictment for a crime of violence or weapons offense; convicted
of an offense involving drugs, assaults or threats; acquitted by
reason of insanity; adjudicated chronic alcoholics; committed to
a mental hospital; suffering from a physical defect and unable
to use a firearm safely; adjudicated negligent in a firearm
mishap causing death or serious injury; or otherwise ineligible
under district law.  All  registration applicants are required
to demonstrate adequate vision and a satisfactory knowledge of
district firearm laws.

Restoration of rights.  Persons convicted of offenses involving
drugs, assaults or threats, and certain other prohibited
persons, may be allowed to register a firearm after a 5 year
disqualification.

Regulated sales.  Only firearm transfers by or to licensed
dealers are allowed.  Dealers can transfer firearms to persons
with valid registration certificates.

Permits.  A valid registration certificate is required for
possession or transfer of any firearm.

Background checks.  The Chief of Police conducts background
checks and issues registration certificates.  The district is
not a point of contact for the NICS; licensed dealers contact
the FBI for all NICS checks.  An ATF ruling allows registration
certificates issued before 11/30/98 to be used for a purchase
without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No requirements.

Information from applicants.  Registration information includes
the applicant's name, present address, previous addresses,
occupation, business address, date and place of birth, sex,
history with firearms, intended use and location of the firearm,
plus information about the firearm to be transferred and the
transferor.  Fingerprints may be required, and two recent
photographs must be submitted.

Purchaser fees.  No information is available.

State data.  No information is available.

Check processing time.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  No information is available.

Registration.  All handguns owned prior to September 24, 1976,
are required to be registered.  Handguns and long guns acquired
after that date must also be registered.

Appeals of denials.  District law does not provide an appeal
procedure for a person who is denied a registration certificate.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

Relevant laws.  District of Columbia Code 6-2301 et seq; 22-3201
et seq.

Source of information.  United States Attorney's Office,
District of Columbia.        

State contacts for the Firearm
Inquiry Statistics (FIST) project

Alabama
Isaac Kervin
Criminal Justice Information
770 Washington Ave.
Room 350
Montgomery AL  36130
(334) 242-4900

Alaska
Diane Schenker
Department of Public Safety
Division of Administrative Services
5700 East Tudor Road
Anchorage AK  99507
(907) 269-5092

Arizona
Teresa Fuentes
Department of Public Safety
Instant Check Unit
P.O. Box 6638
Phoenix AZ  85005
(602) 223-2702

Arkansas
T. J Farley
Attorney General's Office
200 Tower Building
323 Center Street
Little Rock AR  72201
(501) 682-2007

California
Mike Broderick
Department of Justice
Firearms Program
P.O Box 820200
Sacramento CA  94203
(916) 227-3500

Colorado
Susan Kitchen
CBI Instant Check Unit
CO Dept. of Public Safety

690 Kipling Street, Rm. 3000
Denver CO  80215
(303) 239-4235

Connecticut
Robert Kiehm
Department of Public Safety
License and Firearms Unit
1111 Country Club Road
Middletown CT  06457
(860) 685-8160

Delaware
Teresa Jones
State Police, BOI
Firearms Transfer Program
P.O. Box 430
Dover DE  19903
(302) 739-2933

Florida
Martha Wright
Department of Law Enforcement
Criminal Justice Information
P.O. Box 1489
Tallahassee FL  32302
(850) 488-4931

Georgia
Charles A. Severs
Bureau of Investigation
Crime Information Center
P.O. Box 370748
Decatur GA  30037
(404) 244-2605

Hawaii
Liane Moriyama
Criminal Justice Data Center
Kekuanao'a Building
465 South King St., Rm. 101
Honolulu HI  96813
(808) 587-3101

Idaho
Bob Taylor
Bureau of Criminal Identification
Criminal History Unit
700 South Stratford
Meridian ID  83642
(208) 884-7133

Illinois
Kirk Lonbon
State Police
Division of Administration
100 Iles Park Place
Springfield IL  62708

(217) 782-5015

Indiana
Karen Butt
State Police Firearm
Indiana Government Center North
100 N. Senate Ave.
Indianapolis IN  46204
(317) 232-8264

Iowa
Carroll L. Bidler
Office of Public Safety
Division of Criminal Investigation
Wallace State Office Building
Des Moines IA  5031
(515) 281-8422

Kansas
Charles Sexson
Bureau of Investigation
1620 Southwest Tyler
Topeka KS  66612
(785) 291-3029

Kentucky
Carol Bowman
State Police
Information Services Center
1250 Louisville Road
Frankfort KY  40601
(502) 227-8700

Louisiana
Mike Noel
Office of State Police
Bureau of Criminal Identification
P.O. Box 66614
Baton Rouge LA  708
(504) 925-6095  

Maine
Barry Hathawy
State Police
Department of Public Safety
36 Hospital Street
Augusta ME  04333
(207) 624-7062

Maryland
W.T. Szimanski
State Police
Firearms Enforcement Division
7751 Washington Boulevard
Jessup MD  20794
(410) 799-0191


Massachusetts
Maureen W. Chew
Criminal History Systems
200 Arlington Street
Boston MA  02150
(617) 660-4600

Michigan
Debbie Smith
Department of State Police
Central Records Division
7150 Harris Drive
Lansing MI  48913
(517) 322-5518

Minnesota
Karen R. McDonald
Criminal Justice Information System
Department of Public Safety
1246 University Avenue
St. Paul MN  55104
(612) 642-0687

Mississippi
S. David Bufkin
Department of Public Safety
Records and Identification Division
P.O. Box 958
Jackson MS  39205
(601) 987-1586

Missouri
Robert E. Gartner
State Highway Patrol
Criminal Records Division
P.O. Box 568
Jefferson City MO  65102
(573) 526-6160

Montana
Walt Joyce
Department of Justice
Law Enforcement Services
Scott Hart Building, Rm. 374
Helena MT  59620
(406) 444-2966

Nebraska
Lathan Rohren
State Highway Patrol
P.O. Box 94907
Lincoln NE  68509
(402) 479-4938

Nevada
Grace L. George
Highway Patrol
555 Wright Way

Carson City NV  89711
(702) 687-6675

New Hampshire
Patrick Poirier
Department of State Police
James H. Hayes Safety Building
10 Hazen Drive
Concord NH  03305
(603) 271-3575

New Jersey
Mike Aneskewich
Department of State Police
River Road West
Trenton NJ  08628
(609) 882-2000

New Mexico
Paul V. Herrera
Department of Public Safety
Technical and Emergency Support
P.O. Box 1628
Sante Fe NM  87504
(505) 827-9191

New York
Clyde DeWeese
Division of Criminal Justice Service
Office of Identification
Stuyvesant Plaza
Albany NY  12203
(518) 457-6050

North Carolina
David P. Bryan
Bureau of Investigation
407 North Blount Street
Raleigh NC 27601
(919) 733-3171

North Dakota
Robert J. Helten
Bureau of Criminal Investigation
Information Services Division
P.O. Box 1054
Bismarck ND  58502
(701) 328-5500

Ohio
Lonnie Rudasill
Bureau of Criminal Identification
P.O. Box 365
London OH  43140
(740) 852-2556

Oklahoma
Ronald R. Young

Bureau of Investigation
6600 North Harvey,
Oklahoma City OK  73116
(405) 848-6724

Oregon
Clifford W. Daimler
State Police
Identification Services
3772 Portland Road NE
Salem OR  97303
(503) 378-3070

Pennsylvania
John Thierwechter
State Police
Records and Information Services
1800 Elmerton Avenue
Harrisburg PA  17110
(717) 783-5592

Rhode Island
Vincent McAteer
Department of the Attorney General
Bureau of Criminal Investigation
150 South Main
Providence RI  02903
(401) 421-5268

South Carolina
Carlotta Stackhouse
Law Enforcement Division
4400 Broad River Road
Columbia SC  29221
(803) 896-7118

South Dakota
Robert Grandpre
Division of Criminal Investigations
Administration Services
500 East Capitol Avenue
Pierre SD  57501
(605) 773-3331

Tennessee
Doug Woodlee
Bureau of Investigation
1148 Foster Avenue
Nashville TN  37210
(615)726-7809

Texas
David Gavin
Department of Public Safety
Crime Records Division
P.O. Box 4143
Austin TX  78765
(512) 424-2077

Utah
Joyce Carter
Bureau of Criminal Identification
4501 South 2700 West
Salt Lake City UT  84119
(801) 965-3810

Vermont
Max Schleuter
Criminal Information Center
Department of Public Safety
P.O. Box 189
Waterbury VT  05676
(802) 244-8727

Virginia
R. Lewis Vass
State Police
Records Management Division
P.O. Box 27472
Richmond VA  23261
(804) 674-2148

Washington
Jannice Gordon
State Highway Patrol
Identification Section
P.O. Box 42633
Olympia WA  98504
(360) 705-5102

West Virginia
Thomas A. Barrick
Department of State Police
725 Jefferson Road
South Charleston WV  25309
(304) 746-2177

Wisconsin
Mary Studevant
Department of Justice
Criminal Records Section
123 West Washington Ave.
Madison WI  53702
(608) 267-2776

Wyoming
James M. Wilson
Division of Criminal Investigation
316 West 22nd Street
Cheyenne WY  82002
(307) 777-7523

American Samoa
Jacinta Brown
O.T.I.C.I.D.E.
P.O. Box 4567
Pago Pago AS  96799

(684) 633-2827

Guam
Ray Fernandez
Police Department
287 West Obrien Drive
Agana GU  96910
(671) 475-8459

Puerto Rico
Julio L. Rosa Santiago
Department of Justice
P.O. Box 192
San Juan PR  00902-0192
(787) 729-2484

Virgin Islands
Susan M. McDonald
Records Bureau
V. I. Police Department
Criminal Justice Complex
St. Thomas VI  00802
(809) 774-2211

Washington, D.C.
Thomas Zeno
U.S. Attorney's Office
555 4th Street, N.W
Washington DC  20001
(202) 514-6922

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

Report of work performed under
BJS Cooperative Agreement No.
95-RU-RX-K021 awarded to the
Regional Justice Information
Service (REJIS), 4255 West Pine
Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri
63108.  Contents of this document
do not necessarily reflect the views
or policies of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics or the U.S. Department
of Justice.

The U.S. Department of Justice
authorizes any person to repro-
duce, publish, translate, or other-
wise use all or any part of this 
material in this publication with
the exception of those items
indicating they are copyrighted
or printed by any source other
than REJIS.

More information on this subject
may be obtained from:

Gene Lauver, FIST Manager
Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard
St. Louis, MO. 63108
Phone: (314) 535-1455, ext. 260
Fax: (314) 535-1729

An electronic version of this
report may be found on the
Internet at:

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/


End of file
3/1/00 ih






