U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2003


August 2004, NCJ 203701


---------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfsm03.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ssprfs
----------------------------------------------------------------

Prepared by the 
Regional Justice Information Service 
St. Louis, Missouri

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement No. 95-RU-RX-K021 
awarded to the Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), 4255 West Pine
Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63108. Contents of this document do not necessarily
reflect the views or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the U.S.
Department of Justice.

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to reproduce, publish,
translate, or otherwise use all or any parts of the material in this
publication with the exception of those items indicating they are 
copyrighted or printed by any source other than REJIS.

More information on this subject may be obtained from:

Gene Lauver, FIST Manager Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard St. Louis, MO 63108 Phone: (314) 535-1455, 
ext. 260 Fax: (314) 535-1729

Devon B. Adams, BJS State Program Manager, and Ronald J. Frandsen, 
REJIS, wrote this report . Gene Lauver, Michael Bowling, David 
Naglich, and Joann Laws assisted in collecting survey data for 
REJIS. Tom Hester and Carolyn C. Williams produced and edited the 
report. 

An electronic version of this
report may be found on the
Internet at:

Http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Contents

Introduction

History of the survey and related Bulletins      
Survey methodology                     

Background

Federal prohibitions                   
Brady interim system                   
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)   
State involvement in firearm 
transfer regulation                                        
ATF reorganization              
Sources of additional information           

Firearm sales topics

Prohibited persons                     
Prohibitory records                    
Types of firearms                      
Regulated sales                        
Approval systems                       
Waiting periods                        
Checking process                       
Transaction and registration
records              
Appeals of denials                     
Rejection rates                 

Jurisdictional summaries

Information in summaries               
Federal system                   

States
Alabama                          
Alaska                                 
Arizona                                
Arkansas                               
California                                           
Colorado                                    
Connecticut                                 
Delaware                         
Florida                          
Georgia                          
Hawaii                           
Idaho                            
Illinois                         
Indiana                          
Iowa                             
Kansas                           
Kentucky                         
Louisiana                        
Maine                                  
Maryland                         
Massachusetts                    
Michigan                         
Minnesota                        
Mississippi                      
Missouri                         
Montana                          
Nebraska                         
Nevada                           
New Hampshire                    
New Jersey                        
New Mexico                       
New York                         
North Carolina                   
North Dakota                     
Ohio                             
Oklahoma                         
Oregon                           
Pennsylvania                     
Rhode Island                     
South Carolina                   
South Dakota                     
Tennessee                              
Texas                                  
Utah                             
Vermont                          
Virginia                         
Washington                                  
West Virginia                               
Wisconsin                                   
Wyoming                          
American Samoa                   
Guam                                   
Puerto Rico                      
The Virgin Islands               
Washington, D.C.

Appendixes

Table 1. Applications for firearm transfers and permits processed by
States                           
Table 1a. Applications for firearm permits processed by local agencies,
grouped by population level of community served                    
Table 2. Prohibited persons: Statutory basis for denial of firearm
sale or possession                     
Table 3. Minors: Restrictions based on age or juvenile offender status         
Table 4. National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS): checking agencies              
Table 5. Background check and permit procedures            
Table 6. Fees, record retention, and appeals                    
Table 7. Prohibited and restricted firearms           
Table 8. Firearm laws                  
Table 9. Laws regarding prohibited persons, restoration of rights,
pro-hibited firearms, regulated sales, handgun transfer limits, and 
permits                          
Table 10. Laws regarding background checks, waiting 
periods, transaction records, registration, false applications, 
and appeals                            
Table 11. Revisions of sales regulations and other significant
changes in State firearm laws               
Table 12. Agencies conducting firearm background checks    
Table 13. Notification procedures of State agencies regarding
denied persons subject to arrest                      
Table 14. Data accessed for firearm background checks: domestic 
violence                         
Table 15. Data accessed for firearm background checks:  other
prohibitions                     

State contacts for FIST Project             

State agency Internet sites                      

Glossary and acronyms             

Introduction

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2003 is the eighth in a series of Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
reports. This report describes laws, regulations, proce- dures, and
information systems related to sales and other transfers of firearms
that were in effect as of June 30, 2003. Procedures summarized in
the survey are required by the laws and regulations of the United
States, the 50 States, and other jurisdictions.

History of the survey and related bulletins  This national survey
is produced by the BJS Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) project, a
component of the National Criminal History Improvement Program
(NCHIP). NCHIP provides funding and technical assistance to
improve the quality, timeliness, and accessibility of State criminal
records and support interfaces between State and national record
systems. The FIST project was established in 1995 to collect data
that describes the scope and impact of firearm background checks
required under Federal or State law.

The first three editions of the survey primarily described procedures
related to background checks on handgun purchasers, especially
those required by the interim provisions of the Brady Act. The fourth
through seventh editions described procedures required by the
permanent provisions of the Brady Act or State law for transfers of
handguns and other types of firearms. This edition incorporates
recent changes in Federal and State procedures, and provides
expanded and updated coverage on topics related to firearm sales.

Data collected and analyzed by the FIST project are also reported in
BJS Bulletins. Five bulletins reported counts of firearm transfer
applications and denials for the Brady interim period. (A cumulative
summary is presented in Presale Handgun Checks, the Brady Interim 
Period, 1994-1998, June 1999, NCJ 175034.) More recent bulletins 
have summarized counts of firearm transfer applications and denials 
for the first 4 full years of the permanent Brady Act provisions. For 
the most recent bulletin, see Background Checks for Firearm Transfers,
2002, September 2003, NCJ 200116.

(All prior surveys and bulletins can be viewed or ordered through
the BJS web site listed at the end of the Background section.)

The regular release of updated information in BJS surveys and
bulletins is intended to highlight changes in the number of firearm
transfer applications and denials as well as changes in the overall
denial rate or the reasons for denial. The changes reported may be
influenced by a variety of factors, including revisions in Federal and
State laws, policies, or procedures, and the availability of different
categories of law enforcement records. BJS anticipates that the
procedural information presented in this report will be used with the
statistical information about background checks to provide a more
thorough understanding of the scope and impact of firearm transfer
regulations.

Survey methodology  Information for this report was collected
from hundreds of Federal, State, and local agencies, including law
enforcement organizations, statistical analysis centers, and
legislative research bureaus. Descriptions of procedures and
statistical data were voluntarily provided by agencies participating 
in the survey. Data analysis and supplementary legal research were
provided by the Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS), the
organization conducting the study pursuant to a cooperative
agreement with BJS.

To ensure the accuracy of the information as of June 30, 2003, a
draft of each State's summary was sent to the agency designated
by the State for review and comment. The final version of each
summary, as contained in this report, was reviewed and approved
by the State contact. A complete list of the State contacts is
included in the appendices. 

Consistent with privacy protection procedures followed by the FIST
project, the information collected for this survey did not disclose 
the identity of any individual involved in a firearm transaction.
Additionally, the software provided to help agencies submit
statistical data to REJIS contains a purging mechanism that
destroys data in accordance with applicable Federal or State law.

Background

Federal prohibitions  The Gun Control Act (GCA), 18 U.S.C.
922(d), prohibits the transfer of any firearm to any person who --

*  is under indictment for or has been convicted of a crime punishable by
imprisonment for more than 1 year
*  is a fugitive from justice
*  is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance
*  has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a mental
institution
*  is an alien unlawfully in the United States or admitted under a
nonimmigrant visa
*  was discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions
*  has renounced U.S. citizenship
*  is subject to a court order restraining him or her from harassing,
stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child
*  has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic 
violence

In addition, it is unlawful for a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) to
transfer a long gun to a person less than 18 years of age or a
handgun to a person less than 21 years of age. It is unlawful, with
limited exceptions, for any person to transfer a handgun to a
juvenile (under 18). (18 U.S.C. 922(b), (x))

Brady interim system  In 1993 the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act 
(Brady Act) amended the Gun Control Act to provide a method for blocking
transfers to prohibited persons. From February 28, 1994, until November 
30, 1998, the interim provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), 
required a FFL to request a background check on a prospective handgun
purchaser by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer (CLEO) of the jurisdiction
where the licensee operated. A handgun could be transferred if a denial 
was not transmitted within 5 days by the CLEO. The interim provisions
allowed States with prohibitory statutes comparable to Federal law to 
utilize handgun purchase permits and other alternative procedures.

National Instant Criminal Background Check System  The permanent provisions 
of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t), required establishment of the National
Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) by November 30, 1998. 
The U.S. Department of Justice, with the States, developed the system 
during the 57-month interim period.

The NICS allows a licensee to contact the system by telephone or
other electronic means for information, to be supplied immediately,
on whether receipt of a firearm by a transferee would violate
Federal or State law. In addition to regulation of handgun sales, the
permanent provisions mandate background checks on long gun
purchasers and persons who redeem a pawned firearm. A licensee
has the option of requesting a check on a person who attempts to
pawn a firearm.

A NICS check by a dealer is not required if a transferee presents a
State permit qualified by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives (ATF) as an alternative to the point-of-transfer
check. Qualifying permits are those which:

1) allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm, and 
2) were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State in which
the transfer is to take place, after verification by an authorized
government official that possession of a firearm by the transferee
would not be a violation of law

A permit issued after November 30, 1998 qualifies as an alternative
only if the information available to the State authority includes the
NICS. As of June 30, 2003, 20 States authorize permits that exempt
the holder from a NICS check.

Prior to initiating a NICS check, a licensee must receive a
completed Firearm Transaction Record (ATF Form 4473) and verify
the transferee's identity through a photo identification issued by a
government agency. A transferee may also be required to complete
a State disclosure form. Submitting false information in regard to a
firearm transaction may subject a transferee to arrest and
prosecution under Federal law and many State statutes.

All NICS checks by the FBI are without charge; POC fees are
determined by State law or agency regulations (see table 6). A
licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI or a
point of contact (POC) agency designated by State government.
Most inquiries are conducted by telephone. The FBI provides
Internet access to dealers through a program known as "e-check."
Computerized access is available through some POC agencies,
usually by way of a State terminal at a dealer's premises.

The FBI and the POC agencies always check three major Federal
databases, the National Crime Information Center (NCIC), the
Interstate Identification Index (III), and the NICS Index. If the
transferee is not a citizen of the United States, the NICS will 
query Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) records. 
A POC may check additional State records. A check may include
contacting an agency that maintains a record that the FBI or POC
cannot access directly.

After a search of available records, the checking agency responds
with a notice to the licensee that the transfer may proceed, may not
proceed, or is delayed pending further review of the applicant's
record. If further review of a record indicates the transfer would not
violate Federal or State law, the checking agency notifies the
licensee that the transfer may proceed. If the licensee does not
receive a response within 3 business days, the transfer may
proceed at the licensee's discretion (known as a "default proceed").

The FBI has requested that POC agencies notify NICS when a
transfer is denied. Thirteen statewide POC agencies were able to
provide denial notifications to NICS as of June 30, 2003.

A person who is prohibited from purchasing a firearm may request
the reason for denial from the FBI or POC, which has 5 business
days to respond. The applicant may then submit information to
correct the record on which the denial was based and may be
required to contact the agency where the record originated. As an
alternative the applicant's challenge to the record can be directed to
the FBI, which will contact the denying agency or the source of the
record. A person who is denied by a POC may also have appeal
rights pursuant to State law. 

In addition to background checks related to firearm transfers, the
NICS Index may be accessed for information related to a permit or
license for explosives, or in response to ATF inquiries regarding
enforcement of Federal firearms laws. NICS denial data is
electronically transmitted by the FBI on a daily basis to ATF's Brady
Office, which screens the data and refers potential violations to ATF
field offices. 

ATF is also informed when the FBI discovers that a firearm was
transferred to a prohibited person after a default proceed. An ATF
investigation may result in retrieval of the firearm or a transfer back
to the dealer. ATF gives priority to investigation of felons, domestic
violence offenders, nonimmigrant aliens, and other prohibited
persons who attempt to obtain firearms. (See ATF Performance and
Accountability Report 2002; for information on prosecutions, see
Federal Firearm Offenders, 1992-98, June 2000, NCJ 180795.)

State involvement in firearm transfer regulation  Each State
determines the extent of its participation in the NICS process. Three
basic forms of State involvement currently exist:

1) a POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers originating
in the State
2) a POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers;
licensees in the State are required to contact the FBI for approval of
long gun transfers
3) the State does not maintain a point of contact; licensees are
required to contact the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm transfers
originating in the State

As of June 30, 2003, handgun transfer checks are conducted by the
FBI for 26 States and by POC agencies for 24 States; long gun
transfer checks are conducted by the FBI for 36 States and by POC
agencies for 14 States. In a few States the FBI conducts the NICS
check on certain pawn transactions instead of the POC. Most
States have designated a single agency with statewide jurisdiction
as their NICS point of contact. Some States have multiple points of
contact, which are usually county sheriffs or municipal police
departments. Local agencies access the NICS through a State
interface.

In addition to transfer checks, POC agencies may also conduct
NICS checks on persons who apply for a State permit required to
receive a firearm. Agencies that issue ATF- qualified permits either
access the NICS Index themselves or request a check by sending
information (such as fingerprints) to the FBI.

The NICS process does not automatically supplant State firearm
transfer regulations. State background check and permit statutes
that existed before the effective date of the NICS remain in force
unless repealed by legislative action or allowed to expire. The
background check requirements of the Brady Act are the prevailing
minimum nationwide. Some States have enacted additional
requirements.

Most background checks required by State laws are conducted by
agencies that also serve as NICS points of contact. However,
purchasers in six States are required to undergo two checks
conducted by different agencies. If agencies that conduct checks
under State law are unable to access the NICS, licensees in that
State are required to contact the FBI for approval of transfers. Thus,
prospective transferees in some States are required to undergo a
permit or sale check by a State agency and a NICS check by the
FBI.

ATF reorganization  Homeland security legislation authorized the
transfer of firearms law enforcement functions from the Treasury
Department to the Department of Justice. Effective January 24,
2003, the new division within the Department of Justice is known as
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (still
referred to as "ATF"). The Treasury Department retained authority
over alcohol and tobacco revenue collection.

Sources of additional information  NICS regulations have been
promulgated by the FBI (28 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 25)
and ATF (27 CFR 478). Internet sites for State agencies that
provide information about firearm laws are listed in the Appendix.
Further information on Federal law and BJS-related publications is
available from the following sites:

ATF: <http://www.atf.gov/firearms/
index.htm>
FBI: <http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/nics/
index.htm>
BJS: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
Guns.htm>   

Firearm sales topics — State laws

Prohibited persons

The categories of prohibited persons in the Federal Gun Control Act
(GCA) are the prevailing minimum nationwide (see Background).
Firearm transfer to or possession by such persons is unlawful. State
statutes may include additional or more restrictive prohibitions.
These prohibitory laws are intended to prevent firearm possession
or purchase by persons believed to be incapable of handling a
weapon in a safe and legal manner. In some cases Federal and
State laws allow a prohibited person to regain firearm rights. 

The most common categories of prohibited persons are described
below. The number of States that have enacted each type of
prohibition is listed in parentheses. 

Felons (49 States) -- Generally, a felony is an offense that carries
a penalty of incarceration for more than 1 year. The GCA prohibits a
person who is under indictment for or has been convicted of a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year. A crime is not
within this prohibition if it is an offense related to the regulation of
business practices or a State offense classified as a misdemeanor
and punishable by imprisonment of 2 years or less. A conviction is
not prohibitory if it was expunged or set aside, or if the offender was
pardoned or had civil rights restored. See 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(20).

Although statutory definitions vary widely, the laws of 49 States
prohibit firearm purchase or possession by at least some categories
of felons. Some statutes disqualify all convicted felons from firearm
possession. Other statutes disqualify persons who committed
specific felonies, which may be enum- erated in the statute or
categorized by terms such as "crimes of violence," "serious
offenses," or "firearm offenses." Many statutes extend purchase or
possession restrictions to persons convicted of a felony or a similar
offense in other jurisdictions. Only Vermont lacks a statute that bars
firearm possession by a convicted felon.

Federal relief from firearm disabilities may be obtained through a
presidential pardon or an ATF decision. Nearly all States allow
firearm rights to be regained by a pardon or restoration of civil
rights, or by expungement or set aside of a conviction (see
Jurisdictional summaries). Restoration of State firearm rights may
be obtained from the governor or through a court order, an
administrative proceeding, or the passage of a certain number of
years after conviction or discharge from a sentence without further
violations. 

Many States require several steps before rights are restored. For
example, a person who obtained a pardon or has not committed a
new offense for a specified number of years may be required to
petition a court for an order that restores firearm rights. The method
of restoration may depend on the type of offense that was
committed. In some States, certain offenders can never regain the
right to possess a firearm. 

State relief from firearm disabilities does not automatically restore
rights under Federal law or in another State. A State proceeding
that does not fully restore the rights to possess or receive firearms
is insufficient to remove a Federal disability (27 CFR 478.142).

In addition to restricting the rights of convicted felons, 12 States
prohibit firearm purchase or possession by at least some persons
who have been charged with a felony. Colorado and Florida extend
the prohibition to persons who have been arrested for certain
disqualifying offenses. Firearm rights are restored in these States if
an arrest or criminal charge does not result in a disqualifying guilty
plea or conviction.

Misdemeanor offenders (21 States) -- Generally, a misdemeanor
is a crime punishable by incarceration for less than one year. A few
States have offenses defined as misdemeanors that are punishable
by incarceration for more than one year. The types of
misdemeanor-level offenses included in prohibitory statutes vary
widely. 

Federal law and a few State codes only prohibit a misdemeanor
offender who has been convicted of an act of domestic violence
(generally, an assault against a spouse, an intimate partner, or a
child). Several other States deny a misdemeanor offender who has
been convicted of any crime of violence or a firearm offense. 

Requirements for misdemeanor offenders to regain firearm rights
after a conviction are generally less stringent than those for felons.
A few States disqualify persons who have been arrested for or
charged with certain misdemeanors.

Fugitives (12 States) -- The GCA, at 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(15), defines
"fugitive from justice" as any person who has fled from any State to
avoid prosecution for a crime or to avoid giving testimony in a
criminal proceeding. Most States apply a similar definition and some
limit the prohibition to persons who are wanted for certain types of
offenses.

Mentally ill (33 States) -- Federal law prohibits firearm possession
by a person who has been adjudicated as a mental defective or
committed to a mental institution. The definition of "adjudicated as a
mental defective" (27 CFR 478.11) includes a person who is found
by a court or other authority to be a danger to himself or others,
unable to manage his own affairs, insane in a criminal case,
incompetent to stand trial, or not guilty by lack of mental
responsibility. "Committed to a mental institution" includes an
involuntary commitment by a court or other authority, but does not
include a voluntary admission. 
State definitions of disqualifying mental illness are generally similar
to the Federal definition although a variety of terminology is used.
Some States list specific court orders that will cause a mental
illness prohibition. A person who is prohibited may be able to regain
firearm rights if a certain number of years have elapsed after
discharge from a mental institution, or if documentation from a
mental health professional demonstrates that the person's condition
has stabilized.

Subject to a restraining order (19 States) -- A person prohibited
under this category is usually subject to a court order (entitled
restraining order, protection order, injunction, and others) intended
to prevent domestic violence. The applicable orders commonly
restrain the subject from contacting or harming a spouse, former
spouse, child, domestic partner, or other intimately related person.
In a few States the prohibition attaches if the order specifically bars
the subject from possessing firearms. A statute may provide that
the order becomes prohibitory when it is issued after a hearing with
the subject present (instead of ex parte) or entered into a law
enforcement information network. 

Drug or alcohol abusers and offenders (drug - 29 States; alcohol
- 19 States) -- Many States prohibit persons convicted of drug sale
or possession offenses, either through a statute that lists a variety
of disqualifying offenses or by way of a separate statute. A few
statutes disqualify persons who committed offenses involving
alcohol, such as driving while intoxicated. Generally, drug and
alcohol offenders may regain firearm rights in the same manner as
other prohibited offenders. 

Another common prohibition involves persons addicted to drugs or
alcohol, who are described by terms such as "addicted to a
controlled substance," "habitually intoxicated," or "chronic alcoholic."
In several States a firearm cannot be transferred to or possessed
by a person who is intoxicated. 

Minors (49 States) -- The firearm rights of minors are often
restricted solely on the basis of age. State laws include prohibitions
on purchase or possession of firearms by minors, and prohibitions
on transfer of firearms to minors. Some of these laws predate the
enactment of federal minimum ages for possession and purchase
of firearms. Limitations based on age apply to handguns in 49
States and to long guns in 38 States. 

The minimum age for unrestricted purchase and possession of a
handgun by a minor is usually 18 (28 States) or 21 (17 States). The
minimum age for unrestricted purchase and possession of a long
gun by a minor is usually 18 (31 States), with other minimum ages
ranging from 12 to 21.  In Rhode Island, a person under 18 years of
age must have a permit to participate in legal firearm activities.

The laws provide for numerous exceptions to prohibitions based
solely upon age. Generally, possession of a firearm is permissible
when a minor is engaged in educational or recreational activities
under the supervision of a parent, guardian, or certified firearms
instructor. 

Juvenile offenders (27 States) -- Statutes in this category prohibit
persons who were adjudicated delinquent or committed an act as a
juvenile that would have been a disqualifying offense if committed
by an adult. A juvenile offender's access to all firearms is restricted
in 23 States, and access to handguns is restricted in 4 additional
States. The prohibitions usually continue into early adulthood or until
the person regains firearm rights through a pardon, court order, or
other process. In several States persons who committed juvenile
offenses must follow the same restoration of rights procedures
available to adult offenders.

Aliens (12 States) -- The Gun Control Act prohibits transfer of a
firearm to a person who has entered the United States illegally or
has been admitted under a nonimmigrant visa. Pursuant to the
Immigration and Nationality Act, a nonimmigrant visa may be issued
to an alien who is allowed to reside or travel in the United States
temporarily. See 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15), (26). Certain aliens admitted
under a nonimmigrant visa are exempt from the firearm restrictions.
18 U.S.C. 922(y)(2). Among the States, Massachusetts prohibits
issuance of a license to carry or a firearm identification card to an
alien; Hawaii (with exceptions) and Missouri require a purchase
permit applicant to be a United States citizen. A person who is not a
United States citizen or lawfully admitted for permanent residence
cannot possess an assault firearm in Virginia. In eight other States,
firearm purchase or possession by an illegal alien is prohibited.
Hawaii, Massachusetts, and Washington allow certain aliens to
apply for a permit to possess a firearm. 

Other restrictions.  Additional categories of prohibited persons are
defined in State statutes, including persons who have failed to
complete a firearm safety course, or renounced their citizenship, or
were dishonorably discharged from military service. In addition,
several States prohibit a "straw purchase," an attempt to buy a
firearm on behalf of a known prohibited person. (See Jurisdictional
summaries for details.)

Between July 1, 2002 and June 30, 2003, six States enacted new
legislation regarding prohibited persons. The most extensive
legislative changes occurred in Maine, where an amendment
prohibited firearm possession by a person found not criminally
responsible for a listed crime by reason of mental disease or defect.
Two new sections of the Maine statutes provide, consistent with
Federal law, that an individual may not transfer a handgun to a
person under 18 years of age and a federally licensed dealer may
not sell a handgun to a person under 21 years of age.

Prohibitory records

Record systems are necessary to identify persons who are ineligible
to receive and possess a firearm. Prohibitory records are
maintained by Federal, State, and local agencies, and may be
computerized or on paper. These records may be in a database that
is used for a variety of law enforcement purposes or in a specialized
database that is used only for background checks on firearm
purchase or permit applicants. The most common types of prohibitory 
records are summarized below.

Criminal history  All States maintain a central repository with
criminal history records that include, at a minimum, felony arrests
and dispositions. The first entry for a subject is normally an arrest
record supported by fingerprints. Subsequent dispositions that may
be recorded include dismissals of charges, guilty pleas, convictions,
acquittals, admissions to and discharges from correctional facilities,
and probation and parole events. Criminal history repositories also
record modifications such as an expungement or a set aside of a
conviction, a pardon, or a restoration of civil rights. Agencies that
submit records to the repositories include police and sheriffs'
departments, courts, prosecutors, jails, and prisons.

State criminal record systems differ in regard to procedures, the
extent of automation, and the completeness, accuracy, and
accessibility of the data (see Survey of State Criminal History
Information Systems, 2001, August 2003, NCJ 200343).

Domestic violence misdemeanors  Forty-five States and the
District of Columbia are able to distinguish between felony and
misdemeanor records in the central repository (Improving Criminal
History Records for Background Checks, May 2003,
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc.htm>). Because Federal law
prohibits a transfer of a firearm to a person who was convicted of a
domestic violence misdemeanor, all States need to identify such
convictions in their criminal records. However, a conviction that
results from a domestic violence incident is only prohibitory if it 
falls within the specific definition found at 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(33). 
In addition, a State prohibition may be triggered by a domestic
violence offense with a definition that differs from Federal law.

Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions may be identified from
criminal history records in 43 States (table 14). These convictions
must be distinguished in the records from misdemeanors that are
not prohibitory. Most States identify prohibitory convictions by use of
a "flag," a record entry that denotes the offense as being the result
of a domestic violence incident. A few States have criminal laws
that apply only in domestic incidents, with convictions pursuant to
these laws identified in the records by an offense code.

If a central repository record does not clearly indicate that a
misdemeanor conviction resulted from domestic violence, a
checking agency may obtain further information from the court that
submitted the record. For example, court records may disclose the
relationship of the victim and the perpetrator. Thirty-two States
reported that court records may be used to identify domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions. 

Restraining orders  Domestic violence restraining (protective)
orders are issued by a judge and usually entered by court or law
enforcement personnel into a State system or NCIC or both.
Forty-three States utilize a centralized court administrative file 
or a statewide law enforcement network to record orders. As of June 
30, 2003 the NCIC protection order file receives entries that meet
Federal criteria from 42 States, including six States that do not 
have their own registry of orders. 

Mental illness  Federal and State prohibitions encompass a variety
of civil court orders, including a commitment to a mental hospital
and a finding that a person is incompetent to manage his or her
affairs. A prohibition may also be caused by a disposition in a
criminal prosecution, such as a finding of incompetence to stand
trial or a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity. 

A criminal case disposition is usually reported by the trial court to
the State's central records repository. Civil commitment records are
often protected from disclosure by privacy laws. However, some
States have enacted laws that allow such records to be used for
determining whether an individual is eligible to purchase a firearm
or receive a permit.

Twenty States have a database containing prohibitory mental illness
records that are submitted by courts or treatment facilities. The
records are maintained by a statewide checking agency or a mental
health department. In a few States an agency conducting a
background check may obtain data directly from a local court or
mental health facility. Other prohibitory mental illness dispositions
may be obtained from a central repository's criminal history records.

Between July 1, 2002 and June 30, 2003, two States enacted new
legislation that allows checking agency access to records of mental
illness dispositions. In Arizona an amendment requires courts to
provide limited data about commitments to the Department of Public
Safety for purposes of enforcing the State's firearm laws. A
Colorado law requires courts to report data to the NICS on persons
found to be incapacitated or ordered committed for drug, alcohol, or
mental health treatment. 

Other State records  Centralized data on fugitives from justice is
maintained by 46 States and 21 States have records on juvenile
offenders or persons who were adjudicated delinquent. Several States 
have specialized data, such as a file that is used to enforce a 
purchase limit of one handgun per month.

Federal databases  The Federal system for background checks on
firearm applicants primarily depends on three databases
administered by the FBI: the National Crime Information Center
(NCIC), the Interstate Identification Index (III), and the NICS Index.
Checking agencies normally access NCIC and III, and NICS point of
contact agencies also access the NICS Index. If the transferee is
not a citizen of the United States, the NICS will query records of the
Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).  

NCIC contains supervised release, federal prisoner, protection order,
deported felon, wanted person, and sexual offender files. The III is a
national system which points to States with a criminal history record
on an individual. The NICS Index contains records of persons
prohibited by Federal law from receiving a firearm and is divided
into controlled substance, mental defective, illegal alien, dishonor-
able discharge, renunciation of citizenship, and denied person files.
Alien registrations and admissions and other records are contained
in several databases managed by ICE.

Federal and State agencies supply information to NCIC and the
NICS Index pursuant to law or on a voluntary basis.

Impediments to record checks  The absence of flags, missing
dispositions, insufficient details on relationships between victims
and offenders, and other incomplete records issues are the most
common impediments to identifying domestic violence misdemeanor 
convictions in State databases. Incomplete records are also the most 
common difficulty encountered by statewide restraining order 
repositories, mainly because of courts' inability to provide all 
necessary information to the repositories.

Checking agencies' ability to retrieve complete and accurate mental
illness data is significantly affected by the absence of interfaces
between mental health databases and criminal history repositories,
the lack of biometric identifiers in the records, incomplete
automation of record systems, and privacy laws.

The impediments to checking agency access also inhibit States'
ability to send records to NCIC and the NICS Index. Transmission
of domestic violence misdemeanor and restraining order records is
primarily affected by incomplete data. Transmission of mental
illness records is significantly impeded by incomplete automation,
privacy laws, and the lack of biometric record identifiers. 

For a complete summary of impediments to record checks, see Improving
Access to and Integrity of Criminal History Records, forthcoming in
2004, NCJ 200581.

Record improvements  State repositories held over 64 million
criminal history records at year-end 2001, and about 90% of the
records were automated. About 75% of the automated records were
accessible for firearm background checks. From 1995 to 2001 the
number of criminal history records grew 29% nationwide, the
number of automated records increased 35%, and the number of
records available for sharing through III climbed 75%. During the
same period records of disqualifying factors other than felonies
have become more widely accessible. (Improving Criminal History
Records for Background Checks, May 2003, 
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc.htm>).

By year-end 2002 more than half of the States had at least one
initiative planned or underway to improve mental illness, domestic
violence misdemea- nor, or restraining order records. The initiatives
included technical and administrative improvements to the condition
of the records and providing additional resources to conduct checks
on the records (see Jurisdictional summaries for details).

Types of firearms

A typical definition of a firearm is "any weapon which will or is
designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the
action of an explosive."  44 U.S.C. 921(a)(3). Firearms can
generally be divided into two major categories: handguns and long
guns. A handgun is a weapon that can be held or fired with one
hand, such as a pistol or revolver. A long gun is a weapon that
requires two hands to hold or fire, such as a rifle or shotgun. 
(Also see Glossary of firearm terms for definitions.) State codes
sometimes divide firearms into categories based upon the length of
the barrel.

The sale and possession of handguns is extensively regulated
because a handgun can be easily concealed upon a person and is
carried during the overwhelming majority of crimes committed while
the offender is in possession of a firearm. A survey of inmates who
carried a firearm while committing a crime found that 83% of State
inmates and 87% of Federal inmates possessed a handgun during
their offense (Firearm Use by Offenders, November 2001, NCJ
189369). Long guns are used much less frequently in crime and are
subject to less extensive regulation than handguns. 

Certain types of firearms are regulated because they are deemed
by legislators to be inappropriate for self-defense or sporting
purposes. The sale and possession of assault weapons, machine
guns, short-barreled ("sawed-off") rifles and shotguns, and unsafe
handguns is often prohibited or allowed only in limited
circumstances. Federal law and the laws of 43 States either
prohibit, severely restrict, or require registration for at least 
1 type of firearm. 

Exceptions to restrictions on certain types of weapons are often
allowed for law enforcement officers and firearm collectors.

An assault weapon may be a handgun or long gun, but is distinguished 
by the presence of special features common to military weapons (see for
example the definition given in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(30)). The most common
features of an assault weapon are a semiautomatic firing mechanism 
which allows a shot to be fired with each pull of the trigger without
reloading, and a large-capacity magazine that holds numerous rounds of
ammunition. 

Federal law, at 18 U.S.C. 922(v), provides that it shall be unlawful
for a person to transfer or possess a semiautomatic assault
weapon, unless the firearm was lawfully possessed before
September 13, 1994. In addition, nine States regulate assault
weapons. Some jurisdictions publish a list of makes and models
that are banned or restricted.

A machine gun (automatic firearm) will automatically fire more than
one bullet, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger. Like assault weapons machine guns are designed to rapidly
fire a high volume of ammunition. Federal law, 18 U.S.C. 922(o),
provides that it shall be unlawful for a person to transfer or 
possess a machine gun, unless it was lawfully possessed before May 
19, 1986. In addition, 38 States regulate machine guns.

A short-barreled rifle has one or more barrels less than 16 inches in
length or has an overall length of less than 26 inches due to
modification. A short-barreled shotgun has one or more barrels less
than 18 inches in length or has an overall length of less than 26
inches due to modification. Short- barreled rifles and shotguns (and
machine guns) must be registered pursuant to Federal law, 26
U.S.C. 5841. Thirty-three States regulate short-barreled rifles and
40 States regulate short-barreled shotguns.

An unsafe handgun ("Saturday night special" or "junk gun") has a
barrel length under 4 inches, is easily concealable, and is not
effective for sporting or self defense purposes due to its poor quality
of construction, inaccuracy, and lack of essential safety features.
Seven States forbid sales of handgun models that are determined
to be unsafe. The quality of a handgun's construction is determined
by its melting point or by technical standards found in State codes.

Other weapons that may be prohibited include zip guns and firearms 
that are made for silent discharge or that cannot be detected by 
airport security devices. An Illinois law effective in July 2002 
made it illegal to possess a firearm shaped like a wireless telephone.

The primary focus of this report is upon regulation of transfers
involving handguns, long guns, and assault weapons. Methods of
regulating various types of firearms are described in Regulated
sales and Approval systems. Types of firearms that are exempt
from regulation in many jurisdictions are generally not discussed in
this report. These types include antique, curio, and replica firearms,
and weapons that have been rendered permanently inoperable.

Terms such as firearm, handgun, long gun, and assault weapon, as
defined above, are generally used throughout this report to facilitate
comparisons between the laws and procedures of the jurisdictions
summarized. However, terms and definitions used in firearm codes
vary considerably by jurisdiction. For the sake of clarity, a few 
of the summaries use terms and definitions specific to a particular
jurisdiction. Readers are advised to consult a jurisdiction's laws 
for a complete understanding of its terminology. 

Regulated sales

Firearms are sold either by dealers licensed under Federal and
State laws, or by unlicensed persons (private sales). Most sales
occur at the business premises of licensed dealers or at gun shows,
which may include licensed and unlicensed sellers. In addition to
sales and gifts, firearms can be transferred in pawn transactions,
where a weapon is pledged as collateral for a loan and can be
redeemed when the loan is repaid. Redemptions of pawned firearms 
are often regulated in the same manner as sales under State law.

Statutes that require prospective purchasers to obtain a permit or
undergo a background check usually allow exemptions for certain 
types of persons or transactions. Common exemptions are those for 
purchases by law enforcement officers, transfers of antique and 
replica firearms, and gifts or loans of firearms from parents or 
guardians to minor children.

Dealer transfers  Federal law requires a check through the
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) of all
persons who receive a firearm from a Federal Firearms Licensee
(FFL) either by purchase or by redemption of a pawned firearm.
Licensees have the option of requesting checks on persons who
attempt to pawn a firearm. (See Background for further details on
the NICS.)

In addition to Federal requirements, background checks of persons
seeking either to receive firearms from licensed dealers or obtain
permits required for transfer are conducted in 29 States. Of these
States, 18 regulate dealer transfers of all types of firearms, 2
regulate dealer transfers of handguns and assault weapons, and 9
regulate only handgun transfers by dealers.  Several States regulate
redemptions of pawned firearms in the same manner as sales -- by
licensing pawnbrokers and requiring background checks on
redemptions. The pawning of any firearm is prohibited in New
Jersey, while five other States ban the pawning of handguns. 

Private sales  The laws of 17 States regulate at least some private
sales by requiring that purchasers obtain a permit or undergo a
background check before receiving a firearm. Of these States 11
require that the person receiving the firearm have a permit and 7
require the receiver to undergo a check (Connecticut is counted
twice because it mandates both procedures for handguns). Ten
States regulate private transfers of all types of firearms, one
regulates private transfers of handguns and assault weapons, and
six regulate only handgun transfers. 

Most private sale regulations apply to transfers initiated at any
location, whether it be a person's home, a gun show, or anywhere
else. In a few States, the only private transfers regulated are 
those that occur at gun shows. Delaware, Nevada, and Oregon allow
unregulated private sellers the option of requesting a check on a
purchaser.

Gun shows  Seven States have statutes that specifically regulate
gun shows. Most of these statutes define a gun show as an event
where a certain number of firearms are exhibited for transfer (for
example, 25 or more in Colorado and Oregon; 50 or more in
Connecticut; 25 or more pistol or revolvers or 50 or more firearms,
rifles, or shotguns in New York). Some laws also define a gun show
according to the number of vendors who are exhibiting firearms for
transfer.  Gun show regulations affect organizers, vendors, and 
purchasers. For example, California requires a show organizer to 
obtain a certificate of eligibility from the Department of Justice, 
provide local law enforcement with a list of the show's sellers, and 
exclude minors unless they are accompanied at all times by a parent 
or guardian. Colorado, Connecticut, New York, and Oregon require
vendors to request an instant check on every unlicensed person
who attempts to make a purchase. Colorado and New York require
a show organizer to secure the presence of at least one licensed
dealer to process the background checks. In Connecticut and
Oregon any seller can contact the State checking agency directly.
Maryland requires that unlicensed gun show sellers obtain a
temporary transfer permit from the State, have a fixed display, and
comply with all restrictions imposed upon transfers by licensed
dealers. Virginia requires that any person who sells firearms at 
a gun show must submit to a background check and obtain a seller
identification number from the State Police.

Residency rules  The Gun Control Act generally prohibits interstate
transfers of firearms between unlicensed persons (18 U.S.C.
922(a)(5)), a prohibition intended to channel interstate transfers
through licensed dealers who are subject to scrutiny by ATF. A
licensed dealer generally cannot transfer a firearm other than a rifle
or shotgun to an unlicensed person who does not reside in the State
where the licensee's place of business is located. A rifle or shotgun
may be transferred in person by a dealer to a nonresident if the
transfer complies with the laws of the State where the dealer's place
of business is located and the State where the purchaser resides.
(18 U.S.C. 922(b)(3)) 

To ensure compliance with Federal law, many States have passed
statutes that allow nonresidents to purchase long guns. Three
States (Maryland, Missouri, and Virginia) require fixed periods of
residency, ranging from 1 to 6 months, before a person can
purchase certain firearms. Residency rules are intended to prevent
nonresidents from purchasing and reselling firearms that they could
not obtain in their home State.

A State POC may opt to receive notification from NICS when a
resident of their State attempts to purchase a rifle or shotgun in
another jurisdiction (known as "long gun notification"). The POC
agency may have access to a record on the prospective purchaser
that is not available to the checking agency for the other 
jurisdiction.

Handgun purchase limits  There are no Federal restrictions on the
frequency of firearm acquisition or on the quantity of firearms that
can be acquired. However, a handgun purchase limit of one per
month prevails in California, Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia.
These limits are intended to deter persons who would purchase
large quantities of handguns for resale to prohibited persons.

Approval systems

Over 3,000 State and local agencies are required by law to determine 
the eligibility of persons who apply to receive a firearm or a permit 
that can be used for a purchase. Systems for determining the legal 
eligibility of prospective purchasers may generally be classified as 
"instant approval," "purchase permit," "exempt carry permit" or "other
approval" systems. 

Of the 29 States that require a background check or a permit, 16
have instant approval, 12 utilize purchase permits, and 4 maintain
other approval systems. (Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey are
each counted twice because these States operate permit and instant 
approval systems.)  Exempt carry permits, issued in 19 States, are 
not required for purchase but can be used to exempt the holder from 
a background check at the point of sale.

Instant approval  This type of system allows a licensed firearms
dealer to contact a checking agency by telephone or other
electronic means and receive a response immediately, or as soon
as possible without delay, as to whether a prospective purchaser 
is ineligible under law. Four instant approval systems, Colorado,
Connecticut, Oregon, and Pennsylvania, require at least some
unlicensed sellers to request a check from a statewide agency.
Unlicensed sellers either contact the checking agency directly or
request a check through a licensed dealer or a police station. 

All State instant approval systems function as NICS points of
contact (see Background) except for the Delaware system. The
instant approval systems allow a firearm transfer to proceed as
soon as the checking agency informs the seller that no disqualifying
record was found on the purchaser, unless the applicable State law
requires a waiting period (see Waiting periods). Pursuant to the
Brady Act or a State law, most instant approval systems allow 3
days for a checking agency to conduct a background investigation
and reach a decision on an applicant's eligibility. A transfer is
usually allowed to proceed if the seller has not received a response
from the checking agency by the end of the applicable period. 

Purchase permits  These documents are issued by a government
agency after a background check and must be presented to a seller
in order to receive a firearm (the required documents have a variety
of titles, such as license or identification card, but all are 
referred to below as "permits"). The time period that a checking 
agency is allowed to investigate a permit applicant ranges from 2 
days in Nebraska to 180 days in New York. Most purchase permit 
systems allow a checking agency 7 to 30 days to approve or deny an
application. A few purchase permit systems mandate a waiting
period after an application is filed and before the permit can be
issued or a firearm acquired.

Federal law does not mandate a permit to purchase firearms.
Twelve States administer purchase permit systems that regulate
sales of handguns. Four of these States also require a permit to
purchase a long gun. Minnesota allows handgun and assault
weapon purchasers the options of undergoing a background check
to obtain a 1-year permit or submitting to a check each time they
attempt a purchase.

In addition to the handgun and long gun permits, New Jersey, North
Carolina, Ohio, and South Carolina require special permits in order
to purchase or possess certain types of firearms (such as machine
guns)that are generally prohibited (see Jurisdictional summaries).

The handgun and long gun purchase permits vary according to the
duration of a permit and the number of firearms that can be
purchased at one time or during the tenure of a permit. Most
handgun permits have a duration of between 10 days and 1 year,
with a few remaining in effect for a longer duration. Long gun
permits generally remain effective for a longer period than handgun
permits. New Jersey's identification card for long guns remains in
effect until revoked for a violation of law; among the other three
States with long gun permits, the duration ranges from 1 to 5 years. 

Generally, permits with a lengthy duration may be revoked by the
issuing agency if the holder is convicted of a crime or otherwise
becomes ineligible to possess a firearm.

The number of handguns that can be purchased by one person is
sometimes limited by a State permit. In seven States, only one
handgun can be purchased with a permit. Six of these States
mandate a new permit for a second handgun, while New York
requires an amendment to the purchaser's handgun license. Five
States allow unlimited handgun purchases during the effective
period of a permit. Unlimited purchases of rifles and shotguns 
are allowed in the four States that issue long gun permits.

In six States holders of purchase permits must undergo another
background check before receiving a firearm from a licensed
dealer. Connecticut and Illinois mandate the additional check by
statute; in Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, and New Jersey,
purchasers must undergo a NICS check requested by a dealer
because their purchase permits have not been qualified by ATF 
as an alternative to the NICS requirements (see Background).

Exempt carry permits  These documents primarily allow holders to
carry a concealed firearm, but also may be used as purchase
permits. A carry permit is exempt if it is issued after a background
check that includes the NICS and meet other requirements of the
Brady Act pursuant to an ATF ruling. Some carry permits can be
used to exempt the holder from a back- ground check required by
State law. In addition, a few States exempt certain permit holders
from waiting period requirements. 

Overall, 42 States required a concealed firearm permit and Vermont
allowed carrying without a permit as of June 30, 2003. Exempt carry
permits were issued in 19 States. Some permits issued before
November 30, 1998 were "grandfathered" in as exempt from the
NICS point-of-sale check because they were qualified by ATF under
the interim Brady law. Most of these grandfathered permits have
now expired.

Agencies that issue exempt carry permits usually have between 30
and 120 days to approve or deny an application. States that
authorize carry permits are generally categorized as having either a
"shall issue" or a "discretionary" system. The former system
mandates issuance of a permit if no statutory reason for denial is
revealed during a background check of the applicant. The latter
system allows the issuing officer to consider the applicant's history,
character, and intended purpose for carrying a firearm. Most
exempt carry permits are valid for 4 or 5 years. Generally, a 
permit may be revoked by the issuing agency if the holder becomes
ineligible to carry a concealed firearm.

Other approval systems  These systems, found in California,
Maryland, Rhode Island, and Washington, combine some of the
characteristics found in instant check and permit systems.
Generally, sellers are required to convey purchaser information to a
checking agency by mail, telephone, or other electronic means.
Three of the four other approval systems require licensed dealers
and private sellers to request background checks. The California
and Maryland systems function as NICS points of contact.

In other approval systems the checking agency is not required to
respond immediately to the seller, but must respond within a waiting
period or other statutory time limit. The applicable time periods for a
response range from 7 to 10 days. These systems usually allow a
transfer to proceed if the seller has not received a response from
the checking agency by the end of the applicable period.

Checking delays  Some approval systems allow an extension of
the time available to complete a background check if specific
circumstances are present. For example, if an applicant's history
includes a felony arrest without a recorded disposition, the checking
agency may be granted additional time to contact the agency that
originated the record and inquire about the outcome of charges
against the applicant (see Checking process). 

In a few States the checking agency is allowed more time to
investigate an applicant who resides in another jurisdiction.

Waiting periods

A waiting period is a length of time after a firearm purchase
application is filed with a seller or a permit application is filed 
with a law enforcement agency, which must expire before transfer of 
the firearm or issuance of the permit can be completed. The length 
of time an applicant must wait is sometimes referred to as a
"cooling-off" period, intended to deter persons who desire a firearm
immediately for use in a specific misdeed. Another purpose of a
waiting period is to provide sufficient time for law enforcement
agencies to investigate and resolve questions about an applicant's
background, especially if searches of local or manual records are
necessary. However, mandatory waiting periods should be 
distinguished from time limits on inquiries by a checking agency 
into an applicant's background (see Approval systems).

Twelve States require waiting periods, which range in length from 1
to 14 days. Of these States, 11 require a waiting period for handgun
permits or purchases, 2 include assault weapons, and 5 include
long guns within their waiting period regulations. 

Waiting periods have been enacted in every region of the Nation
and are most often found in States with extensive firearm
regulations. Exemptions from waiting periods have been enacted in
some States for law enforcement officers, holders of valid carry
permits, or other specific classes of persons who have
demonstrated the ability to handle a firearm responsibly.

Several States mandate both a waiting period and a time limit on
inquiries by a checking agency, which may or may not be the same
length of time. The Brady Act provides 3 days for a checking agency
to respond to an inquiry from a licensed dealer, but does not
mandate a waiting period for purchasers (see Background).

Checking process

Development of the NICS has increased the national uniformity of
procedures used to approve or disapprove firearm transfers.
However, approval systems established by State laws still employ a
variety of procedures to determine the eligibility of prospective
purchasers. The process for determining eligibility may be divided
into three stages: application, background check, and post-denial.

Application  Federal and State laws require prospective firearm
purchasers to provide information that is needed to initiate a
background check. In order to receive a firearm from a licensed
dealer, federal law requires submission of a Firearm Transaction
Record, ATF Form 4473 (see Federal summary for contents). A few
instant approval systems only require information from the ATF
form, but most require the completion of an additional form as well.
All purchase permit systems require specific information from
applicants except in North Carolina, where the county sheriff is
allowed to determine what information is necessary. State laws vary
widely in regard to the types of information required from applicants
(see Jurisdictional summaries).

Depending on the type of approval system, checking agencies receive 
applicant information in person or by mail, telephone, or the
Internet. Federal law, at 18 U.S.C. 922(a)(6), makes it unlawful to
acquire or attempt to acquire a firearm by making a false statement
or furnishing false identification to a licensee. Twenty-seven States
have similar laws. Attempting to obtain a firearm or a permit under
false pretenses may be grounds for denial of an application, or
subject the applicant to a fine or incarceration.

The laws of 23 States allow a checking agency to charge a fee for
processing a sale transaction or issuing a purchase permit. Seven
States do not charge a fee for a background check that is related to
a sale transaction. Fees charged at the point of sale (usually
collected by dealers and remitted to the State) range from $2 in
Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Virginia to $20 in California (for a single
handgun or any number of long guns, plus $16 for each additional
handgun purchased). Checking agencies in Michigan and Minnesota do 
not charge for a purchase permit. Hawaiian checking agencies collect 
a fee from first-time applicants but do not charge for permit 
renewals. Fees charged for purchase permits range from $5 in several 
States to at least $100 for a permit in Massachusetts. Several States 
include a charge that covers fingerprint processing by the FBI. In 
some States the checking agency can adjust the amount of the fee or 
is given discretion as to whether any fee will be charged.

Background check  Many agencies that issue purchase or exempt carry 
permits initiate a check by sending an applicant's fingerprints to 
a State unit or the FBI or both. The prints are compared against
arrestee records already on file. Instant check systems compare the
applicant's name and other identifying information against
computerized prohibitory records. Generally, the automated agencies 
conduct a single background check that incorporates Federal and State
requirements for each transaction.

A background check may also involve obtaining a record that is not
available in a national or statewide electronic database. A sheriff's
office or police department may search county court files or other
local records. If an electronic record is not complete, the agency
that created the original record may be contacted to find out if it 
has been updated.

The effectiveness of background checks is affected by the degree
of automation involved, the types of prohibitory records available,
and the extent to which the records are complete. The time an
agency needs to obtain complete information may be lengthened if
records on an applicant are maintained in another jurisdiction. A
delay may also occur if research is needed to determine whether an
entry on an applicant's record disqualifies the person from receiving
a firearm.

The majority of background checks processed by State approval
systems are initiated with information received by telephone or
computer from a licensed dealer. State instant approval systems
use a variety of terminology, but all generate an initial response 
to the dealer indicating that the transaction may proceed, may not
proceed, or must be delayed pending further research on an
applicant's records. If no record retrieval problems emerge, most
State instant approval systems are able to process a check and
provide a final response to a dealer in less than five minutes. Some
systems are able to complete the checking process in less than one
minute (see Jurisdictional summaries).

If a transaction is allowed to proceed, the firearm dealer is given 
an approval number to record on the forms filed by the applicant.
Federal and State procedures vary as to the period of time for which
the approval remains valid (the period during which the applicant
must complete a transaction by receiving a firearm from the seller).
For example, an approval by the FBI is valid for 30 days; an
approval of a private sale by the Oregon State Police is valid for 24
hours. A person who does not receive the firearm during the
applicable period is required to undergo another background check.

State laws differ regarding the length of time that a transaction can
be delayed and the circumstances that allow a delay. A checking
agency's search for a missing arrest disposition is the most common 
reason for a delay. If a final disposition such as a conviction cannot 
be found, Federal or State law usually dictates the checking agency's 
response to the firearm dealer. Some States apply the Brady Act's rule 
that if a disqualifying conviction record is not found within 3 days, 
a transfer may proceed at the discretion of the dealer (termed a 
"default proceed" by the NICS). Other States have laws and regulations 
that allow their agencies to deny a transfer if an applicant was 
arrested for an offense that would be disqualifying upon conviction.

A checking agency may continue to research an incomplete record
even after a default proceed has occurred. If a disqualifying record
is found at a later date (termed a "delayed denial" by the NICS), the
dealer may be contacted to determine if the applicant completed the
transaction and received a firearm. If the transfer has occurred, law
enforcement officers may locate the purchaser and confiscate the
firearm.

Post-denial  Appeal procedures are available to applicants who
have been denied a firearm because the checking agency cannot
locate an exonerating record such as an acquittal or a dismissal of
criminal charges (see Appeals of denials). 

Another aspect of the checking process involves notifying law
enforcement agencies of denied persons who are wanted in an
outstanding warrant or who may have attempted to obtain a firearm
in violation of Federal or State law. A denied person may have
acted illegally by submitting false information or failing to disclose
required information on an application, by attempting to make a
purchase while subject to a prohibition, or by attempting to obtain 
a firearm for a prohibited person. 

Numerous agencies receive notices of denied persons, including
special police units, ATF, and agencies with jurisdiction over the
location of the transaction (usually a dealer's premises) or the
applicant's residence. (For statistics on arrests of denied persons,
see Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2002, September 2003, 
NCJ 200116).

Transaction and registration records 

Federal and State laws determine the types of information that must
be provided by prospective firearm purchasers, as well as the types
of information that must be retained or purged by checking
agencies or other agencies. These laws also determine the length
of time that records must be saved and when records must be
destroyed. Some checking agencies receive and retain paper
records of permit or purchase applications. Nevertheless, most
information on purchasers is transmitted over the telephone or via
computer by a licensed dealer, and stored electronically by the
checking agency.

Requirements for maintaining or purging transaction data vary
among the States. Retention of information on approved firearm
transactions is often limited by Federal and State laws, because of
concern for the privacy of lawful firearm owners. Some checking
agencies purge a transaction record almost immediately after it is
approved. In contrast, retention of information on denied
transactions is seldom limited, due to its usefulness for judicial 
and law enforcement purposes.

Thirty States require a permit, point-of-sale background check, or
waiting period before a firearm transfer can be completed. Checking
agencies in nearly half of these States retain records of approved
transactions for less than 90 days, pursuant to statute or agency
regulations. In contrast, nearly all agencies retain records of 
denied transactions indefinitely or for a specific length of time 
longer than 90 days. In States where county sheriffs or municipal 
police departments issue permits or purchase approvals, the retention
period for transaction records is usually at the discretion of the
checking agency. Some State agencies are required to maintain
copies of transaction records forwarded by local checking agencies.

Records of permit applications or sale transactions are retained by
checking agencies in order to monitor agency performance or
achieve a law enforce- ment objective. With computerized checking
systems, the complete electronic record of a transaction is generally
maintained for a short period of time in order to facilitate audits of
system performance or correction of errors. In some States certain
information such as a name, approval number, and date from an
approved transaction may be retained for auditing purposes for a
longer period than other data about the applicant. Retention of all
approved transaction records is mandated in two States for certain
types of firearms: handguns in California and regulated firearms
(handguns and assault weapons)in Maryland.

Checking agency records may also be referenced in order to verify
that licensed firearms dealers are maintaining records as required
by law. In States that require a firearm owner to have a license or
identification card, records of approved applications are retained in
order for law enforcement officers to determine whether a particular
person is legally in possession of a firearm. States that require a
waiting period retain records of approved transactions in order to
verify that a seller waited the proper length of time before
transferring a firearm to the buyer. Records of denied transactions
are retained to facilitate appeals, arrests, and prosecutions, and to
build databases on prohibited persons.

Registration records, which normally include information on a
firearm and its owner, facilitate tracing of firearms that are resold
illegally, used in a crime, or stolen. Federal law requires registration
of a machine gun or a short-barrel rifle or shotgun. Twelve States
register at least one type of firearm. The types of firearms most
commonly registered by these States are machine guns, assault
weapons, and handguns. A few States register short-barrel rifles or
shotguns, or all rifles and shotguns. The laws of several States
prohibit registration of firearms.

Appeals of denials

Appeal procedures for firearm denials provide specific means by
which applicants can challenge decisions on firearm purchase
eligibility. These appeals often serve the practical purposes of
resolving questions of identity and updating incomplete criminal
history records.

Federal law provides the right to challenge a NICS denial by the FBI
or a State point of contact (see Back-ground). Specific appeal
procedures are codified in the laws of nearly all States that require
background checks of firearm permit or purchase applicants. The
most common State procedure allows an appeal to the checking
agency for reconsideration of a denial, and a subsequent appeal to
a court. In two States an appeal is available to an agency separate
from the checking unit. 

Most purchase permit statutes require the checking agency to
inform an applicant in writing of the reason for a denial. With instant
approval systems, an applicant usually is informed of a denial by the
dealer who requested the background check. The applicant must
then call or write the checking agency to learn the reason for the
denial. Statewide checking agencies often have forms available to
initiate a request for reconsideration. Some States impose a
deadline on denied applicants for filing the initial appeal.

Other agencies involved in firearm appeals are those that maintain
criminal history, restraining order, mental health, or other records
that could disqualify an applicant. The appellant may be required to
obtain data from or submit data to the agency that originated a
disputed record.

Appeals often arise when a denied person claims that he or she is
not the individual named in a disqualifying record found by the
checking agency. To resolve the identity question, the appellant will
ordinarily submit fingerprints (if they are not already on file) which
will be checked against Federal and/or State arrestee print records.
If the appellant's prints do not match any disqualifying records on
file, the denial can be reversed. A few States require submission of
fingerprints with all requests for reconsideration.

Another common appeal issue arises when a denied person claims
that a disqualifying record is incomplete. For example, if a
background check reveals a felony charge without a recorded
disposition, the checking agency may be required by State law to
issue a denial. The applicant can have the denial reversed by
submitting court records to prove that the charge was subsequently
dismissed. An appeal procedure may give the denied person the
alternative of requesting that the appellate review agency contact
the agency of record to inquire about a missing disposition.

An appeal may be filed when there is no entry in criminal history
records for a proceeding that restored the applicant's firearm 
rights. An administrative agency or a court may also need to decide
whether a pardon or an expungement of a conviction was sufficient
to restore an applicant's firearm rights.

In addition to record challenge procedures, some States allow an
appellant or the reviewing agency to request an administrative
hearing. State laws vary widely in regard to deadlines for
administrative decisions and subsequent appeals by a denied
applicant. 

Whether a checking agency is required by law to approve, delay, or
deny a person with an incomplete record may affect the number of
appeals filed in a State. The vast majority of disputed firearm
denials are resolved at the administrative level and are based upon
the accuracy of records instead of an interpretation of the law.

Rejection rates

State and local checking agencies received an estimated 3.6 million
firearm transfer applications during 2002; an estimated 75,000
applications were rejected, a rejection rate of 2.1% (FBI checks are
not included in these figures). The most common reason for
rejection of an application by a State or local checking agency was
the applicant's indictment or conviction for a felony offense (52%),
followed by a conviction for a domestic violence misdemeanor
(10%). (See Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2002,
September 2003, NCJ 200116.) 

The 2002 background check statistics included applications for
transfers, permits required for transfers, and carry permits that
could be used to exempt the holder from a check at the point of
transfer. This national estimate combined actual counts from
statewide reporting agencies with an estimate for aggregated local
agencies.

The rejection rates among statewide agencies in 2002 for the various 
types of firearm approval systems were estimated to be 3.0% for exempt 
carry permits, 2.2% for instant approvals, 2.2% for purchase permits, 
and 1.1% for other approval systems. The rejection rates among local 
agencies for the various types of firearm approval systems were 
estimated to be 1.8% for exempt carry permits, 1.7% for purchase 
permits, and 0.9% for other approval systems (no local agencies 
administer instant approval systems).

Statewide rates  The number of applications received and rejected,
and rejection rates for statewide agencies during 2002. Fourteen 
instant approval systems exhibit the widest variation in rejection 
rates, ranging from 0.2% (Connecticut and New Jersey) to 4.3% 
(Delaware). Statewide rejection rates for purchase permit applications 
range from 1.5% (Hawaii) to 2.5% (Illinois). Rejection rates for nine 
States that reported exempt carry permit counts range between 0.3% 
(North Dakota) and 8.8% (Arizona). Complete statewide data was also 
reported by the "other approval" system for California, which had a 
rejection rate of 1.1%.

Variations in rejection rates among States may be influenced by
many interrelated factors, including the type of approval system, 
the number of years the system has operated, the extent of State
firearm regulation, the length of time allowed for an agency to
complete a check, the decision process for records with missing
dispositions, and the extent of automation of criminal histories and
other records. Although the full impact of these factors has not been
quantified, a few observations are possible from the limited
information available.

Among the lowest rates are those of New Jersey (0.2%) and Illinois
(0.9%), where an instant check at the point of transfer is the second
step required for approval of prospective firearm owners. Before an
instant sale check can be conducted, both States require a
prospective owner to obtain some type of purchase permit such as
an identification card or a handgun permit. During the first step of
the process, the rejection rates are considerably higher in New
Jersey (2.0%) and Illinois (2.5%), and are closer to the national
average than the rates for the second step.

Generally, higher rejection rates occur in States that implemented
an instant approval system on or after February 28, 1994, the
effective date of the Brady Act. These States include Colorado
(3.8%), Tennessee (3.3%), and Georgia (2.9%).

In contrast, approval systems established before passage of the
Brady Act tend to have lower rejection rates. In addition to
California, Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey, these systems
include Virginia (1.3%) and Wisconsin (1.6%). Extensive regulation
of firearm sales by States with older approval systems may
influence rejection rates. As prospective firearm owners become
more knowledgeable about laws and procedures in the States with
well-established systems, some persons with potentially
disqualifying records may be discouraged from applying for a
purchase or permit in those States.

Rejection rates may be influenced by a State's policy toward
applicants who have incomplete records for criminal history and
other disqualifying factors. Checking agencies most frequently
encounter delays while attempting to determine the final disposition
of a criminal charge that is indicated by an arrest, information, or
indictment record. If the final disposition cannot be found during the
time allowed for a background check, the agency must decide,
based on Federal or State law, whether the application will be
approved, denied, or delayed pending further research. A State's
rejection rate will tend to be low if an approval is mandated and 
high if a denial is mandated.

Some States apply the Brady Act's rule that if a disqualifying record
is not found within 3 days, a transfer may proceed. Other States
have laws and regulations that allow their agencies to deny or delay
a transfer if an incomplete record is being researched when the
time limit for a response expires. These types of rules may partially
account for the comparatively high rejection rates in States such as
Colorado and Tennessee.

Local agency rates  Rejection rates among local agencies may be
influenced by many of the same factors that influence the rates of
agencies with statewide jurisdiction. Local agencies that provided
data for the Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) project were grouped
according to the size of the community they served: small (under
10,000 people), medium (10,000 to 100,000), or large (over
100,000).

In 2002, rates varied among local agencies by size of the population
served and type of permit. The rejection rate for purchase permits
was highest in large communities (3.10%) and lowest in small
communities (0.97%). The rejection rates for exempt carry permits
varied only slightly, with the highest rate occurring in large
communities (1.34%) and the lowest rate occurring in small
communities (1.30%). 

Jurisdictional summaries

Information included in the Federal and 
State summaries

References on this page to "State" generally include all jurisdictions
summarized (the United States and each State, Territory, Commonwealth, 
and District). Topics listed are not alphabetized; they follow the 
order of presentation used in the summaries. Laws that apply nationwide 
are included in the Federal summary and are generally not repeated 
elsewhere. State participation in the NICS is described in sub-headings 
for the summaries.

Prohibited persons.  Categories of persons prohibited permanently or
temporarily from purchasing, possessing, or transferring firearms.

Restoration of rights.  Pardons, court procedures, or other means
by which adult or juvenile offenders can regain the right to possess
or purchase firearms.

Prohibited firearms.  Types of firearms that cannot be purchased
or possessed by any person or that may only be purchased or
possessed pursuant to a limited exception.

Regulated sales.  The scope of firearm transfer restrictions such
as background checks, permit and license requirements, residency
rules, and handgun purchase limits. Includes types of transferors
(licensed or unlicensed), firearms (such as handguns or long guns),
and transactions (such as sales or redemptions) that are regulated.

Permits.  Documents (such as a permit, license, or identification
card) issued by a law enforcement agency, which are required for
the purchase, possession, or carrying of firearms.

Background checks.  Procedures and requirements for conducting
criminal history and other checks on firearms purchasers or permit
applicants under Federal and State laws, including time limits
imposed on checking agencies.

Waiting period.  A period of time after a firearm purchase application 
is filed with a seller or a permit application is filed with a
law enforcement agency, which must expire before transfer of the
firearm or issuance of the permit can be completed.

Information from applicants.  Required or optional information
provided by persons applying for a purchase from a firearm seller or
for a purchase permit from a law enforcement agency.

Purchaser fees.  The amounts charged to firearms purchasers for
background checks or the issuance of documents needed for
purchase.

State data.  Automated and manual prohibited person data that are
maintained by State agencies. The data are available to agencies
within the State for background checks on firearm buyers or permit
applicants, and may also be available to agencies outside the State.
Local record sources may also be described.

Check processing time.  The length of time needed, on average,
for checking agencies to complete background checks on routine
transactions and those that require additional research on missing
dispositions and other questions.

Retention of records.  Time limits on retention of data from
approved and denied firearm transactions by checking agencies
and other agencies, based on Federal or State law or agency
policies.

Registration.  State procedures for maintaining permanent records
on firearms and firearms owners.

Appeals of denials.  Statutory or administrative procedures for
appealing a denial of the right to purchase a firearm or obtain a
permit that can be used for a purchase.

Arrests of denied persons.  Arrest and notification procedures
followed by checking agencies in regard to persons who are denied
a firearm or a permit because they submitted false information or
have an outstanding warrant.

2002/2003 legislation.  Significant changes in laws related to
firearm sales that became effective between July 1, 2002, and June
30, 2003.

Relevant laws.  Citations to statutes governing the transfer,
possession, and use of firearms.

Source of information.  State agencies that contributed to the
survey.

Federal system

Prohibited persons.  Federal law prohibits firearm possession by
or transfer to a person who is: under indict- ment for or convicted of
a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year; a fugitive
from justice; an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled
substance; adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a
mental institution; an illegal alien or an alien admitted under a
nonimmigrant visa; dishonorably discharged from the armed forces;
a renounced U.S. citizen; restrained by court order from harassing,
stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child; or convicted in
any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence. It is
unlawful for a federally-licensed dealer to transfer a long gun to a
person under 18 years of age or a handgun to a person under 21
years of age. Further, it is unlawful for any person to transfer a
handgun to a juvenile (under 18) or for a juvenile to possess a
handgun, except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Federal firearm rights may be restored by a
presidential pardon or by ATF; agency decisions may be appealed
to Federal district court.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions, to
possess or transfer a machine gun, a firearm not detectable by
airport security devices, or a semiautomatic assault weapon.

Regulated sales.  Record checks through the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) are required on persons who purchase 
firearms or redeem pawned firearms from federally-licensed dealers. A 
licensee has the option of requesting a check when a firearm is pawned. 
A handgun cannot be transferred by a licensee to a person who does not 
reside in the State where the licensee's business is located. An 
interstate transfer of a handgun or long gun between unlicensed persons 
is prohibited.

Permits.  Federal law does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm.

Background checks.  NICS checks are conducted by the FBI and
State point of contact (POC) agencies. The FBI checks handgun
and long gun buyers in 26 States and only long gun buyers in 10
additional States. Dealers contact the system by telephone or other
electronic means and receive an immediate response as to whether
a transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or will be delayed
pending further review. If no response is received within 3 business
days, the transfer may proceed (known as a "default proceed").

Waiting period.  No Federal requirements.

Information from applicants.  The standard ATF form filed with a
licensee requires the buyer's full name, residence address, place of
birth, height, weight, gender, date of birth, race, State of residence,
country of citizenship, and alien or admission number. A Social
Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  NICS checks by the FBI are without charge. State
laws establish POC fees.

Federal data.  The three major Federal databases are the Interstate
Identification Index (III), containing pointers to State criminal 
histories; the National Crime Information Center (NCIC), which 
includes protection order, fugitive, and other data; and the NICS 
Index, which includes mental defective, illegal alien, denied person, 
and other data. Immigration and Customs Enforcement(ICE)data are 
queried for noncitizen buyers.

Check processing time. About 80% of the inquiries conducted by
the FBI in 2002 resulted in an immediate "proceed" response.

Retention of records.  Information on applicants denied by the FBI
is retained indefinitely. Most information on transfers allowed by 
the FBI is not retained; certain items may be retained for auditing
purposes for not more than 90 days.

Registration.  A short-barrel shotgun or rifle or a machine gun must
be registered.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm after a NICS
check can appeal to the denying agency (FBI or POC), and may be
required to contact the agency that originated the disqualifying
record. As an alternative, the appellant can ask the FBI to review a
POC denial. A further appeal may be filed in Federal district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  The FBI notifies ATF of NICS denials
and persons who obtain a firearm by default proceed but are
subsequently determined to be prohibited.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  United States Code 18-922 et seq; 26-5801 et seq.

Source of information.  Federal Bureau of Investigation, NICS
Program Office; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.

Alabama

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits ownership, possession, or
control of a handgun by a person who has been convicted in
Alabama or elsewhere of committing or attempting to commit a
crime of violence or is a drug addict or an habitual drunkard. It is
illegal to deliver a handgun to any person under the age of 18 or to
one who the seller has reasonable cause to believe has been
convicted of a crime of violence or is a drug addict, an habitual
drunkard, or of unsound mind.

Restoration of rights.  A person who has been convicted of a
crime may regain the right to possess a handgun through a pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal for a person to possess, obtain,
receive, sell, or use a short-barreled rifle or shotgun, except for a
peace officer engaged in official duties.

Regulated sales.  Background checks on firearms purchasers are
not required by Alabama law. Residents of adjoining States may
purchase long guns in Alabama unless otherwise prohibited. No
person shall make any loan secured by a mortgage, deposit, or
pledge of a handgun, nor lend, give, or otherwise deliver a handgun
contrary to the provisions of the law. A State license is required for
retail dealers of handguns.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a  concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed dealers in Alabama contact the FBI for all checks
required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirement.

Information from applicants.  No State requirement.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Alabama makes fugitive, criminal history, probation/
parole, and domestic violence restraining order data available on 
the statewide computer network.  Domestic violence misdemeanor 
convictions(flagged records)may be found within criminal histories.
                              
Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Code of Alabama 13A-11-50 et seq.

Source of information.  Alabama Bureau of Investigation;
Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center.

Alaska

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons. Alaska law prohibits handgun possession by
or sale to a person who was convicted of a felony or adjudicated a
delinquent minor for conduct that would constitute a felony if
committed by an adult. It is illegal for a firearm to be possessed by
or sold to a person whose physical or mental condition is substantially
impaired by intoxicating liquor or controlled substances. An 
unemancipated minor under 16 years of age cannot possess a firearm 
without the consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  The State allows a convicted felon's right to
own a handgun to be restored if the conviction is pardoned or set
aside. If at least 10 years have elapsed since the offender's
unconditional discharge, firearm rights are restored except for 
those who committed felony "crimes against persons."

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to manufacture, possess,
transport, sell, or transfer a prohibited weapon, which includes a
machine gun, short-barrel rifle, or short-barrel shotgun. 

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  Alaska does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A
permit is not required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed dealers in Alaska contact the FBI for all checks
required by the Brady Act. The Alaska Department of Public Safety
conducts background checks on applicants for concealed handgun
permits. ATF allows a valid concealed handgun permit to be used
for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data. Alaska maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, and domestic violence protective order data on a statewide
network. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions may be
identified from flagged criminal history records created after 
January 15, 1998.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun permit is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed handgun
permit application may be appealed to the commissioner of public
safety.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  Beginning September 9, 2003 the concealed 
weapons laws were largely repealed. Now almost anyone over age 21 
can carry any concealed, legally owned, deadly weapon without a 
permit.

Relevant laws.  Alaska Statutes 11.61.190 et seq; 18.65.700 et
seq.

Source of information.  Alaska Department of Public Safety.

Arizona

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Arizona law makes it illegal to sell or transfer
a firearm to a prohibited possessor, defined as any person who has
been found to be mentally ill by a court, convicted of a felony,
adjudicated delinquent, imprisoned, or serving a term of probation,
parole, community supervision, work furlough, home arrest, or
release on any other basis because of a domestic violence or felony
offense. It is illegal to knowingly transfer a firearm to a person 
who intends to use the firearm in the commission of any felony. A
firearm cannot be transferred to or possessed by a minor under the
age of 18 except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Adult felons convicted of "dangerous
offenses" cannot regain the right to possess firearms. All other
felons discharged from probation must wait a certain length of time,
depending on the offense, before applying for a court order to
restore firearm rights. For adult felons, the waiting period is 10
years for "serious offenses" and 2 years for other offenses. For
juvenile felons, the waiting period is until age 30 for dangerous 
and serious offenses, and 2 years for most other offenses.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to manufacture, possess, transport, 
sell, or transfer a prohibited weapon, which includes a machine gun or 
a short-barreled rifle or shotgun (unless it is registered in accord 
with federal law).

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on persons who purchase firearms.

Permits.  Arizona does not require a permit to purchase firearms.
Carrying a concealed weapon requires a permit.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Arizona contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act. The Department of Public Safety
(DPS) Concealed Weapons Unit conducts background checks on
applicants for concealed carry permits. ATF allows a valid
concealed weapon permit to be used for a purchase without a NICS
check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements for purchase
applicants.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Arizona maintains fully automated fugitive and criminal
history data on a statewide network. Probation, parole, and flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor data are found within criminal
history records. Sex offender registration and corrections data are
also available. The courts report limited data on mental health
commitments to DPS. Domestic violence protective orders are
entered into a court repository which is being expanded to include
all State courts.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Data on persons who are denied a concealed weapon
permit are kept on paper for 5 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A person who is denied a
concealed weapon permit may request reconsideration by submitting 
additional data to DPS. An administrative hearing may be held. A 
further appeal may be filed in superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  An amendment provides that if a court finds
a person to be a danger to self or others and orders treatment, the
court shall transmit the name, date of birth, and date of commitment
to DPS, for purposes of enforcing the State's firearm laws.

Relevant laws.  Arizona Revised Statutes 13-905 et seq; 13-3101
et seq.

Source of information.  Arizona Department of Public Safety.

Arkansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Arkansas law provides that no person shall
possess or own any firearm who has been convicted of a felony,
adjudicated mentally ill, or committed involuntarily to any mental
institution. No person under the age of 18 shall possess a handgun
except in limited circumstances. It is illegal to furnish a firearm 
or other deadly weapon to a minor (under 18) without the consent of 
a parent or guardian, or to furnish a handgun or prohibited weapon to
a felon, or to knowingly sell, rent, or transfer a firearm to a person
prohibited by State or Federal law.

Restoration of rights.  The governor can restore a felon's right to
own a firearm upon a recommendation from a chief law
enforcement officer if the underlying offense did not involve the use
of a weapon and occurred more than 8 years ago. Restoration of
rights can also occur with a pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to use,
possess, make, repair, sell, or otherwise deal in a machine gun or
sawed-off shotgun or rifle, or a firearm specially made or specially
adapted for silent discharge.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks on 
firearms purchasers. Residents of adjacent States may purchase
long guns in Arkansas unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Arkansas does not require a permit to purchase firearms.
A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Arkansas contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act. The Arkansas State Police
conducts background checks on applicants for concealed handgun
permits. ATF allows a valid concealed handgun permit to be used
for a purchase without a NICS check, if the permit was issued prior
to November 30, 1998, or issued on or after April 1, 1999.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history, restraining
order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor conviction data are 
available on the statewide network.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun permit is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  The law that determines when possession
or use of a machine gun is presumed to be for an offensive or
aggressive purpose was amended to add exemptions for Federal
registration and ammunition testing.

Relevant laws.  Arkansas Code 5-73-101 et seq; 5-73-201 et seq.

Source of information.  Arkansas State Police and the Office of
the Attorney General.

California

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  California prohibits possession of firearms by
certain persons who were convicted of felonies or misdemeanors
specified in State law; are addicted to any narcotic drug; are
prohibited as a condition of probation; are subject to restraining
orders; were adjudged wards of the juvenile court (until age 30); or
are mentally ill as defined in State law. A firearm cannot be 
transferred to a minor (under 21 for handguns; under 18 for long guns) 
except in limited circumstances.  Handgun owners must pass a safety 
course or show proof of exemption.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights can be restored by a
governor's pardon or if an underlying conviction is reopened and the
subject pleads to a lesser charge. Persons convicted of specified
misdemeanors or committed to a mental institution can have their
rights restored by the proper court. Those who committed
disqualifying acts as juveniles can have their right to possess a
firearm automatically restored at age 30 if no additional violations
occur.

Prohibited firearms.  Short-barreled rifles and shotguns, unsafe
handguns, machine guns, assault weapons, and several other types
of firearms are prohibited, with limited exceptions.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by State-licensed dealers and unlicensed persons, and for
pawn redemptions processed through dealers. Additional
regulations apply to gun shows. Handgun purchases are limited to
one in a 30-day period.

Permits.  A permit is required to possess a machine gun or an
assault weapon. Carrying a concealed firearm requires a license.

Background checks.  The California Department of Justice (DOJ)
is a NICS point of contact and conducts all checks required by
Federal and State law. Gun show transfers and other private sales
are processed through a licensed dealer or law enforcement
agency. Dealers contact DOJ with a computerized "point-of-sale
device." A denial based on a Federal prohibition (except mental
illness) is reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  A 10-day waiting period is required for all firearms,
regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  The Dealer's Record of Sale(DROS)form 
requires a buyer's name, alias, gender, home address, local address 
if traveling, California driver's license, California ID card or 
military ID card number (with duty orders showing a station in the 
State), safety certificate (for a handgun) or exemption number, 
height, weight, descent, hair color, eye color, responses to 
questions concerning potential prohibited status, and date of 
application.

Purchaser fees.  DOJ charges $20 for a check on a single handgun or 
an unlimited number of long guns, and $16 for additional handguns 
purchased at the same time (by those who are exempt from the one per 
30-day rule).

State data.  California maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, restraining order, domestic abuse conviction (flagged
records), probation/parole, juvenile, mental health, and prohibited
armed persons data.

Check processing time.  Background checks are processed within
the 10-day waiting period.

Retention of records.  Data on approved long gun transactions can be 
retained for 5 days; data on prohibited long gun transfers are
retained indefinitely. Other transaction data are retained indefinitely
on microfiche if entered prior to April 1, 1997, or in an automated file
if entered after that date.

Registration.  Handguns are not registered, but the automated files
maintain a record of handgun transfers. New residents must report
handgun ownership within 60 days of moving to California. Assault
weapons are registered.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm can appeal
to California DOJ.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified
applications or outstanding warrants, DOJ informs the agency with
jurisdiction over the individual. Persons with warrants cannot
receive a firearm if a conviction would disqualify them. DOJ
enforcement and local law enforcement serve search warrants and
arrest and prosecute armed prohibited persons who are found to be
in possession of firearms.

2002/2003 legislation.  Application procedures were amended and
a system was authorized to identify persons eligible to receive
firearm shipments.

Relevant laws.  California Penal Code 12000 et seq.

Source of information.  California Department of Justice.

Colorado

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Colorado law forbids transfer of a firearm to
any person who is prohibited by Federal or State law; arrested for or
charged with a crime for which the person, if convicted, would be
prohibited by Federal or State law; or the subject of an indictment,
information, or felony complaint alleging a crime punishable by
imprisonment exceeding 1 year. A firearm cannot be possessed by
a person who is a previous felony offender or was adjudicated for
an act that would be a felony if committed by an adult. A firearm
cannot be possessed by or transferred to a person who has not
attained the age of 18 years, except in limited circumstances. It is
illegal to knowingly obtain a firearm on behalf of a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights.  Felons and juvenile offenders can regain
firearm rights if they receive a pardon from the president or the
governor.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
knowingly possess a dangerous weapon, which includes a machine
gun, short shotgun, or short rifle.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers or at a gun
show. Residents of any State may purchase long guns in Colorado
unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Colorado does not require a permit to purchase firearms.
A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Colorado Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required
by Federal and State law. Licensed dealers in Colorado request
instant checks by using a 1-800 number. Gun show transactions are
processed through dealers. State law mandates denial of a person
arrested or indicted for a potentially disqualifying offense if no final
disposition of the case is noted in databases searched. A denial by
CBI is reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Colorado's application includes the
purchaser's name, address, race, gender, and date of birth. A
Social Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  CBI does not charge a fee for an instant check. A
licensed dealer may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for processing
a gun show transaction.

State data.  Colorado maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, probation, parole, restraining order, and flagged domestic
abuse misdemeanor data on a statewide network. CBI receives
court records of persons who have been adjudicated as a juvenile
delinquent. Data on persons who are incapacitated or committed for
drug, alcohol or mental health treatment are reported by State
courts to the NICS. The State is pursuing technical and
administrative improvements to record systems for domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions and restraining orders.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are processed within 
1 hour; transactions requiring additional research are processed 
within 3 days.

Retention of records.  CBI purges data from approved transactions 
within 48 hours. Data from denied transactions can be retained 
indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may request
reconsideration by submitting additional information to CBI.

Arrests of denied persons.  All persons who are denied or have an 
outstanding warrant are reported to Federal, State, and local law
enforcement agencies with jurisdiction over the applicant's
residence and the dealer's premises.

2002/2003 legislation.  Two new sections provide that  district and
probate court clerks shall periodically report to the NICS those
persons found by court order to be incapacitated or ordered
committed for drug, alcohol or mental health treatment. A new
statutory part creates statewide standards for issuance of
concealed handgun permits.

Relevant laws.  Colorado Revised Statutes 12-26.1-101; 18-12-101
et seq; 24-33.5-424.

Source of information.  Colorado Bureau of Investigation.

Connecticut

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A pistol permit or an eligibility certificate shall
not be issued to a person who failed to complete a firearm safety
course. A person may not obtain a pistol permit or an eligibility
certificate or possess a handgun if the person is: convicted of a
felony, any of 11 specified misdemeanors, or a serious juvenile
offense; discharged from custody within the preceding 20 years
after being found not guilty of a crime by reason of mental disease;
confined to a hospital for psychiatric disabilities within the preceding
12 months by court order; subject to a restraining, protective, or
firearm seizure order; an illegal alien; or under age 21. A firearm
may not be possessed by a person who has been convicted of a felony, 
a serious juvenile offense, or a domestic violence misdemeanor, or is 
subject to a restraining, protective, or firearm seizure order.

Restoration of rights.  The Board of Pardons may restore the right
to possess a firearm or override a conviction.

Prohibited firearms.  Assault weapons and sawed-off shotguns
are prohibited, with few exceptions.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
apply for a permit or receive a firearm, except for a long gun transfer
between unlicensed persons who are not at a gun show. A person who 
becomes ineligible to possess a firearm must transfer all firearms 
owned within 2 business days and notify the Department of Public 
Safety of the transfer. Firearms dealers must have a State license.

Permits.  An eligibility certificate or pistol permit is required to
purchase a handgun. Both documents are valid for 5 years, allow
unlimited purchases, and will waive the long gun waiting period.
Carrying a handgun also requires a pistol permit, with a 60-day
permit issued by a local official required as a prerequisite to
receiving the 5-year permit issued by the Connecticut State Police
(CSP).

Background checks.  CSP is a NICS point of contact and conducts checks 
on applicants for pistol permits, eligibility certificates, and firearm
purchases. Applications are approved or denied within 8 weeks for a 
pistol permit or 90 days for an eligibility certificate. Instant checks 
on buyers are conducted by telephone (1-888-335-8438 in the State). A 
denial by CSP based on Federal data is reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  A 14-day waiting period, which begins when an
application is filed, is required for a long gun transfer, unless the
buyer has a valid permit or qualifies for an exemption.

Information from applicants.  A sales application requires the
buyer's full name, date of birth, current address, race, gender,
height, weight, date of application, pistol permit or eligibility
certificate number and expiration date, driver's license number and
State of issue, hunting license number (for long gun sale),
salesperson's name, and sales authorization number. A Social
Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $70 is charged to receive a 60-day and a
5-year pistol permit. Eligibility certificates cost $35. An additional
$24 is charged to cover the FBI fingerprinting fee for criminal
history.

State data.  Connecticut maintains fugitive, criminal history,
probation, parole, protective order, flagged domestic abuse
misdemeanor, mental health, and juvenile data. The State is
pursuing technical improvements to mental health and restraining
order record systems.

Check processing time.  Sale checks are normally processed in less 
than 30 seconds if no eligibility questions arise, within 1 minute
if there is an eligibility question, or within 3 days if further 
research is needed.

Retention of records.  CSP retains denied purchase applications for 
5 years. A dealer must retain approved purchase applications for
the life of the business.

Registration.  Data on the sale, weapon, buyer, and seller are
recorded on a registration form for a handgun or long gun. A
certificate of possession is required for an assault weapon legally
owned prior to 10/1/93.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm purchase may 
appeal to CSP. A denial or revocation of a pistol permit or
eligibility certificate may be appealed to the Board of Firearm 
Permit Examiners.

Arrests of denied persons.  Cases involving falsified applications
or attempts by prohibited persons to buy firearms are referred to 
the Firearms Trafficking Unit.

2002/2003 legislation.  A new automated registry of protective
orders was established.

Relevant laws.  Connecticut General Statutes 29-27 et seq; 53-202
et seq; 53-217a et seq.

Source of information.  Connecticut State Police, Special
Licensing and Firearms Unit.

Delaware

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Delaware law prohibits purchase or possession of 
a firearm by any person who is convicted of a felony or crime of 
violence involving physical injury to another; committed for a mental
disorder to any hospital, mental institution, or sanitarium; convicted 
for unlawful use, possession, or sale of a narcotic, dangerous drug, 
central nervous system depressant or stimulant, or controlled substance;
adjudicated delinquent for conduct which if committed by an adult would
constitute a felony; subject to a protection from abuse order; or 
convicted of any misdemeanor crime of domestic violence as defined by 
statute. A juvenile cannot possess a handgun without adult supervision. 
It is illegal to transfer a firearm to a child under 18 years of age 
(without parental consent), a person who intends to commit certain 
crimes, or a prohibited person. A handgun cannot be sold to a person 
under the age of 21 or to an intoxicated person.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a firearm
may be restored through a governor's pardon. A person who
committed a disqualifying misdemeanor may regain firearm rights 5
years after conviction; those who committed disqualifying juvenile
offenses regain their rights at age 25.

Prohibited firearms. It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to sell,
transfer, buy, receive, or possess a sawed-off shotgun or machine
gun or any other firearm adaptable for use as a machine gun.

Regulated sales.  Delaware law requires background checks on persons 
who purchase a handgun or rifle from a licensed dealer, but a shotgun 
purchase is exempt. Checks are optional for private sales. A handgun 
dealer is required to have a State license.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  State law requires that licensed dealers call
the Delaware State Police (DSP) for instant sales checks, by using
a 1-800 number. DSP has a maximum of 3 days to complete a
check. A holder of a concealed handgun permit issued by a county
superior court is exempt from the check required by State law.
Delaware is not a point of contact for the NICS; dealers must
contact the FBI for checks required by the Brady Act on handgun,
rifle, and shotgun buyers.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Delaware requires a purchase
applicant's name, address, race, gender, date of birth, Social
Security number, and date of application. If the application is
rejected, the type, make, model, and serial number of the weapon
are recorded.

Purchaser fees.  DSP does not charge a fee for an instant check.
A dealer may charge a fee not to exceed $20 per criminal history
check to process a private sale.

State data.  Delaware maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, probation, parole, juvenile, mental health, restraining 
order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor data on a statewide
network.

Check processing time. Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 6 minutes. Transactions requiring additional research 
are normally processed in less than 14 minutes. Retention of records. 
DSP retains records of approved transactions for 60 days and records 
of denied transactions indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by DSP may
petition for amendment of errors in the record. A further appeal may
be filed in superior court. The superior court's refusal to issue a
concealed handgun permit may be appealed to the State supreme
court.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases involving falsified applications, 
DSP informs the agency with jurisdiction over the individual. When a 
person is denied because of an outstanding warrant, the agency with
jurisdiction over the dealer is notified to apprehend the suspect.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Delaware Code 11-1441 et seq; 24-901 et seq.

Source of information.  Delaware State Police.

Florida

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Florida law prohibits the transfer of a firearm
to a person who has been convicted of a felony, a delinquent act
that would be a felony if committed by an adult and the offender is
under 24 years of age, or a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence; had
adjudication of guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on a 
felony charge and 3 years have not elapsed since the completion date 
of any court provisions; has been indicted for a felony; is subject to 
a protective order; has been arrested for a "dangerous crime," or other
offenses enumerated in State law; or is a minor under the age of 18 and 
lacks permission of a parent or guardian. A firearm cannot be possessed 
by a person who is a felon, a delinquent, restrained by a domestic 
violence injunction, a violent career criminal, or mentally incompetent.

Restoration of rights.  Florida allows a convicted felon's right to
own firearms to be restored through a pardon from the jurisdiction
where the felony conviction occurred. A person convicted of a
delinquent act that would be a felony if committed by an adult can
regain firearm rights when the jurisdiction of the court expires.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions, for 
any person to own or have care, custody, possession, or control of 
a short-barreled rifle or shotgun or a machine gun which is or may
readily be made operable.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by licensed importers, manufacturers, and dealers. Certain
pawnshop redemptions are also subject to checks.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A license is
needed to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Florida Department of Law Enforcement
(FDLE)is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts instant
checks required by Federal and State law. Checks on firearms
redeemed within 90 days of being pawned may be conducted by the
FBI; if a weapon is redeemed after 90 days, the check is conducted
by FDLE. If a purchaser is not disapproved within 3 business days,
the dealer must contact FDLE before releasing the firearm. A denial
by FDLE is not reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  Handgun purchases require a waiting period of 3
business days, beginning with the transfer of money or other
valuable consideration to the dealer, regardless of when a
background check is completed. Some counties extend the waiting
period by ordinance.

Information from applicants.  A firearm purchaser submits the
standard ATF form to a dealer. State law requires that the dealer
transmit the purchaser's name, date of birth, gender, race, and
Social Security number (optional) or other identification number to
FDLE.

Purchaser fees.  FDLE currently charges $5 for a check. The
maximum fee allowed by statute is $8.

State data.  Florida maintains fugitive, criminal history, restraining
order, juvenile, probation, and parole data. Domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions are included within criminal history
records.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 4 minutes. Transactions requiring additional research 
are normally processed in fewer than 3 days.

Retention of records.  Information on an approved transaction is
destroyed by FDLE within 2 days after the response to a licensee's
request for a check. Information on denied transactions is retained
for 1 year on paper and 2 years in electronic format.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may appeal
through the FDLE within 21 days of the non-approval issuance. In
order for FDLE to process the appeal after 21 days, a licensed
firearm dealer must conduct another background check.
Alternatively, a denied person may request the NICS to process an
appeal after the 21 day period has expired. 

Arrests of denied persons.  A person with an outstanding warrant
is reported to agencies with jurisdiction over the fugitive and the
location of the dealer. All denied persons are reported monthly to
ATF, special agency personnel, and local law enforcement by the
Firearm Purchase Program.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Florida Statutes 790.001 et seq.

Source of information.  Florida Department of Law Enforcement,
Firearm Purchase Program.

Georgia

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits possession of a firearm by
a person who is on probation as a first offender or has been
convicted of a felony in Georgia or elsewhere. A person under the
age of 18 may only possess a handgun in certain circumstances,
unless the person has been convicted of a forcible offense or
adjudicated delinquent. A handgun cannot be sold to a person who
is prohibited by State or Federal law, or has been involuntarily
hospitalized within the preceding 5 years.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon can regain the right to
possess firearms if the person is granted a pardon and the Pardon
and Parole Board specifically restores possession rights.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
possess a sawed-off shotgun, sawed-off rifle, or machine gun.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
firearm sales by licensed dealers and on redemptions which occur
more than 1 year after the firearm is pawned. A resident of any
State may purchase rifles and shotguns in Georgia unless
otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Georgia does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) is
a point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks required by
Federal and State law. Holders of concealed handgun permits
issued by county probate courts are exempt from sale checks under
ATF and State rules. Licensed dealers request instant checks by
using a 1-800 number or by an electronic point-of-sale device. The
GBI is allowed 3 business days to complete a check. During the 3
business days a delay status is given to the dealer until a final
determination can be made. The time allowed can be extended if
the applicant's criminal history record is not immediately available
(no extension limit is provided in the statute). A denial by GBI is
reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Georgia's consent form requires the
purchaser's name, gender, race, and date of birth, plus a Social
Security or other identification number (a Social Security number is
voluntary, but is used as a means of identification and as a search
parameter).

Purchaser fees.  GBI charges $5 for the background check on a
firearm purchaser.

State data.  Georgia maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, probation, parole, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor,
protective order, and mental health data.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 3 minutes. Transactions requiring additional research 
are normally processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  The Georgia Consent Form is attached to
the ATF 4473 and retained by the dealer. The GBI does not retain
information on approved sales. Data on denied transactions are
retained for 90 days except for transaction numbers and denial
dates, which are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may petition
GBI in writing or by telephone for an amendment of the record. A
further appeal may be filed in superior court.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who submits false information on 
an application or is subject to an outstanding warrant is reported by 
GBI to the agency with jurisdiction over the individual.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Official Code of Georgia 16-11-101.1 et seq;
16-11-170 et seq.

Source of information.  Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Crime
Information Center.

Hawaii

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits ownership, possession, or
control of a firearm by a person who is a fugitive from justice;
indicted or bound over for or convicted in Hawaii or elsewhere of a
felony, a crime of violence, or an illegal drug sale; addicted to 
drugs or alcohol; acquitted of a crime on grounds of mental disease;
diagnosed as having significant behavioral, emotional, or mental
disorders; under 25 years old and adjudicated to have committed
certain crimes; or subject to a restraining order that prohibits firearm
possession. A U.S. citizen must be 21 or more years of age to apply
for a permit to acquire. Handgun permit applicants must complete a
hunter education or firearm safety course. A long gun cannot be
transferred to a person under the age of 18.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon may possess a firearm if
the right to acquire firearms was specifically restored by a governor's
pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  Since July 1, 1992 an assault pistol cannot
be brought into Hawaii and, if legally owned before that date, can
only be transferred to a licensed dealer or a county chief of police.
Possession, sale, or transfer of an automatic firearm or a short
barrel rifle or shotgun is prohibited. It is unlawful to possess or 
sell a handgun made of zinc alloy with a melting temperature of less 
than 800 degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales.  Hawaii law requires a permit to acquire the
ownership of any firearm. A firearms dealer is required to have a
State license.

Permits.  A permit to acquire, valid for 10 days, is required for every
purchase of a handgun. A permit to acquire, valid for 1 year, is
required for unlimited purchases of long guns. A license is needed
to carry a handgun. Certain aliens may obtain a permit to acquire or
use a firearm.

Background checks.  Four police departments are points of contact for 
the NICS and conduct checks required by Federal and State law on 
applicants for permits to acquire handguns or long guns. State law 
mandates that a permit application be approved or denied within 20 
days. ATF allows permits to acquire and licenses to carry to be used 
for purchases in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  A 14-day waiting period, which begins when an
application is filed, must expire before a permit to acquire can 
be issued, regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  The Hawaii permit application requests 
the following: name, previous name, home address, business address,
occupation, race, gender, height, weight, date and place of birth, 
hair and eye color, Social Security number, and mental health 
history. Fingerprinting and photographing of first-time applicants 
is required; thereafter, only a yearly photograph is taken (or 
whenever the applicant renews a permit to acquire). 

Purchaser fees.  First-time permit applicants are charged $24 to
subsidize the FBI fingerprint check.

State data.  Hawaii's new criminal justice information system was
implemented in November 2002 and contains data on criminal
histories, domestic violence misdemeanors (flagged records), and
some restraining orders. A wants and warrants file is being
developed. A database for the State mental health facility is queried
and files are manually reviewed for names with a positive hit. Data
may be obtained from a private mental health agency if a permit
applicant signs a waiver or if the agency receives State funding.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Data on approved and denied applications
are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  All firearms acquired in Hawaii or brought into the
State are required to be registered, except for certain antique or
inoperable devices.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide an appeal procedure 
for permit denials.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Hawaii Revised Statutes 134-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Hawaii Criminal Justice Information Center; 
Honolulu Police Department.

Idaho

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Idaho law does not allow persons convicted of 
certain felonies to ship, transport, possess, or receive firearms. It
is unlawful for persons who were previously convicted of these felonies 
(or comparable offenses in other U.S. jurisdictions) to purchase, own,
possess, or have custody or control of any firearm. A firearm cannot 
be sold to or possessed by a minor under the age of 18 without the 
consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  Some convicted felons regain firearm rights
upon completion of imprisonment, probation, or parole. Other felons, 
except for those convicted of specified offenses, may apply to the 
commission of pardons and parole for restoration of firearm rights 
if 5 years have elapsed after final discharge.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks on 
firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may purchase 
long guns in Idaho unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the NICS. 
Licensed firearms dealers in Idaho contact the FBI for all background 
checks required by the Brady Act. County sheriffs conduct background 
checks on applicants for concealed weapon permits. ATF allows a valid 
permit to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Idaho maintains fully automated fugitive and criminal
history data on a statewide network, as well as a sex offender
registry. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions are found
within criminal history records and civil protection orders are entered
into the NCIC protection order file. The State is pursuing technical
improvements to misdemeanor conviction records and a feasibility
study of an automated link between law enforcement and courts for
protection order data is underway.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A person who is denied a concealed
weapon permit may bring a civil action in the county of application
or Ada County.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  An amendment clarifies that it is unlawful
for a person who has been convicted of a felony to purchase, own,
possess, or have under his custody or control a firearm.

Relevant laws.  Idaho Code 18-310; 18-3302 et seq.

Source of information.  Idaho State Police.

Illinois

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Firearm Owners Identification (FOID) cards
cannot be issued to persons who are prohibited by any Illinois
statute or Federal law. State law prohibits firearm possession by
persons who are under age 21 and have been convicted of
misdemeanors other than a traffic offense, or adjudged delinquent;
under 21 and lack parental consent to possess firearms; convicted
felons; narcotic addicts; mentally ill or retarded; illegal aliens;
subject to protective orders; or convicted of firearm or domestic
violence offenses. It is illegal to make a straw purchase for a
prohibited person.

Restoration of rights.  A felon may regain firearm rights if relief
from an Illinois conviction is granted. A person who committed a
forcible felony must complete the sentence and 20 years without
additional violations before applying to the Circuit Court. A person
who committed a non-forcible felony may apply to the director of
State Police.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to sell, manufacture, purchase,
possess, or carry a machine gun, a short-barreled rifle or shotgun,
or a firearm shaped like a wireless telephone. A dealer cannot
transfer a handgun made of zinc alloy or other metal which will melt
or deform at a temperature of less than 800 degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required on permit
applicants and persons who purchase or redeem firearms from
licensed dealers. All buyers must display a valid FOID card. A
private seller is not required to request a check but must retain
transaction records for 10 years. Long guns may be purchased in
Illinois by residents of adjacent States and other nonresidents who
meet certain requirements.

Permits.  Illinois requires residents to possess a valid FOID card to
purchase firearms or ammunition. The card is valid for 5 years, with
no limit on the number of firearms pur- chased. State law does not
provide for concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The Illinois State Police (ISP) is a point of
contact for the NICS and conducts checks required by Federal and
State law. Checks are conducted on applicants for FOID cards,
with a maximum of 30 days allowed to process an application. A
purchase from a dealer requires a valid card and an instant check
through the Firearm Transfer Inquiry Program (FTIP) Unit of ISP.
Dealers use a 1-800 number to request checks. A denial by ISP is
reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  After a sale application is filed, the wait is 24
hours for a long gun and 72 hours for a handgun, regardless of
when a check is completed.

Information from applicants.  A FOID card application includes
the name, address, date of birth, race, gender, height, weight, eye
color, hair color, driver's license or State identification card number,
recent picture, and answers to specific questions regarding eligibility
factors. In order to perform a background check (FTIP transaction),
the dealer must provide an FFL number, an ISP gun dealer number,
and a valid FOID card number; nonresidents of Illinois must furnish
name, date of birth, race, and sex.

Purchaser fees.  ISP charges $5 for a FOID card and $2 for an
FTIP inquiry at the time of purchase.

State data.  A statewide network contains automated data on
fugitives, criminal history, and convictions. Other files cover mental
health, juveniles, protective orders, and flagged domestic violence
convictions.

Check processing time.  FTIP inquiries requiring limited analysis
are completed in less than 2 minutes. Inquires requiring a more
in-depth analysis are completed within the 3 business days time
frame in accordance to the Brady Act.

Retention of records.  Data on approved FTIP transactions is a
pending issue regarding the retention period. Current State
legislation has been proposed to remedy the retention period. Data
on denied transactions is retained indefinitely. FOID applications are
retained on microfilm and FOID denial data is kept for 10 years.

Registration.  Firearms are registered by some local governments,
but not by the State.

Appeals of denials.  A denial or revocation of a FOID card can be
appealed to the director of State Police, and further to circuit court
(denials for certain reasons can only be appealed to circuit court). A
purchase denial can be appealed to the FTIP unit.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person with an outstanding warrant
is reported by ISP to the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.
Denied persons are referred to a unit within ISP which analyzes
denial information and reports significant violations to ATF.

2002/2003 legislation.  Amendments made it illegal to possess a
firearm shaped like a wireless telephone and to forge, counterfeit,
or alter a FOID card.

Relevant laws.  Compiled Statutes 430:65/0.01 et seq; 720:5/24-1
et seq; 725:5/112A-14.5.

Source of information.  Illinois State Police.

Indiana

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Indiana law prohibits a sale, gift, or other
transfer of a handgun or an assault weapon to a person under 18
years of age, except in limited circumstances. It is unlawful to 
sell, give, or in any manner transfer a handgun to a person who is
convicted of a felony, adjudicated a delinquent child for an act 
that would be a felony if committed by an adult, a drug abuser, an
alcohol abuser, or mentally incompetent. Further, it is unlawful to
purchase a handgun with the intent to transfer it to a person known
to be ineligible to receive it. A firearm cannot be possessed by a
serious violent felon or a person less than 18 years of age, except
in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
handgun may be restored by post-conviction relief or a governor's
pardon. Persons who have been adjudicated delinquent can regain
their rights at age 23.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
manufacture, cause to be manufactured, import, keep for sale, offer
or expose for sale, give, lend, or possess a sawed-off shotgun, or to
own or possess a machine gun.

Regulated sales.  State law requires a background check on a
person who obtains a handgun license or buys a handgun from a
licensed dealer. Residents of contiguous States may purchase long
guns in Indiana unless otherwise prohibited. A retail dealer of
handguns must have a State license. It is illegal to secure a loan by
a mortgage, deposit, or pledge of a handgun.

Permits.  Indiana does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A
handgun license is required for personal protection (carrying),
hunting, and target shooting.

Background checks.  Licensed dealers in Indiana contact the FBI
for checks on persons purchasing or redeeming long guns. The
Indiana State Police (ISP) is a partial point of contact for the 
NICS and conducts telephone instant checks on handgun purchasers.
After receiving a dealer's request for a check, ISP, under Indiana
law, has until the end of the next business day to advise of a
prohibition. A denial by ISP is reported back to NICS. ATF and State
rules allow personal protection, hunting, and target licenses issued
by ISP to be used for purchases in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Handgun purchasers must provide
the following: name, address, gender, race, place of birth, date 
of birth, height, weight, Social Security number, and fingerprints 
plus the date and hour of the transfer.

Fees charged.  The ISP charges $3 for an instant check, $5 for a
hunting and target license, and $15 for a personal protection
license.

State data.  The statewide network available for background checks 
includes automated criminal history, wanted person, protection order, 
and juvenile offender data. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions 
may be found in court records.

Check processing time.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  Limited data on approved transactions
(buyer name, dealer and approval numbers, and transaction date)
can be retained by ISP for not more than one year; other data on
approvals can be retained for up to 30 days. Data on denied
transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns are voluntarily registered in Indiana; there
are no State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a handgun can appeal to 
ISP or the agency with the disqualifying record. A further appeal 
may be filed in circuit court.

Arrests of denied persons.  ISP informs ATF of persons who submit 
false information on a firearm application. A person with an
outstanding warrant is reported to the agency with jurisdiction over
the fugitive.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Indiana Code 35-47-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Indiana State Police.

Iowa

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Applicants for permits to acquire pistols and
revolvers must meet all Federal requirements for possessing
firearms. Additionally, Iowa law prohibits issuing a permit to a
person who is less than 21 years of age, has been convicted of a
felony, is addicted to the use of alcohol or a controlled substance,
has a history of repeated acts of violence, has been convicted of
certain misdemeanor crimes of assault, or has been adjudged
mentally incompetent. A person who is convicted of a felony or
adjudicated delinquent for conduct that would constitute a felony if
committed by an adult cannot possess or receive a firearm. It is
illegal to sell, loan, give, or make available a long gun to a person
below the age of 18 or a handgun to a person below the age of 21,
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  Iowa allows a convicted felon's right to own
a handgun to be restored through a pardon or a special restoration
of rights with firearms privileges.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
knowingly possess a machine gun, short-barreled rifle, short-barreled 
shotgun, silenced firearm, or any part or combination of parts 
designed or intended to be used to convert any device into a prohibited
firearm.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun sales
by licensed dealers, pawnshops, and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  Iowa requires an annually renewed permit to acquire
pistols or revolvers, unless the purchaser holds a valid permit to
carry firearms. An unlimited number of handguns can be purchased
with either permit.

Background checks.  Ninety-nine county sheriffs are partial points
of contact for the NICS, conducting checks of applicants for permits
to acquire or carry handguns. State employees and nonresidents
are checked by the Iowa Department of Public Safety. Licensed
dealers in Iowa contact the FBI for checks on persons who purchase 
long guns or redeem a firearm without a permit. ATF allows permits 
to acquire or carry to be used for a purchase in lieu of a NICS 
check.

Waiting period.  An Iowa permit to acquire handguns becomes valid 3 
days after the date of application unless the applicant is found to 
be disqualified.

Information from applicants.  An application for a permit to acquire 
must provide the applicant's name, driver's license or non-operator's
identification card number, residence, and age. The applicant must 
display an identification card that bears a distinguishing number, 
name, date of birth, sex, residence address, brief description, and 
color photograph.

Fees charged. There is no statutory fee for a permit to acquire
handguns. The statutory fee for a new permit to carry weapons is
$10 and a renewal is $5. Some sheriffs charge a fee for processing
a permit.

State data. Iowa maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, protective order, and flagged domestic abuse misdemeanor
data on a statewide network. Checking agencies also have access
to some probation, parole, and juvenile data. Some agencies check
county court records to obtain mental incompetence data.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Sheriffs retain approved permits for the
remainder of the issuing year plus an additional 3 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a permit under Iowa
law can appeal to Iowa district court. A person who is denied under
Federal law can appeal to the FBI's NICS Program Office.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested by the checking agency in some cases.

2002/2003 legislation.  The applicant information required for
permits to carry or acquire a handgun was modified to exclude a
Social Security number and replace it with a driver's license or
non-operator's identification card number. Penalties were increased
for an applicant who makes a false statement and for a convicted
felon or adjudicated delinquent who possesses a firearm. The
statute that limited long gun purchases by Iowa residents to the
contiguous States was repealed, allowing such purchases in all
States.

Relevant laws.  Iowa Code 702.7; 724.1 et seq.

Source of information.  Iowa Department of Public Safety.

Kansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  It is illegal to knowingly transfer a firearm with
a barrel less than 12 inches to a person under 18 years of age, or to
knowingly transfer a firearm to a person who is both addicted to and
an unlawful user of a controlled substance, or has been convicted of
a felony described in the criminal disposal of firearms statute. A
firearm cannot be possessed by a person who is both addicted to
and an unlawful user of a controlled substance, or has been
convicted of a felony or adjudicated as a juvenile offender, under
circumstances described in the criminal possession of a firearm
statute. A person less than 18 years of age cannot knowingly
possess a firearm with a barrel less than 12 inches except in limited
circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  The prohibition against possession of a
firearm no longer applies if 5 years (or 10 years in certain cases)
have elapsed since the date of conviction for a felony or release
from imprisonment for a felony (whichever date is later) or
adjudication as a juvenile offender. Rights are not restored to
certain offenders who possessed a firearm at the time of
commission of the offense. An expungement or a pardon may also
restore possession rights in certain cases.

Regulated sales.  Kansas law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States are allowed
to purchase long guns from a licensed importer, manufacturer,
dealer, or collector in Kansas unless otherwise prohibited.

Prohibited firearms.  It is a criminal use of a weapon to knowingly
sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry a shotgun with a
barrel less than 18 inches in length or any other firearm designed to
discharge or capable of discharging automatically more than once
by a single function of the trigger. This prohibition does not apply to
certain persons.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm. State law
does not provide for a permit to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Kansas contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Kansas maintains criminal history, protection from
abuse order, juvenile offender, and sex offender registration data on
the statewide criminal justice information system. Domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions can be identified within criminal history by
statutory citation.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Kansas Statutes 21-4201 et seq.

Source of information.  Kansas Bureau of Investigation.

Kentucky

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Kentucky law prohibits the possession,
manufacture, or transport of a firearm by a person who has been
convicted of a felony in any State or Federal court, and by any
youthful offender convicted of a felony offense under the laws of
Kentucky. No person shall knowingly sell or transfer a firearm to 
any person prohibited from possessing the firearm. A handgun cannot
be possessed, manufactured, or transported by a person under the
age of 18 except in limited circumstances. It is unlawful in certain
circumstances to provide a handgun to a person under the age of
18.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm can be restored through a full pardon from the governor or
the president, or through relief by the secretary of the treasury.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Kentucky unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Kentucky does not require a permit to purchase a firearm.
A license is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed dealers in Kentucky contact the FBI for all checks
required by the Brady Act. ATF allows a concealed firearm license
issued after July 15, 1998, or before November 30, 1998, to be
used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Kentucky maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, and domestic violence restraining order data on a statewide
network. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions may be found
in court records.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.
Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  When a person subject to a restraining 
order attempts to buy a firearm in violation of federal law, the 
Justice Cabinet must make a reasonable effort to notify the
petitioner of the order if a notification request has been made.

2002/2003 legislation.  A new section provides that when a person
subject to a domestic violence protective order attempts to buy a
firearm in violation of federal law, the Justice Cabinet must make a
reasonable effort to notify the petitioner of the order if a request 
for notification has been made. Notices to courts and law enforcement
agencies will no longer be required.

Relevant laws.  Kentucky Revised Statutes 237.060 et seq;
431.064; 527.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Kentucky State Police.

Louisiana

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Louisiana law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who has been convicted of certain State
felonies (or a similar offense in another jurisdiction), unless the
person has not been convicted of a felony for a period of 10 years
from the date of completion of sentence, probation, parole, or
suspension of sentence. A firearm cannot be sold or otherwise
delivered to a person under the age of 18. It is unlawful for a 
person who has not attained the age of 17 years to possess a handgun
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm can be restored in Louisiana through a governor's pardon or
by certain law enforcement officers. Upon completion of sentence,
probation, parole, or suspension of sentence, convicted felons may
apply to the sheriff of their parish of residence (or in Orleans 
parish, the superintendent of police) for a permit to possess 
firearms.

Prohibited firearms.  No person (with limited exceptions) shall sell,
keep or offer for sale, loan or give away, purchase, possess, carry,
or transport a machine gun.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Louisiana unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  No permit is needed to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the NICS. 
Licensed firearms dealers in Louisiana contact the FBI for all checks 
required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  A fully automated statewide computer network contains
fugitive data and criminal histories that include domestic violence
offenses and some mental health data. Other mental health data
are maintained by local coroners. A protective order registry is
maintained by the judicial administrator's office.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  Machine guns, firearms with obliterated serial
numbers, short barrel rifles and shotguns, and certain modified
firearms are required to be registered.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:91; 14:95 et seq;
40:1379.3: 40:1751 et seq.

Source of information.  Louisiana State Police.

Maine

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Maine law prohibits ownership, possession,
or control of a firearm by a person who has been convicted or found
not criminally responsible by reason of mental disease or defect of
committing a crime punishable by imprisonment for 1 year or more,
a crime in another State that is similar to an offense punishable by
imprisonment for 1 year or more in Maine, or a firearm or dangerous 
weapon crime; engaged in conduct as a juvenile that if committed by
an adult would have been a disqualifying conviction; or is subject 
to a domestic violence restraining order. An individual may not 
transfer a handgun to a person under 18 (except in limited
circumstances) and a federally licensed dealer may not sell or
deliver a handgun to a person under 21. It is unlawful for a person
other than a parent or guardian to transfer a long gun to a person
under 16.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights may be restored by the
commissioner of public safety, a court order, or a governor's
pardon. A person convicted of a disqualifying offense can apply to
the commissioner for a permit to possess a firearm if 5 years have
elapsed since the date of final discharge from the sentence. The
commissioner's decision can be appealed to superior court.
Nonviolent juvenile offenders regain firearm rights 3 years after
completion of their dispositions or upon reaching 18 years of age,
whichever is later.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal for a person to possess a machine
gun, except for law enforcement or military personnel in the discharge 
of official duties or if the machine gun is possessed in accordance 
with the National Firearms Act.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits.  Maine does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A
permit is required to carry a concealed weapon. An offender whose
rights have been restored may be issued a possession permit but
cannot carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Maine contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  State agencies maintain criminal history, fugitive,
juvenile crime, domestic violence restraining order, and motor
vehicle data.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  An amendment provides that a person convicted 
in another State is not prohibited from possessing a firearm if the 
crime is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of 2 years or less, 
unless such crime is substantially similar to a crime punishable by
imprisonment for 1 year or more in Maine, and that firearm possession 
by a person found not criminally responsible by reason of mental disease 
or defect of a listed crime is prohibited.  Two new sections provide 
that an individual may not transfer a handgun to a person under 18 and 
a federally licensed dealer may not sell a handgun to a person under 21.

Relevant laws.  Maine Revised Statutes 15.393; 17A.554A et seq;
17A.1051 et seq; 25.2001 et seq.

Source of information.  Maine State Police.

Maryland

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A "regulated firearm" (handgun or assault weapon) 
cannot be transferred to or possessed by a person who is convicted of 
a crime of violence, a felony, or any common law offense or misdemeanor 
that carries more than a 2-year term of imprisonment; a fugitive; an 
habitual drunkard; addicted to a controlled substance; mentally 
disordered as defined in State law; under 21 years of age; less than 30 
years of age and was adjudicated delinquent; or subject to a protective 
order. In addition, it is illegal to transfer a regulated firearm to a 
person who is visibly under the influence of alcohol or drugs or a 
participant in a straw purchase. A regulated firearm buyer is 
required to complete a safety training course. A person under the 
age of 18 cannot purchase a long gun.

Restoration of rights.  The right to own a firearm may be restored
by a governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms. It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
possess or transfer an assault pistol on or after 7/1/94, or to
possess a short-barreled rifle or shotgun. Any type of handgun that
is not on the Maryland handgun roster may not be manufactured for
sale in the State.

Regulated sales.  Background checks are required on all persons
who buy a regulated firearm. A dealer is required to have a
Maryland regulated-firearms license. An unlicensed person selling
at a gun show must obtain a temporary transfer permit, have a fixed
display, and comply with the same restrictions imposed upon
licensed dealers. Regulated firearm purchasers must have resided
in Maryland for 90 days, and are limited to one purchase every 30
days. Residents of adjacent States may purchase long guns from
licensed dealers in Maryland unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A permit
issued by the secretary of the Maryland State Police (MP)is required 
to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  The Maryland State Police is a partial point
of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on regulated firearms
buyers. Dealers transmit applications to MP by certified mail or fax.
Private sales are processed through dealers or MP installations.
Checks must be completed within 7 days unless placed on hold
because of a criminal proceeding without a disposition. A denial by
MP is reported back to NICS. The FBI checks all redemptions, and
sales of long guns not regulated by Maryland law.

Waiting period.  Transfers of regulated firearms require a 7-day
waiting period that begins when an application is filed, regardless 
of when a check is completed.

Information from applicants.  A regulated firearm application
requires the buyer's name, address, race, gender, height, weight,
hair and eye color, date and place of birth, driver's identification
number, occupation, and date of application, plus the weapon
caliber, make, model, and serial number. A Social Security number
is optional.

Purchaser fees.  A $10 application fee is required.

State data.  Maryland maintains fully automated fugitive and criminal
history files, plus restraining order, flagged domestic violence 
misdemeanor, probation, and parole data. Information on mentally ill 
persons who attempt to purchase firearms is maintained when it is 
voluntarily provided by family members or other persons.

Check processing time.  Routine applications are processed in about 5 
days. Additional research is normally completed in less than 1 month.

Retention of records.  Permanent transaction records, containing
the caliber, make, model, serial number, and special characteristics
of each regulated firearm transferred, are maintained by MP.
Denied applications are maintained indefinitely.

Registration.  Machine guns and assault pistols (owned before
6/1/94) must be registered.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a regulated firearm can
appeal to MP and further to State court.

Arrests of denied persons.  All denied persons are reported to the
MP Firearms Investigation Unit.

2002/2003 legislation.  Handgun permit and regulated firearm
license procedures were amended, firearm laws were recodified,
and integrated mechanical safety device requirements went into
effect.

Relevant laws.  Code of Maryland: Criminal Law Title 4; Article 27
section 441 et seq. (became Public Safety Title 5 on October 1,
2003).

Source of information.  Maryland State Police Firearms
Enforcement Division.

Massachusetts

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  A firearm identification card or license to
carry will not be issued to a person who is convicted or adjudicated
a youthful offender or delinquent child in Massachusetts, another
State, or a federal jurisdiction for commission of a felony, a
misdemeanor punishable by more than 2 years imprisonment, a
violent crime, or a weapon or drug offense; or to a person who is
mentally ill, a drug or alcohol addict, under age, subject to a
protection order, or a wanted person. An identification card or a
license cannot be used to buy a firearm, rifle, or shotgun for the
unlawful use of another or for transfer to an unlicensed person. A
permit to purchase may be issued with restrictions to a person who
is not a minor if it appears that the purchase is for a proper purpose.

Restoration of rights.  A person who committed a disqualifying
adult or juvenile offense (except for certain offenses) may possess
a rifle or shotgun 5 years after completion of a sentence or an
adjudication without new violations, if this right is fully restored 
in the jurisdiction where the adjudication or conviction occurred. 
Addicted persons may apply for restoration if 5 years have elapsed 
after completion of treatment.

Prohibited firearms. It is illegal to possess a machine gun (with
limited exceptions) or a sawed-off shotgun. A firearm cannot be
sold if it does not meet certain manufacturing standards or pass a
firing test.

Regulated sales.  A permit is required to receive a rifle, shotgun, 
or "firearm" from a dealer or private person. Weapon types are mainly
distinguished by barrel length: rifles, equal to or greater than 16
inches; shotguns, equal to or greater than 18 inches; "firearms,"
less than 16 inches or shotguns less than 18 inches. Firearms
cannot be pawned. A dealer must have a State license.

Permits.  Two classes of licenses to carry allow, for 4 years,
possession of certain types of weapons: Class A, large capacity
firearms, rifles, and shotguns; Class B, non-large capacity firearms,
and large capacity rifles and shotguns. A firearms identification 
card allows possession of rifles, shotguns, ammunition, and chemical
mace or similar substances. Certain firearm purchases require a
permit that is valid for 10 days. Temporary licenses and permits
may be issued to nonresidents and aliens, with certain restrictions.

Background checks.  Licensing authorities (351 police departments) 
forward license and identification card applications to the 
Massachusetts State Police (MP), which conducts criminal history and
fingerprint checks. MP informs a licensing authority of check results 
within 30 days; the authority renders a decision within 40 days from 
the date of application. The State is not a point of contact for the 
NICS. Dealers contact the FBI for checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  License or identification card
applicants must provide: name, aliases, mother's maiden name,
father's name, date and place of birth, home and business
addresses, employer, occupation, telephone number, build,
complexion, eye and hair color, height, weight, fingerprints,
photograph, and references. A Social Security number is optional.

Purchaser fees.  A $100 fee is charged for licenses to carry,
identification cards, and permits to purchase.

State data.  The State maintains fully automated criminal history,
probation, parole, juvenile, domestic restraining order, and fugitive
data. Domestic assault and other violent misdemeanors are found
in criminal histories. Licensing authorities contact the Department of
Mental Health by phone or e-mail. The State will notify the licensing
authority of any disqualifying events which may occur after the
license is issued.

Check processing time.  No data are available.

Retention of records.  Licensing authorities keep copies of approved 
and denied applications indefinitely. Information on applicants is 
also maintained in the Firearms Record Bureau database.

Registration.  Rifles, shotguns, and firearms purchased in Massachusetts 
are registered. New residents have 60 days to register their firearms.

Appeals of denials.  Identification card and license to carry denials
can be appealed to State district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  An applicant who is denied a license or
identification card may be arrested if the person has an outstanding 
warrant.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Massachusetts General Laws, chapter 140,section 121 
et seq.

Source of information.  Massachusetts Criminal History Systems Board,
Executive Office of Public Safety.

Michigan

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Michigan prohibits issuing licenses to purchase 
handguns to persons who the licensing agency has probable cause to 
believe will use the gun to harm themselves or others, or to violate 
the law. Further, licenses cannot be issued to persons who are subject 
to certain orders and dispositions (related to mental illness and 
personal protection); under the age of 18; not legal residents of the 
State; charged with or convicted of felonies; adjudged legally insane 
or incapacitated; or involuntarily committed due to mental illness. 
Firearms cannot be possessed by convicted felons or by persons under 
the age of 18 who are not supervised by an adult.

Restoration of rights.  State law allows persons convicted of
nonviolent or drug offenses to regain the right to own a handgun 3
years after completion of their sentences. Violent offenders may
have their rights restored 5 years after completion of a sentence, 
if approved by a county Concealed Weapons Licensing Board, or upon 
appeal to circuit court. Rights may also be restored if a conviction 
is expunged or set aside or the offender is pardoned. However, 
current Federal law does not recognize restoration by these procedures.

Prohibited firearms.  A person shall not manufacture, sell, offer for
sale, or possess a machine gun or a short-barreled shotgun or rifle,
with limited exceptions.

Regulated sales.  A person shall not purchase a handgun without
first having obtained a license. Handguns cannot be pawned for
resale. Residents of contiguous States may purchase long guns in
Michigan unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Michigan requires a license, which is valid for 10 days, for
every purchase of a handgun unless the purchaser holds a license
to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  Checks on applicants for handgun purchase
licenses are conducted by 595 sheriffs and police departments,
which are partial points of contact for the NICS. Firearms dealers 
in Michigan must contact the FBI for checks on sales and redemptions
of long guns required by the Brady Act. ATF allows a handgun purchase 
license (but not a concealed carry license) to be used at the point 
of sale in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The State's application for a license
to purchase includes the person's name, address, and date of birth.
At the time of registration, the buyer's race, gender, height, and 
hair and eye color are recorded, along with the make, caliber, type,
model, and serial number of the handgun.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history, domestic
violence restraining order, probation/parole, adjudicated mentally
defective, and juvenile (if reportable to the State) data are available
statewide. Some corrections data are also available. Flagged domestic 
violence misdemeanors can be located through an automated pointer that
requires manual research.

Check processing time.  Routine license applications are normally
processed by non-automated agencies in less than 1 hour, and by
automated agencies in less than 5 minutes. Applications requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 5 days.

Retention of records.  State law requires that sheriffs and police
departments retain approved license applications for 6 years.
Denied applications are kept at the discretion of the licensing
agencies.

Registration.  Michigan requires registration of handguns. Copies
of the registration are retained by the registering law enforcement
agency and the Michigan State Police.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a handgun purchase or
concealed carry license can appeal to circuit court or through NICS.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested in some cases.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Michigan Compiled Laws 28.421 et seq; 123.1101
et seq; 750.222 et seq.

Source of information.  Michigan State Police.

Minnesota

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Minnesota law prohibits firearm possession
by certain persons who are under the age of 18, convicted of or
adjudicated delinquent for or charged with committing crimes of
violence, mentally ill, drug addicts, domestic violence offenders,
convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than 1
year, fugitives, or illegal aliens, or who have been dishonorably
discharged from the military or have renounced U.S. citizenship.

Restoration of rights.  A person convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for committing a crime of violence may possess a
firearm if discharged from a sentence before August 1, 1993, and if
10 years have elapsed since restoration of civil rights or expiration
of the sentence or disposition (whichever occurs first), and no
further conviction or adjudication for another crime of violence has
occurred.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to own 
or possess a machine gun or short-barreled shotgun. A "Saturday Night 
Special Pistol" cannot be sold by a licensed dealer or manufactured 
or assembled by any person.

Regulated sales.  State law requires a check on all persons who
attempt to obtain a permit or purchase a handgun or assault
weapon from a licensed dealer. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Minnesota unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Minnesota allows its citizens to obtain a transferee permit
which is valid for 1 year and can be used to purchase an unlimited
number of handguns and assault weapons. A permit to carry is
required to possess a concealed firearm and also constitutes a
transferee permit. In the alternative a buyer can undergo a
background check for each purchase of an unlimited number of
handguns or assault weapons.

Background checks.  Five-hundred sixty-eight sheriffs and police
departments conduct checks after receiving transferee permit
applications or transfer reports (on persons without permits) from
dealers. A permit shall be issued or denied within 7 days of
application. After a transfer report is filed, a dealer can complete 
the transaction if a notice of disqualification from the checking 
agency is not received within 5 business days. In addition, dealers in
Minnesota contact the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No person shall deliver a handgun or assault weapon 
until 5 business days after the date the agreement to transfer is 
delivered to a chief of police or sheriff. All or part of the waiting 
period can be waived by the checking agency because of a threat to the 
life of the transferee or a member of the transferee's household.

Information from applicants.  A permit application or transfer
report requires the applicant's name, address, telephone number,
driver's license number, gender, date of birth, height, weight, eye
color, and distinguishing physical characteristics. Applicants must
show identification with a color photograph.

Purchaser fees.  There is no fee for a transferee permit or a
transfer report. A fee not to exceed $10 may be charged for a
background check on a carry permit applicant.

State data.  A statewide network maintains automated criminal
history, fugitive, juvenile, and order for protection data. Domestic
violence misdemeanors are identified in criminal histories by the
offense charge. Checking agencies call the Department of Human
Services for mental health commitment data.

Check processing time.  Background checks are normally
completed in less than 5 days.

Retention of records.  Copies of applications are retained at the
discretion of the checking agency. However, a sheriff or chief of
police will not maintain any record of an approved transferee's
identity if that person requests return of the transfer report.

Registration.  A report of ownership must be filed for a machine
gun or short-barreled shotgun.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a permit or firearm
can appeal to the district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who makes a false statement on a 
permit or transfer application can be charged with a gross misdemeanor.

2002/2003 legislation.  The statute on permits to carry a pistol was
amended to require a county sheriff to issue a permit to an applicant
unless that person is disqualified under specific listed factors.

Relevant laws.  Minnesota Statutes 609.165; 609.66 et seq; 624.71
et seq.

Source of information.  Minnesota Department of Public Safety.

Mississippi

FBI conducts NICS checks 

Prohibited persons.  Mississippi law makes it unlawful to sell, give,
or lend a firearm to a person whom the transferor knows to be a
minor under 18 years of age, or intoxicated. A person convicted of a
felony under the laws of Mississippi, any other State, or the United
States cannot possess any firearm. It is an act of delinquency for a
person under the age of 18 years to knowingly possess a handgun,
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm can be restored by a governor's pardon, Federal relief, or a
certificate of rehabilitation from the court of conviction.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A license is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Mississippi contact the FBI for
all checks required by the Brady Act. The Mississippi Department of
Public Safety conducts background checks on applicants for
concealed handgun licenses. ATF allows a valid license issued to
an individual to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  There is no State waiting period to purchase a
firearm.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Mississippi maintains an automated message switch
that allows local agencies to access the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and the Interstate Identification Index (III). Arrest 
and disposition records on felonies and misdemeanors are available
online, along with fugitive from justice information.

Check processing time.  No statewide data is available.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun license is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A person who is denied a concealed
handgun license may appeal to the commissioner of public safety
and further to the circuit or county court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  An amendment deleted the requirement
that a merchant, dealer or pawnbroker keep records of ammunition
sales.

Relevant laws.  Mississippi Code 45-9-101; 97-37-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Mississippi Department of Public Safety.
(Note: The Department of Public Safety is the agency responsible
for the issuance of individual firearm permits and does not 
regulate the purchasing of firearms.)

Missouri

FBI conducts NICS checks 
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Missouri law requires that an applicant for a
permit to acquire a concealable firearm (handgun) be at least 21
years of age, a U.S. citizen, and a State resident for at least 6
months. A permit cannot be issued to a person who has pled guilty
to, been convicted of, is a fugitive from justice for, or currently
charged with a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term
exceeding 1 year under any State or Federal laws, or a weapons
misdemeanor; has been dishonorably discharged from U.S. armed
forces; is publicly known to be habitually intoxicated or drugged; 
is currently adjudged mentally incompetent; has been committed to a
mental health facility; or has rendered a false statement on the
application. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a person who is 
not entitled to possess it, is less than 18 years old (without consent 
of the child's parent or guardian) or is intoxicated. It is unlawful 
to receive a handgun without obtaining a valid permit or to deliver a
handgun to a person who lacks a valid permit.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a handgun
can be restored through a governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a
machine gun or a short-barreled rifle or shotgun.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun
transfers by licensed dealers, pawnshops, and unlicensed persons.
Residents of contiguous States may purchase long guns in Missouri
unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Missouri mandates a permit to acquire a concealable
firearm, which is valid for 30 days and can be used to purchase 
one handgun.

Background checks.  One-hundred fourteen county sheriffs and the St. 
Louis County Police Department conduct background checks on applicants 
for permits to acquire handguns. A permit shall be issued or denied 
within 7 business days. The State is not a point of contact for the 
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Missouri contact the FBI for all 
checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A permit applicant must provide the
following: name, residence and business addresses, height, hair
and eye color, date of birth, Social Security number, occupation,
reason for desiring a permit, statement of compliance with statutory
requirements, and date of application. The person who receives the
permit from the applicant shall return it to the sheriff with a
description of the handgun obtained, including the make, model,
and serial number.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $10 is charged for a permit.

State data.  Missouri maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, domestic violence restraining order, probation, and parole
data on a statewide computer network. Some domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions are flagged within criminal histories. The
State is pursuing technical and administrative improvements to
record systems for domestic violence misdemeanor convictions and
restraining orders.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  Sheriffs are required to keep a record of all
applications for permits and the actions taken on applications, and
to preserve all returned permits. The permit statute does not specify
a record retention period.

Registration.  Handguns are not registered by the State, but are
registered by some counties and municipalities.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a permit may appeal to 
small claims court in the county where they reside and the permit
was requested.

Arrests of denied persons.  An applicant may be arrested for obtaining 
a permit upon a false representation.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Missouri Revised Statutes 407.500, 407.505;
571.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Missouri State Highway Patrol.

Montana

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Montana law makes it unlawful for a person
to purposely or knowingly purchase or possess a firearm after the
person has been convicted of certain felonies or an equivalent
offense under the law of another State or the United States. A minor
child under the age of 14 years cannot carry or use firearms in
public without adult supervision.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm can be restored by a governor's pardon or upon completion
of the sentence, except for certain offenders who must apply to the
district court for a permit to purchase and possess firearms.

Prohibited firearms.  It is an offense, except under certain
circumstances, to possess a sawed-off rifle or a sawed-off shotgun.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Montana unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Montana does not require a permit to purchase a firearm.
A permit is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Montana contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act. County sheriffs conduct
background checks on applicants for concealed weapon permits.
ATF allows a valid permit to be used for a purchase in lieu of a
NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  Montana maintains fully automated fugitive and criminal 
history data on a statewide network. State law requires entry of 
domestic violence restraining orders into the NCIC protection order 
file. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions may be flagged within 
criminal history records; technical and administrative improvements 
to these records are underway.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed weapon
permit may be appealed to Montana district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who is denied a concealed
weapon permit may be arrested if wanted in an outstanding warrant.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Montana Code 45-8-301 et seq; 46-18-801.

Source of information.  Montana Department of Justice.

Nebraska

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A handgun transfer certificate cannot be issued 
to a person who is under 21 years of age or whose purchase or 
possession of a handgun would be in violation of applicable Federal, 
State, or local law. Nebraska law makes it unlawful for a handgun to 
be possessed by or transferred to a person under the age of 18, except 
in limited circumstances. A person who has previously been convicted 
of a felony in any United States jurisdiction or is a fugitive from 
justice cannot possess a firearm.

Restoration of rights.  A person who was convicted of a felony can
possess a firearm if restoration of such rights is included in a
pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  It is an offense, except under certain
circumstances, to possess a sawed-off rifle or a sawed-off shotgun.

Regulated sales.  A transfer certificate is required to purchase,
lease, rent, or receive a handgun from a licensed dealer or an
unlicensed person, with limited exceptions.

Permits.  The transfer certificate needed to receive a handgun is
valid for up to 3 years and can be used for an unlimited number of
purchases. State law does not provide for concealed firearm
permits.

Background checks.  Ninety-three county sheriffs and the Lincoln
and Omaha Police departments are partial points of contact for the
NICS. These agencies conduct checks required by Federal and
State law on applicants for handgun transfer certificates. The
application may be made in person or by mail. State law allows a
maximum period of 2 days to investigate and decide on an
application for a certificate. Licensed firearms dealers in Nebraska
contact the FBI for checks on long gun purchasers required by the
Brady Act. ATF allows a handgun transfer certificate to be used in
lieu of a NICS check at the point of sale.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A transfer certificate application
includes the person's name, address, race, gender, height, weight,
hair color, date of birth, and Social Security number plus the date 
of application.

Purchaser fees.  State agencies charge $5 for a background
check.

State data.  Nebraska maintains a statewide network with automated 
data on fugitives, criminal histories, domestic violence restraining 
orders, probation, parole, and mental health commitments without a 
discharge in the last 5 years. Some domestic violence misdemeanor 
convictions may be identified from court or criminal history records.

Check processing time.  Routine applications are normally processed 
in less than 1 day. Applications requiring additional research are 
normally processed in less than 2 days.

Retention of records.  Approved and denied applications are retained 
at the discretion of the checking agencies.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A denial or revocation of a handgun transfer
certificate can be appealed to the county court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons who are denied handgun transfer
certificates because they submitted false information or have an 
outstanding warrant are arrested in some cases.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Nebraska Revised Statutes 28-1201 et seq; 69-2401 et 
seq.

Source of information.  Nebraska State Patrol.

Nevada

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Nevada prohibits possession or control of a
firearm by a person who is under 18 years of age (except in limited
circumstances) or has been convicted of a felony under the laws of
Nevada, another State, or the United States. It is illegal to 
recklessly or knowingly sell or barter a handgun to a child who is 
under the age of 18.

Restoration of rights.  State law allows a convicted felon's right 
to possess firearms to be restored if the person is honorably
discharged from probation. Restoration can occur through a
governor's pardon that does not restrict the right to bear arms. 
If a pardon does not restore civil rights, the person may apply to 
a board of pardon commissioners, whose decision can be appealed to
Nevada district court.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to knowingly or willfully possess,
manufacture, or dispose of a short-barreled rifle or shotgun, or to
possess or use a machine gun.

Regulated sales.  Pursuant to an executive order of the governor,
Nevada enforces the Brady Act's requirement of background
checks on firearm transfers by licensed dealers. State law gives
unlicensed sellers the option of requesting a check on a purchaser
from the Nevada Point-Of-Sale Firearms Program. Residents of
contiguous States may purchase long guns in Nevada unless
otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  State law does not require a permit to purchase firearms.
A permit is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Nevada Highway Patrol (NHP) is a point
of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by the
Brady Act. Licensed firearms dealers in Nevada request instant
checks by telephone. A denial by NHP is reported back to NICS. In
addition, NHP conducts checks requested by unlicensed sellers,
which must be completed within 3 business days. County sheriffs
conduct background checks on applicants for concealed firearm
permits. ATF allows a valid permit to be used for a purchase 
without a subsequent NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Licensed dealers in Nevada use the
standard ATF forms when preparing to conduct a firearm transaction. 
No separate State form is required.

Purchaser fees.  The fee for a firearms background check is $15.

State data.  Nevada maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor, and protective
order data on a statewide network. Mental health facilities may 
be contacted by NHP for data on mental illness prohibitions.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 3 minutes. Transactions requiring additional research 
normally are processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  Information from approved transactions is
retained for a maximum period of 20 days. Information from denied
transactions is retained for 2 years.

Registration.  Firearms are not registered in Nevada except in
Clark County.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may request
reconsideration from the NHP Records and Identification Bureau. A
person who is denied a concealed firearm permit may file a petition
in Nevada district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  NHP notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information on purchase forms. When a person is
denied because of an outstanding warrant, the NHP notifies the
agency with jurisdiction over the site of the transaction.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Nevada Revised Statutes 176A.860; 202.253 et
seq; 213.090.

Source of information.  Nevada Highway Patrol.

New Hampshire

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A firearm cannot be owned, possessed, or
controlled by a person who has been convicted of certain felonies in
any United States jurisdiction. No person shall sell, deliver, or
otherwise transfer a firearm to a person who has been convicted in
any jurisdiction of a felony. It is illegal to sell, barter, hire, 
lend, or give a handgun to a minor (under age 18) except in limited
circumstances. A licensed dealer shall not sell handguns to
nonresidents who are prohibited in their States of residence. It is
illegal to knowingly attempt to purchase a firearm while subject to a
protective order.

Restoration of rights.  A felon convicted in New Hampshire may regain 
firearm rights through a full and unconditional pardon by the governor 
or an annulment of the conviction.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  New Hampshire law requires a retail seller of
handguns to obtain a license from the selectmen of a town or the
chief of police of a city. The State conducts background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The New Hampshire Department of Safety (DOS) is 
a partial point of contact for the NICS, processing background checks 
on persons who purchase or redeem handguns from licensed dealers. An 
instant check may be requested by way of a 1-800 number. A handgun 
transfer may proceed if the dealer is not informed of a prohibition 
by DOS within 3 days. A denial by DOS is reported back to NICS. In 
addition, licensed dealers in New Hampshire contact the FBI for 
checks on persons who purchase or redeem long guns.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  New Hampshire's application includes 
the purchaser's name, race, gender, date of birth, and Social 
Security or driver's license number, plus the date of
application.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  New Hampshire maintains fugitive, criminal history,
restraining order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor data
on a statewide computer network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 5 minutes. Transactions requiring additional research 
normally are processed in less than 4 hours.

Retention of records.  State law requires destruction of information 
on approved transactions within 24 hours after approval (except for 
request dates and approval numbers, which may be maintained 
indefinitely). Information on denied transactions shall be retained 
for 3 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person denied a handgun by DOS can appeal to 
that agency, and further to superior court.

Arrests of denied persons. If an applicant submits false information, 
DOS notifies ATF and agencies with jurisdiction over the venue of the
transaction and the person's residence. In cases involving outstanding
warrants, DOS notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  New Hampshire Revised Statutes, Chapters 159
and 159-D.

Source of information.  New Hampshire State Police.

New Jersey

State conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  A handgun permit or firearm identification
card cannot be issued to a person who is convicted of a crime, drug
dependent, confined for a mental disorder, an habitual drunkard,
physically unable to handle firearms, found to have submitted false
information, under age 18 (for an identification card) or 21 (for a
permit), barred from firearm possession by court order, or
adjudicated delinquent for firearm, weapon, explosive, or
destructive device offenses. Issuance of a permit must not
contravene the interest of public health, safety, or welfare.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms can be restored if the offender's criminal record is
expunged by the court.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions, to
possess, manufacture, cause to be manufactured, transport, ship,
sell, or dispose of a sawed-off shotgun, machine gun, or assault
firearm.

Regulated sales.  Permit regulations apply to all handgun transfers, 
and an identification card is required to receive a long gun. A 
firearm cannot be security for a loan. A dealer must have a State 
license.

Permits.  State law mandates a permit to purchase a handgun,
which is valid for 90 days and may be renewed for an additional 90
days. A firearms purchaser identification card, which is valid until
revoked for a violation of law, is required for unlimited long gun
purchases. A permit is required to carry a handgun. A license
issued by the superior court is required to purchase or possess an
assault weapon.

Background checks.  Applicants for permits and identification
cards are checked by 505 local police departments and the New
Jersey State Police (NJSP) for some unincorporated areas. If no
cause for denial exists, a permit or identification card shall be
granted within 30 days (45 days for a nonresident) from the
completion date of the investigation of the applicant. In addition,
NJSP is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by the Brady Act. Licensed dealers call NJSP for instant
checks on purchasers who have obtained a permit or an identification 
card. A purchase denial by NJSP based on a Federal prohibition is 
reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  No handgun shall be delivered by a licensed dealer 
unless a valid permit is exhibited and at least 7 days have elapsed 
since the date of application for the permit.

Information from applicants.  Identification card and permit
applications require a person's name, residence, place of business,
age, date of birth, occupation, gender, physical description,
citizenship, two references, and responses to firearms disability
questions. First-time applicants must submit fingerprints.

Purchaser fees.  The fingerprint fee is $49. Document fees are $2
for a handgun permit and $5 for an identification card. An assault
weapon or machine gun license costs $75.

State data.  New Jersey maintains fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order, misdemeanor, juvenile, and
probation/parole data. NJSP's NICS unit accesses Department of
Mental Health data and local police may check county mental 
illness records.

Check processing time.  Permit and identification card applications 
are normally processed in less than 1 month, or less than 6 months 
if additional research is needed.

Retention of records.  Permit and identification card applications
are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Handguns and assault weapons are registered.

Appeals of denials.  A permit or identification card denial can be
appealed to the superior court for the county where the application
was filed, with notice to the issuing authority. A purchase denial 
can be appealed to the NICS unit.

Arrests of denied persons.  Local police departments arrest denied 
persons in some cases. NJSP's NICS Unit reports all denied persons 
to the Firearms Investigation Unit. NCIC felony warrants are 
reported to the fugitive unit; other felony warrants are reported
to local departments.

2002/2003 legislation.  The statute that bars issuance of a permit
or identification card to a person who was adjudicated delinquent 
for a firearm offense was amended to cover offenses that involve a
weapon, explosive or destructive device.

Relevant laws.  New Jersey Statutes 2C:39-1 et seq; 2C:58-1 et
seq.

Source of information.  New Jersey State Police.

New Mexico

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  New Mexico makes it unlawful for a person under 
the age of 19 to knowingly possess or transport a handgun, except in 
limited circumstances. It is unlawful for a firearm to be received,
transported, or possessed by a felon, defined as a person convicted 
of a felony offense by a court of the United States or of any State 
or political subdivision thereof and less than 10 years have passed 
since the person completed a sentence or period of probation 
(whichever is later) and the person has not been pardoned or received 
a deferred sentence.

Restoration of rights.  State law allows a convicted felon's right 
to possess firearms to be restored by a governor's pardon or upon the
expiration of 10 years after completion of a sentence or a period of
probation without additional violations.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  New Mexico law does not require background checks 
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may purchase 
firearms in New Mexico unless otherwise prohibited.

Permit.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. State law
does not provide for concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in New Mexico contact the FBI for
all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  New Mexico maintains criminal history, flagged domestic 
violence misdemeanor, and juvenile data on a statewide network. These 
files are partially automated, with search requests made by teletype 
to the Department of Public Safety. A domestic violence protection 
order database is being developed.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  New Mexico Statutes 30-7-1 et seq.

Source of information.  New Mexico Department of Public Safety.

New York

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  New York law prohibits issuing a license to
carry or possess a handgun to any person who is under 21, is not of
good moral character, has been convicted of a felony or "serious
offense," suffers from mental illness or has been confined to any
hospital or institution for mental illness, has had a license revoked,
is under a suspension or ineligibility order, or did not complete a
safety course and test (Westchester County only), or concerning
whom good cause exists for denial. A long gun cannot be possessed by 
a person who has been convicted of a felony or serious offense, or 
certified not suitable to possess a rifle or shotgun. A person under 
16 cannot possess a firearm except in limited circumstances. It is 
unlawful to knowingly purchase a firearm on behalf of a prohibited 
person.

Restoration of rights.  Certificates of relief from disabilities and
good conduct are issued at the discretion of the court of conviction
or the Board of Parole. Even if relief from a firearms disability is
granted, a licensing official can rely on the underlying conviction 
to deny a handgun license application.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to possess a short barrel rifle 
or shotgun, a machine gun, a disguised gun, or an assault weapon,
with limited exceptions.

Regulated sales.  Every person who receives a handgun must have a 
license. A firearms dealer is required to have a New York license. 
A NICS check through a dealer is required on all persons who receive 
a firearm at a gun show.

Permits.  Each handgun purchased requires a license, issued by a
designated county or city judicial or law enforcement officer, which
specifies conditions for possession and carrying. A license is valid
throughout the State, except in New York City, where additional
rules of validity apply. Licenses are valid until revoked but have a
fixed duration in New York City (3 years) and in Nassau, Suffolk,
and Westchester counties (5 years). Purchasing additional handguns 
requires a license amendment.

Background checks.  Sheriffs and police departments are partial
points of contact for the NICS and conduct checks of handgun
license applicants on behalf of licensing officers. Fingerprints 
of applicants are processed by the Division of Criminal Justice
Services and the FBI. Applications must be acted upon within 6
months unless there is good cause for delay. A NICS check is
required for amendments to non-expiring licenses unless a check
on the holder occurred during the preceding 5 years. Dealers
contact the FBI for checks on long gun sales and firearm
redemptions required by the Brady Act, and for gun show transfer
checks required by New York law. ATF allows a license to be used
for a purchase from a dealer without the Brady check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  License applicants provide: name,
address, race, gender, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date 
of birth, Social Security number, fingerprints, business address,
previous address, occupation, character references, and the type,
make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  Handgun license fees vary by issuing authority,
but are at least $99, the cost of State and Federal fingerprint
processing.

State data.  New York maintains criminal history, fugitive, order of
protection, and domestic violence misdemeanor data. Limited mental 
health information is available from the New York State Office of 
Mental Health, on patients and former patients of State-operated
 mental health facilities.

Check processing time.  No statewide data available.

Retention of records.  The State Police Pistol Permit Bureau
receives copies of approved license applications, renewals, and
amendments. Denied applications are retained at the discretion of
the licensing authorities.

Registration.  Handguns are registered in New York.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide an appeal procedure 
for handgun license denials.

Arrests of denied persons.  Persons denied a license are arrested
in some cases.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Penal Law articles 265 & 400; General Business
Law article 39-DD.

Source of information.  New York State Division of Criminal Justice 
Services.

North Carolina

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  North Carolina law requires that an applicant
for a handgun purchase permit be of good moral character and
desire possession of the weapon for protection, target shooting,
collecting, or hunting. A permit may not be issued to a person who
is under indictment for or convicted of certain felonies; a fugitive; 
an unlawful user of drugs or a drug addict; adjudicated mentally
incompetent or committed to a mental institution; an illegal alien;
dishonorably discharged from the armed forces; subject to a
domestic violence restraining order; or who has renounced U.S.
citizenship. It is illegal for a minor under the age of 18 to 
possess a handgun and for a minor under the age of 12 to possess 
any firearm, except in limited circumstances. A firearm cannot be
purchased by a person who has been restrained by a domestic
violence order, convicted of a felony, acquitted by reason of
insanity, or determined to lack the capacity to stand trial.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights can be regained if a
conviction has been expunged or set aside (the person is not
considered to have been convicted), or if a person has been
pardoned or had civil rights restored (where the law of the
applicable jurisdiction provided for loss of civil rights). However,
rights are not regained if a pardon, expungement, or restoration of
civil rights provides that the person may not ship, transport,
possess, or receive firearms.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful to manufacture, possess, sell,
purchase, or acquire a fully automatic firearm, a short-barrel rifle 
or shotgun, or certain other firearms; or to manufacture, sell, give
away, or possess machine guns, sub-machine guns, or other like
weapons, except in limited circumstances.

Regulated sales.  Handgun permit requirements apply to all transfers 
by licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.

Permits.  North Carolina requires a permit, valid for 5 years, to
purchase a handgun. A separate permit is required to carry a
concealed handgun. A person who may possess a machine gun is
required to obtain a permit from the county sheriff.

Background checks.  One-hundred county sheriffs are partial points 
of contact for the NICS and conduct checks on applicants for permits 
to purchase or carry a handgun. State law allows a sheriff 30 days 
to decide on a purchase permit application. Licensed dealers in 
North Carolina contact the FBI for checks on long gun sales and 
firearm redemptions. ATF allows handgun purchase and carry permits 
to be used at the point of sale in lieu of the NICS check. These 
permits can be used to purchase multiple long guns, but only in a 
single transaction.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Information requested from purchase 
permit applicants is at the discretion of the county sheriffs, in 
conformity with the standards set forth in the permit statutes.

Purchaser fees.  State law mandates a charge of $5 for processing
a purchase permit application.

State data.  North Carolina maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation, parole, flagged domestic violence
misdemeanor conviction, and motor vehicle data on a statewide
network. State law requires prompt entry of all domestic violence
orders into the NCIC protection order file. Local mental health
records may be accessed manually by checking agencies.

Check processing time.  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records.  County sheriffs destroy permits and licenses 
after 10 years; other records are destroyed when their reference 
value ends.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  Handgun permit denials can be appealed to
the Chief District Court Judge for the district in which the 
application is filed.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  North Carolina General Statutes 14-269.7 et seq;
14-402 et seq.

Source of information.  North Carolina State Bureau of
Investigation; North Carolina Department of Justice.

North Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  North Dakota law prohibits ownership,
possession, or control of a firearm for a period of 10 years by 
a person who has been convicted anywhere of a felony involving
violence or intimidation, or for a period of 5 years by a person
convicted of any other felony or a misdemeanor involving violence
or intimidation committed while using a firearm or dangerous
weapon. A person who was diagnosed and confined or committed
to a hospital or institution in North Dakota or elsewhere as mentally
ill or mentally deficient is prohibited from purchasing, possessing, 
or controlling a firearm except when the person has not suffered from
the disability for the previous 3 years. It is illegal for a handgun 
or other firearm to be transferred if the transferor knows or has
reasonable cause to believe that the transferee is a prohibited
person. A handgun cannot be possessed by or transferred to a
person under the age of 18, except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A person who has been convicted of a
felony or a disqualifying misdemeanor will regain the right to
possess a firearm 5 or 10 years (depending on the type of offense
committed) after the date of conviction or the date of release 
from incarceration or probation, whichever is later.

Prohibited firearms.  No person may possess, obtain, receive, sell,
or use a short-barreled rifle or shotgun, or purchase, sell, have, or
possess a machine gun or fully automatic rifle, unless the person is
within one of the limited exceptions.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks on 
firearms purchasers.

Permits.  North Dakota does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm. A license is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in North Dakota contact the FBI 
for all checks required by the Brady Act. The North Dakota 
Bureau of Criminal Investigation (BCI) conducts background checks 
on applicants for concealed weapon licenses. ATF allows a valid
license to be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  North Dakota maintains partially automated fugitive
and criminal history data on a statewide network. Court protection
order data are also available. A new automated protection order
system is underway to allow electronic entry of records by courts 
in large jurisdictions.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed weapon license is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed weapon
license may be appealed to North Dakota district court.

Arrests of denied persons.  BCI notifies other agencies of concealed 
weapon license applicants who have outstanding warrants.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  North Dakota Century Code 62.1-01 et seq.

Source of information.  North Dakota Bureau of Criminal Investigation.

Ohio

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Ohio law prohibits possession of a firearm by
a person who is a fugitive from justice; under indictment for or
convicted of any felony offense of violence; adjudicated as a
delinquent child for an offense that if committed by an adult would
have been a felony offense of violence; under indictment for or
convicted of any offense involving possession or sale of drugs;
adjudicated as a delinquent child for an offense that if committed by
an adult would have been an offense involving possession or sale of
drugs; drug dependent; a chronic alcoholic; or under adjudication of
mental incompetence. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a
prohibited person. A handgun cannot be transferred to or purchased
by a person under 21 years of age. It is unlawful for any type of
firearm to be transferred to or purchased by a person under 18
years of age, except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  A person convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for a felony offense of violence or a drug offense can
have firearm rights restored by a court of common pleas if the
person has been law abiding since completion of the sentence or
adjudication, and is not otherwise prohibited.

Prohibited firearms.  No person shall knowingly acquire, have,
carry, or use any dangerous ordnance, which includes any
automatic or sawed-off firearm or zip-gun. Certain exceptions are
allowed.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers. Residents of adjacent States may purchase
long guns in Ohio unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. Ohio law
does not provide for concealed firearm permits. A person who is
qualified to acquire, possess, carry, or use any automatic or
sawed-off firearm or zip-gun must apply to the sheriff of a county 
or safety director or police chief of a municipality for a license 
or temporary permit.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Ohio contact the FBI for all
background checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Ohio maintains automated fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence misdemeanor, probation, and parole data on a
statewide network. Domestic violence restraining order data is
maintained by counties and entered into the NCIC protection order
file.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Ohio Revised Code 2923.11 et seq.

Source of information.  Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification.

Oklahoma

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Oklahoma law prohibits transfer of a firearm
to a person who is under 18 years of age (except in limited
circumstances), to any convicted felon or adjudicated delinquent, or
to any individual who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or is
mentally or emotionally unbalanced or disturbed. It is unlawful for a
firearm to be possessed or controlled by a person who is a
convicted felon, adjudicated as a delinquent child or a youthful
offender, or subject to Department of Corrections supervision,
probation, parole, or inmate status.

Restoration of rights.  In Oklahoma, a convicted felon's right to
possess a firearm can be restored if the person was convicted of a
non-violent felony, has received a full and complete pardon from the
proper authority, and has not been convicted of any other felony
offense which has not been pardoned. An adjudicated delinquent
regains the right to possess a firearm when 10 years have elapsed
since the adjudication occurred.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to possess or control a sawed-off
shotgun or a sawed-off rifle, unless the firearm has been registered
pursuant to Federal law.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Oklahoma unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Oklahoma contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Oklahoma maintains fully automated criminal history
data on a statewide network. Domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions may be identified in court or criminal history records by
the title of the charging offense. Fugitive warrants and domestic
violence restraining orders are entered into NCIC files. The State is
currently flagging domestic offense records and increasing
automation of court records and restraining order reporting.
Involuntary commitment records are searched by the Department of
Mental Health during a check on an applicant for a concealed
handgun license.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Oklahoma Statutes 21-1271.1 et seq.

Source of information.  Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.

Oregon

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Oregon law prohibits the knowing possession
of a firearm by a person who is under 18 years of age, a juvenile
offender, convicted of a felony, committed, or found to be mentally
ill and ordered to not purchase or possess a firearm. It is unlawful 
to intentionally transfer a firearm to a person who is under 18 years 
of age, convicted of a felony, named in a felony arrest warrant, free 
on felony pretrial release, committed, found to be mentally ill and
ordered to not purchase or possess a firearm, or convicted within
the previous 4 years of a misdemeanor involving violence (assault
in the 4th degree, menacing, reckless endangering, or intimidation
in the 2nd degree). Further, it is unlawful to ship, transport, 
receive, sell, or otherwise furnish a firearm in furtherance of a 
felony.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm may be restored by expungement or the passage of 15
years since completion of a sentence for a felony which did not
involve criminal homicide or the use of a weapon, provided there is
only one felony conviction on the person's record. Other prohibited
persons may petition a justice court or circuit court for relief.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful to knowingly possess a machine
gun, short-barreled rifle, or short-barreled shotgun, unless the
firearm is registered as required under Federal law.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
purchase a firearm from a licensed dealer or at a gun show. A seller 
who is not subject to these requirements may voluntarily request a 
background check on a purchaser.

Permits.  Oregon does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks.  The Oregon State Police Firearms Unit is a
point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by
Federal and State law. Licensed dealers call a 1-800 number for the
Firearms Unit. Unlicensed sellers can call the 1-800 number or
complete a transfer through a dealer. Queries are processed on the
purchaser and the weapon being sold; the caller is given a
transaction number for an approval or informed that the applicant is
denied. An approval number is valid for 24 hours on a private sale
or 30 days on a dealer transfer. A denial by the Firearms Unit is not
reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  A purchase from a licensed dealer
requires submission of the standard ATF form and a State Police
thumbprint form. If the transferor is not a dealer, the prospective
buyer must provide name, date of birth, race, gender, address, and
the type, issuer, and number of a current photo identification. A
buyer may voluntarily provide a Social Security number.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $9 is charged for a background check by
the Firearms Unit.

State data.  Oregon maintains criminal history, flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor, fugitive, stolen gun, restraining order, and
juvenile data on a statewide computer network. A Department of
Human Services database contains mental illness and commitment
information.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes. Transactions that require
additional research are normally processed in less than 3 days.

Retention of records.  The firearms unit retains records of
approved and denied transactions for 5 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may appeal
to the State Police Identification Services Section upon submission
of fingerprints.

Arrests of denied persons.  For persons who submit false information 
or have outstanding warrants, the Firearms Unit notifies the agency 
with jurisdiction over the individual.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Oregon Revised Statutes 166.410 et seq.

Source of information.  Oregon State Police.

Pennsylvania

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits firearm possession by a
person who is convicted of an "enumerated offense" or an
equivalent offense in another jurisdiction; a fugitive from justice;
convicted of certain drug offenses or equivalent offenses in other
jurisdictions; convicted of three alcohol-related driving offenses 
in a 5-year period; adjudicated incompetent or involuntarily committed 
to a mental institution; an illegal alien; subject to an active 
protection from abuse order; adjudicated delinquent for certain 
offenses; or under 18 (with limited exceptions). State records that 
are prohibiting under Federal law include all convictions for a felony, 
a misdemeanor 1, a misdemeanor for which a person could have been 
sentenced to more than 2 years in prison, or a domestic violence 
misdemeanor conviction as defined by the Lautenberg Amendment.

Restoration of rights.  A prohibited person may apply to the court
of common pleas in the county of their principal residence for relief
from disability under certain conditions (but such relief does not
satisfy federal prohibitions). A prohibition based on juvenile records
terminates 15 years after the last applicable delinquent adjudication
or upon the person reaching the age of 30, whichever is earlier
under certain conditions.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to sell or possess a machine gun,
a sawed-off shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches, or a firearm
made or adapted for concealment or silent discharge, except when
in compliance with the National Firearms Act.

Regulated sales.  Pennsylvania law requires background checks
on persons who purchase any firearms from a licensed dealer and
on all private transfers of handguns except those between certain
related persons. Private transfers of long guns must comply with
Federal law. Handguns cannot be pawned.

Permits.  A permit is not required to buy a firearm. A license is
required to carry a firearm concealed.

Background checks.  The Pennsylvania State Police (PSP) is a NICS point 
of contact for checks on sales or redemptions required by Federal and 
State law. State licensees contact the Pennsylvania Instant Check System
(PICS) by using a toll-free number. On average, 60% of checks are handled
through automation and an Interactive Voice Response (IVR) component. If 
a potentially prohibiting record is identified or the buyer is not a State
resident, the call is automatically transferred to a staff operator. A 
denial by PSP is not reported back to NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Handgun buyers provide: name, address, 
race, gender, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, 
Social Security and Pennsylvania driver's license numbers, occupation,
employer or business name and address, citizenship information, and 
the make, model, serial number, caliber, and barrel length of the 
firearm.

Purchaser fees.  State law requires a fee of $2 for each background 
check and a $3 surcharge for each taxable sale of a firearm.

State data.  A statewide network contains automated criminal history,
fugitive, protection order, probation, and parole data. Mental health 
data supplied by county officials are available to PICS staff only to 
enforce the State firearms act. Updated records from research and 
denial challenges are kept to eliminate duplicate research on future
transactions. A conviction determined to involve domestic violence 
is flagged and record upgrades will incorporate flagging routines.

Check processing time.  Approximately 59% of calls are approved
automatically, averaging less than 1 minute. An additional 31% of
calls are approved during the initial call with the assistance of an
operator. The remaining calls are either denied on the initial call 
by the operator or held in research for a period not to exceed 15 
days.

Retention of records.  Information on the subject of a background
check is not retained by PICS upon approval of a transaction. PICS
retains records on denied persons for 6 months on paper (8 years if
a challenge occurs) and 20 years in electronic format.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied by PICS may file a
challenge with the PICS Legal Unit. Subsequent appeals may be
filed with the State attorney general and commonwealth court.

Arrests of denied persons.  Notice of persons who submit false
purchase applications is given to local, State, and Federal (ATF)
authorities. If a fugitive is identified at the time of purchase, 
the local agency with jurisdiction is notified immediately.

2002/2003 legislation. 

Relevant laws.  Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Title 18,
Chapter 61 (Uniform Firearms Act).

Source of information.  Pennsylvania State Police.

Rhode Island

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  A firearm shall not be purchased or possessed by 
a person who is convicted of a crime of violence in Rhode Island or 
elsewhere, a fugitive from justice, convicted of a domestic violence 
felony, in community confinement or subject to electronic surveillance 
or monitoring as a condition of parole, mentally incompetent, a drug 
addict, an habitual drunkard, or an illegal alien. It is unlawful to 
sell, transfer, give, or convey a firearm to a person under 18 years 
of age without consent of a parent or guardian. A person under 18 
years of age cannot possess a firearm except in limited circumstances. 
Handgun purchasers must be 21 years of age and complete a firearm 
safety course. It is unlawful to sell a handgun to a person under the 
age of 21 or to a person otherwise prohibited.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own firearms
can be restored through a governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  No person shall manufacture, sell, purchase,
or possess a machine gun, or possess or control a sawed-off
shotgun or sawed-off rifle unless the person is within one of the
limited exceptions.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who receive firearms from licensed dealers and unlicensed
individuals. Any citizen of the United States may purchase a long
gun in Rhode Island unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  Rhode Island does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun. A
person under 18 years of age must have a permit to participate in
legal firearm activities.

Background checks.  Thirty-nine local police departments conduct
checks on firearms purchasers required by Rhode Island law.
Sellers transmit purchase applications by certified mail or in person
to the police departments. If notice of denial is not received by the
seller within 7 days, a transfer can proceed. The State is not a point
of contact for the NICS. Licensed dealers in Rhode Island contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  A 7-day waiting period, which begins at noon on
the day after an application is filed, is required for all firearm
transfers, regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  Rhode Island's application includes
the purchaser's name, address, date of birth, place of birth, gender,
height, weight, hair and eye color, scars, tattoos and other
identifying marks, and questions concerning eligibility.

Purchaser fees.  Fees are not mandated by State law but are at the 
discretion of the police departments.

State data.  Rhode Island maintains automated fugitive, criminal
history, probation, parole, restraining order, and flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor data on a statewide network. The State is
pursuing improved automation of restraining order data.

Check processing time.  Background checks are normally completed within 
5 days.

Retention of records.  The checking agency and the State attorney general
receive copies of each purchase application, and are required to retain
approved and denied applications for no more than 30 days. Original copies 
of applications must be retained by sellers for 6 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  State law does not provide a procedure for
appealing a firearm denial. A person who is denied by the FBI can
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Rhode Island General Laws 11-47-1 et seq.

Source of information.  Rhode Island Department of the Attorney General.

South Carolina

FBI conducts NICS checks 

Prohibited persons.  South Carolina law prohibits handgun sales to or
possession by any person who is convicted of a crime of violence in 
any U.S. jurisdiction, a fugitive from justice; an habitual drunkard, 
a drug addict, adjudicated mentally incompetent, a member of a 
subversive organization, under 21 years of age (with limited exceptions), 
or adjudged unfit to carry or possess a pistol.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to own a handgun
can be restored if that person receives a pardon or an expungement 
of the conviction, unless the offense committed was a crime of 
violence.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions, for a
person to transport, store, keep, possess, sell, rent, or give away a
machine gun, military firearm, or sawed-off shotgun or rifle. No
licensed retail dealer may hold, store, handle, sell, offer for sale, 
or otherwise possess a pistol or other handgun with a die-cast, metal
alloy frame or receiver which melts at a temperature of less than
800 degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales.  Retail dealers of handguns must have a State
license. A person who buys a handgun from a licensed dealer must
be a South Carolina resident and is limited to one purchase in each
30-day period. A resident of any State may purchase a long gun in
South Carolina unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. The South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED) issues concealed handgun 
permits and special licenses required for possession, transportation, 
or sale of machine guns.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in South Carolina contact the FBI
for all checks required by the Brady Act. ATF allows a concealed
handgun permit issued by SLED to be used for a purchase without
a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  South Carolina's application for a
handgun purchase from a dealer includes the applicant's name,
home address, business address, race, gender, height, weight, hair
color, eye color, date of birth, place of birth, social security, 
driver's license and telephone numbers, State or military 
identification number, and date of application plus the type, make, 
model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  South Carolina maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, juvenile, and flagged domestic violence
misdemeanor data on a statewide network. In addition, SLED
maintains a "30-day, one handgun purchase" file. Domestic violence
restraining orders with proper identifiers are entered into the NCIC
protection order file.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  SLED retains a copy of every handgun purchase
application filed with a State-licensed dealer. Information on persons 
who are denied a concealed handgun permit is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  Every person permitted to possess a machine gun,
sawed-off shotgun, or sawed-off rifle must register the firearm 
with SLED.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A person who is denied a concealed
handgun permit may appeal to the Chief of SLED and further to an
administrative law judge.

Arrests of denied persons.  SLED notifies other agencies of
concealed handgun permits applicants who have outstanding
warrants.

2002/2003 legislation No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  South Carolina Code of Laws 16-23-10 et seq;
23-31-10 et seq.

Source of information.  South Carolina Law Enforcement Division.

South Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  South Dakota law prohibits possession or control 
of a firearm by a person who has been convicted in the State or 
elsewhere of a crime of violence or a felony controlled substance or 
marijuana violation, or who has a prior conviction for drug possession. 
A person under the age of 18 cannot knowingly possess a handgun except 
in limited circumstances. It is illegal to transfer a firearm to a known
prohibited person or to a person under the age of 18 if the transfer 
or knows or reasonably believes that the minor recipient intends to 
use the firearm to commit a crime of violence.

Restoration of rights.  The right to possess a firearm can be
restored through a governor's pardon or the passage of time. A
person who was last discharged from prison, jail, probation, or
parole for a crime of violence or a felony controlled substances or
marijuana violation (except mere possession) more than 15 years
ago regains the right to possess or control a firearm. For felony
possession of controlled substances or marijuana, the time period 
is 5 years. However, no person convicted of a crime of violence may
ever lawfully purchase a pistol at retail.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal, with limited exceptions, to
knowingly possess a controlled weapon, which includes a machine
gun or short shotgun.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in South Dakota unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm. A permit is
required to carry a concealed handgun. An application (see below) is 
required to purchase a pistol if the purchaser does not have a permit 
to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in South Dakota contact the FBI
for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No seller may deliver a handgun to a purchaser until 
48 hours have elapsed from the time of the sale, regardless of when a
background check is completed. Holders of valid, concealed handgun 
permits are exempt from the waiting period.

Information from applicants.  State law requires the following
information on an application to purchase a pistol: complete name,
address, occupation, place and date of birth, physical description,
the date and hour of application, a statement that the applicant has
never pled guilty to, nolo contendere to, or been convicted of a
crime of violence, a statement that the information on the
application is true and correct, and the applicant's signature.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  South Dakota maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor, probation, parole, and
protective order data on a statewide network. A driver's history file 
is available to check for additional data.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  The seller of a pistol shall within six hours
send by first class mail or hand deliver the completed application to
the chief of police of the municipality or the sheriff of the county of
which the purchaser is a resident. State law requires chiefs of police
and sheriffs to retain their copies of applications for a period of 1
year.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  South Dakota Codified Laws, Chapters 22-14 and 23-7.

Source of information.  South Dakota Attorney General's Office.

Tennessee

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Tennessee law prohibits the intentional, knowing, 
or reckless sale, loan, or gift of a firearm to a person who is a minor 
or intoxicated. A licensed dealer cannot sell a firearm to a person who 
is addicted to alcohol or ineligible to receive a firearm under 18 
U.S.C. 922. A firearm transfer is denied if the buyer was charged with 
a crime for which a conviction would cause a prohibition under State or
Federal law, and the final disposition of the case has not occurred or 
is not recorded. A handgun cannot be possessed by a person who is 
convicted of a felony involving the use of force, violence, or a deadly
weapon, convicted of a felony drug offense, less than 18 (with limited
exceptions), or under the influence of alcohol or any controlled 
substance.

Restoration of rights.  Firearm rights may be regained by a convicted 
felon who obtains a pardon, a set aside or an expungement of the 
conviction, or restoration of civil rights by a circuit court. A person
convicted of a felony involving use or attempted use of force, violence, 
or a deadly weapon, or a felony drug offense cannot possess a handgun 
even if civil rights have been restored.

Prohibited firearms.  It is an offense to intentionally or knowingly
possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a machine gun or
short-barrel rifle or shotgun, except in limited circumstances.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase a firearm. A permit is
required to carry a handgun.

Background checks.  The Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) is a 
point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by 
Federal and State law. Licensed dealers contact TBI by telephone; 
high volume dealers can also use computers with a "point-of-sale 
device." A denial by TBI is electronically reported to NICS.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Tennessee's application includes the 
purchaser's name, date and place of birth, address, Social Security 
number, race, gender, thumbprint, and date of application. The make, 
model, caliber, and manufacturer's serial number of a firearm are 
checked through the FBI/NCIC Stolen Gun File. TBI refers stolen gun 
reports to the law enforcement agency with jurisdiction. If a theft 
is verified, the firearm will be confiscated.

Purchaser fees.  TBI may charge a reasonable fee, not to exceed
$10, for a background check.

State data.  Tennessee's law enforcement communications network 
maintains criminal history, fugitive, flagged domestic abuse
misdemeanor, restraining order, and sex offender data. 

Check processing time.  Transactions are normally processed in
less than 5 minutes or in less than 1 day if additional research 
is required.

Retention of records.  Information on approved transactions is not
retained by TBI, except for approval numbers and dates assigned.
Information on denied transactions is retained indefinitely, but is
destroyed if the decision is reversed on appeal.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who requests reconsideration of a
TBI denial is furnished a letter of instructions and an FBI final
disposition form, which must be filled out by the arresting agency or
clerk of the appropriate court and returned to TBI. For a denial
based upon an arrest with no disposition recorded, TBI has 15
calendar days after the applicant appeals to obtain the final
disposition. If TBI cannot obtain the disposition, the dealer is 
notified that the transaction is a "conditional proceed," (neither 
denied nor approved) and the dealer may lawfully transfer the firearm.

Arrests of denied persons.  TBI notifies ATF of persons who submit 
false information on an application. For persons with outstanding 
warrants, TBI notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the dealer's 
premises and the agency which entered the warrant.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Tennessee Code 39-17-1301 et seq.

Source of information.  Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.

Texas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Texas law prohibits possession of a firearm
by a person who has been convicted of any felony or a Class A
misdemeanor involving a member of the person's family or
household, and 5 years have not elapsed since the person's release
from confinement or supervision. A firearm cannot be possessed by
a person who is subject to certain family violence orders. It is
unlawful to knowingly transfer a handgun to a person who intends to
use it unlawfully or in the commission of an unlawful act, or is
subject to an active protective order. A firearm cannot be knowingly
transferred to a person who is younger than 18 years (without
parental consent), intoxicated, or a convicted felon.

Restoration of rights.  A person who has been convicted of any
felony or a Class A misdemeanor involving a member of the
person's family or household may possess a firearm if 5 years have
elapsed since the person's release from confinement or supervision. 
A convicted felon with restored rights may only possess a firearm 
on the premises where the person lives.

Prohibited firearms.  It is an offense to intentionally or knowingly
possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a machine gun, a
short-barrel rifle or shotgun, or a zip gun except in limited
circumstances.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks on 
firearms purchasers.

Permits.  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A license is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Texas contact the FBI for all
background checks required by the Brady Act. The Texas Department 
of Public Safety conducts background checks on applicants for 
concealed handgun licenses. ATF allows a valid carry license to 
be used for a purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  Texas maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor, protective order,
juvenile, probation, and parole data on a statewide network. Court
records are manually checked for mental illness dispositions.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun license is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
can appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed handgun
license may be appealed to justice court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Texas Penal Code 30.06; 42.12; 46.01 et seq; Government 
Code, Chapter 411, Subchapter H.

Source of information.  Texas Department of Public Safety.

Utah

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  A firearm cannot be purchased, transferred,
or possessed by a Category 1 or Category 2 restricted person. A
Category 1 restricted person has been convicted of a violent felony,
is on parole or probation for a felony, is on parole from a secure
facility, or has been adjudicated delinquent within the past 10 years
for an offense which if committed by an adult would have been a
violent felony. A Category 2 restricted person has been convicted of
or is under indictment for a felony, has been adjudicated delinquent
within the past 7 years for an offense which if committed by an adult
would have been a felony, is an unlawful user of a controlled
substance, is in possession of a dangerous weapon and a controlled 
substance, has been found not guilty by reason of insanity or found 
mentally incompetent to stand trial for a felony, has been adjudicated
mentally defective or committed to a mental institution, is an illegal 
alien, has been dishonorably discharged from the armed forces, or has
renounced U.S. citizenship. A minor under 18 cannot possess a handgun,
sawed-off rifle or shotgun, or automatic weapon except as provided by 
Federal law. It is illegal to provide a firearm to a minor who is 
prohibited or lacks parental consent.

Restoration of rights.  The right to possess a firearm can be restored 
if a conviction is expunged or otherwise removed from the record.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits.  Utah does not require a permit to purchase firearms. A permit 
is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks.  The Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification(BCI)is 
a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by 
Federal and State law. Licensed firearms dealers request instant checks 
by using a 1-800 number, a toll telephone number, or a computer. Some 
denials by BCI are reported back to NICS, depending on the reason for 
denial. Holders of concealed firearm permits issued by BCI are exempt 
from point-of-sale background checks under an ATF ruling and Utah law. 
BCI verifies the validity of permits presented to dealers.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  Utah requires an applicant's name, address,
race, gender, height, weight, hair color, eye color, date and place of 
birth, citizenship, Social Security number, and date of application.

Purchaser fees.  BCI charges $7.50 for a background check.

State data.  Utah maintains automated fugitive, criminal history,
flagged domestic abuse misdemeanor, restraining order,
adjudicated mentally defective, and motor vehicle data on a
statewide network.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed in 
less than 5 minutes.

Retention of records.  State law allows BCI to retain data on approved
transactions for a maximum period of 20 days. Dealer numbers and 
transaction numbers and dates are maintained for 12 months. Data on 
denied transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may appeal to BCI
and further to the Commissioner of Public Safety. An appeal may also be 
filed with the FBI or the State that maintains the prohibitory record. 
A concealed firearm permit denial may be appealed to a State of Utah 
review board.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person who submits false information on 
an application or has an outstanding warrant is reported by BCI to the 
agency with jurisdiction over the location of the dealer. Federal 
offenders are reported to ATF.

2002/2003 legislation.  A person who possesses a Schedule 2 controlled
substance along with a dangerous weapon was added to the definition of
Category 2 restricted persons. Category 1 definitions were amended to 
add an intentional or knowing requirement and to penalize a prohibited 
person who agrees, consents, offers, or arranges to purchase, transfer,
possess, use, or have under custody or control any firearm.

Relevant laws.  Utah Code 53-5-702 et seq; 76-10-501 et seq.

Source of information.  Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification.

Vermont

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Vermont law prohibits a person, firm, or
corporation, other than a parent or guardian, from selling or
furnishing a firearm to a minor under the age of 16 years. A
handgun cannot be possessed or controlled by a child under the
age of 16 years without the consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights.  No State requirements.

Prohibited firearms.  A person who possesses, sells, or offers for
sale a zip gun shall be imprisoned or fined or both.

Regulated sales.  Vermont does not require background checks on
firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may purchase
long guns in Vermont unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  State law does not require a permit to purchase or carry
firearms.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Vermont contact the FBI for all
background checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  The State of Vermont maintains automated information on 
criminal histories, fugitives from justice, abuse prevention orders,
probation, and parole. Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions
are flagged within criminal history records.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  State agencies are not required to retain
any firearm transaction records. Firearm dealers are required to
retain sales records for 6 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Vermont Statutes 13-4001 et seq.

Source of information.  Vermont Department of Public Safety; Newport 
City Police Department.

Virginia 

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Virginia law prohibits possession of a firearm
by a person who is acquitted by reason of insanity, adjudicated
incompetent or incapacitated, involuntarily committed, subject to a
protective order, convicted of a felony, or found guilty as a juvenile
of a delinquent act which would be a felony if committed by an adult.
It is unlawful for an alien to possess an assault firearm, or for a
person under 18 years of age to possess a handgun or assault firearm. 
Handguns cannot be purchased by certain persons who have been convicted 
of two misdemeanor drug offenses within 36 months.

Restoration of rights.  The governor may grant a pardon or removal of
political disabilities to a person who committed a felony or delinquent 
act, and may condition reinstatement of firearm rights. The circuit 
court may issue a permit to carry a firearm to a person whose civil 
rights have been restored.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful to possess a sawed-off shotgun
or rifle (except for limited purposes), or to sell, transfer, or 
possess a plastic firearm or certain semi-automatic shotguns.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
purchase firearms from licensed dealers. Virginia residents may 
purchase firearms upon proof of residency in the State for at least 
30 days. Residents of contiguous States may purchase long guns in 
Virginia unless otherwise prohibited. A person cannot purchase more 
than one handgun in a 30-day period unless authorized by the State 
Police.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm. A permit
issued by a circuit court is needed to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The Virginia State Police (VSP) is a point of
contact for the NICS and conducts all checks required by Federal
and State law. Some dealers request instant checks by using a
1-800 number or the mail to contact the Firearms Transaction
Program. High-volume dealers in the Direct Access Program use
dial-in technology to request checks. A denial by VSP is reported
back to NICS if it is based on data from III, NCIC, or the NICS
Index.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The purchaser's name, date and place of 
birth, current address, Social Security or other identifying number, 
race, gender, height, and weight are required. The number of firearms
purchased in each transaction is recorded by categories (rifle, 
shotgun, pistol, or revolver).

Purchaser fees.  VSP charges $2 for a check on a Virginia resident
and $5 for a nonresident.

State data.  Virginia maintains fully automated criminal history,
fugitive, juvenile, mental health, protective order, flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor, drug user, and misdemeanor drug convictions data. 
A calendar file is maintained for handgun purchases. The State is 
pursuing technical improvements to mental health and domestic violence 
records systems.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 2 minutes. Transactions that require additional research 
are normally processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  Data on approved transactions may be retained 
for 30 days; however, multiple handgun transaction records and a log 
of requests (with purchaser name, dealer and approval numbers, and 
date) may be maintained for 12 months. Records of denied transactions 
are retained for 2 years.

Registration.  Machine guns are registered.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm may request
correction of a criminal history record or appeal to the VSP, or
institute a civil action within 30 days of such denial.

Arrests of denied persons.  VSP arrests all persons denied because of 
an outstanding warrant and arrests persons who submit false information 
in some cases. Using set criteria, VSP, in conjunction with commonwealth
attorneys, decides which denied persons should be prosecuted under 
Virginia law.

2002/2003 legislation.  The one handgun per month limitation was
amended to add an exception for a trade-in. An amendment clarified 
that a concealed handgun permit holder cannot carry a firearm while 
subject to a protective order.

Relevant laws.  Code of Virginia Title 18.2, Chapter 7, Article 7.

Source of information.  Virginia State Police.

Washington

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits ownership, possession, or
control of a firearm by a person who is convicted of or adjudicated
in juvenile court for a serious offense, felony, or misdemeanor as
specified by statute; involuntarily committed for mental health
treatment; under 18 years of age; or free on bond or personal
recognizance pending trial, appeal, or sentencing for a serious
offense. Offenders under the supervision of the department of
corrections shall not own, use, or possess firearms. A person at
least 18 but less than 21 may possess a handgun only in certain
places. State law does allow permissible firearms for children under
18 years of age for events such as hunting or trapping under a valid
license, target shooting or practicing at an established range, or an
organized competition.

Restoration of rights.  An offender's right to possess firearms may
be restored by a court of record or a governor's pardon. A convicted
felon may petition the court of record for restoration if the offender
has no previous violation and no subsequent violation for any
offense for 5 years (3 years if convicted of a non-felony offense)
after completing a sentence. Certain offenders are not eligible for
restoration.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions, for any
person to manufacture, own, buy, sell, loan, furnish, transport, or
have in possession or under control any machine gun, short-barreled 
shotgun, or short-barreled rifle.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
purchase handguns from licensed dealers. Residents of other States may
purchase long guns in Washington unless otherwise prohibited. A firearms
dealer is required to have a State license.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A license is
required to carry a concealed handgun. An alien lawfully present in
the U.S. must obtain a license to possess or carry any firearm.

Background checks.  Applicants for handgun purchases are checked by 291
sheriffs and police departments that are partial points of contact for 
the NICS. Checks are conducted upon receiving applications from dealers 
in person, by fax, or by regular or certified mail. State law provides 
that a handgun can be delivered to the purchaser when the dealer is 
notified of an approval or when 5 business days have elapsed. The time 
allowed for a check can be extended up to 30 days when the applicant 
has a record which lacks certain dispositions, or up to 60 days for 
persons who are new Washington residents or lack the required 
identification. Licensed dealers contact the FBI for checks required by 
the Brady Act on persons who purchase long guns or redeem pawned firearms.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  The Washington handgun application requires 
the purchaser's name, address, race, gender, height, weight, eye color, 
date of birth, place of birth, driver's license or ID number, and date of
application plus the type, make, model, and serial number of the weapon.

Purchaser fees.  None.

State data.  A statewide network maintains automated fugitive,
criminal history, restraining order, and flagged domestic violence
misdemeanor data. Some juvenile data are also available. Checking
agencies request mental illness data from the Department of Social
and Health Services by letter, telephone, or e-mail. The State is
pursuing improvements to domestic violence misdemeanor and
mental health record systems.

Check processing time.  Background checks are completed in
less than 60 days.

Retention of records.  State law provides that a checking agency
shall retain or destroy handgun purchase applications in accord with
18 U.S.C. 922. Generally, approved applications are retained for a
maximum period of 20 days and denied applications are retained
indefinitely. The department of licensing may keep copies or
records of handgun purchase applications. Dealers retain copies of
applications for 6 years.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a handgun purchase may 
appeal to superior court or directly to the FBI.

Arrests of denied persons.  In cases of outstanding warrants, checking
agencies normally notify the agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  WA. Revised Code 9.41.010 et seq.

Source of information.  Washington State Patrol.

West Virginia

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  West Virginia law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who is convicted in any court of a crime
punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year, addicted
to alcohol, an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled
substance, adjudicated as a mental defective or committed
involuntarily to a mental institution, an illegal alien, dishonorably
discharged from the armed forces, subject to a domestic violence
protective order, convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence, or a minor under the age of 18 (except in limited
circumstances). It is illegal to sell, rent, give, or lend a firearm to 
a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights.  State law provides that prohibited persons may
petition the circuit court of the county where they reside for an order 
which allows firearm possession. The court may enter an order if it 
finds such person capable of exercising the responsibility concomitant 
with possession of a firearm.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful for any person to carry, transport, 
or possess any machine gun, submachine gun, or any other fully automatic
weapon, except in compliance with Federal law.

Regulated sales.  West Virginia does not require background checks on 
firearms purchasers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A license is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the NICS. 
Licensed firearms dealers in West Virginia contact the FBI for all 
checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  West Virginia maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history data on a statewide network. Domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions may be found within criminal history records. 
A registry of domestic violence protective orders is being developed.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  No State requirements.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI may 
appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons.  Not applicable.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  West Virginia Code 61-7-1 et seq.

Source of information.  West Virginia State Police.

Wisconsin

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  State law prohibits firearm possession by or
transfer to a person who has been convicted of a felony in
Wisconsin or of a similar crime elsewhere, adjudicated delinquent
for an act that would be a felony if committed by an adult, found not
guilty of a felony in Wisconsin or of a similar offense in another
jurisdiction by reason of mental disease or defect, committed for
treatment and ordered not to possess a firearm, enjoined or ordered
not to possess a firearm under a domestic violence injunction, or is
under 18 years of age(except in limited circumstances).

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to possess firearms 
may be restored by a governor's pardon or Federal relief. A person who 
was adjudicated delinquent as a juvenile (after April 1994) may regain 
firearm rights if the court determines that the offender is not likely 
to act in a manner dangerous to public safety.

Prohibited firearms.  No person, with limited exceptions, may sell,
possess, use, or transport any machine gun or other fully automatic
weapon, or sell, offer to sell, transport, purchase, or possess a
short-barreled shotgun or short-barreled rifle.

Regulated sales.  State law requires background checks on persons who 
purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. State law
does not provide for concealed firearm permits.

Background checks.  The Wisconsin Department of Justice(DOJ)is a point 
of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on handgun purchasers 
required by Federal and State law. Licensed firearms dealers request 
instant checks by using a 1-800 number to contact DOJ. State law 
requires that a check be completed before 48 hours have expired; however, 
the time limit can be extended by 3 days for felony charges with no 
recorded disposition. A denial by DOJ is not currently reported back to 
NICS but will be in the near future. Dealers contact the FBI for checks
required by the Brady Act on persons who purchase a long gun or redeem a
pawned firearm.

Waiting period.  A 48-hour waiting period, which begins when DOJ
acknowledges receipt of purchaser information from a dealer, is
required for handgun sales regardless of when a background check
is completed.

Information from applicants.  Handgun purchasers must provide
the following information: name, previous names, address, race,
gender, height, weight, date of birth, hair color, eye color, date 
of application, and certification that no disqualifying grounds 
exist.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $8 is charged for a background check.

State data.  A statewide network maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, juvenile, involuntary commitment, restraining order,
and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor data. Probation and parole 
files are kept manually.

Check processing time.  Routine transactions are normally processed 
in less than 2 minutes. Transactions that require additional research 
normally are processed in less than 1 day.

Retention of records.  Data on approved transactions are retained
for no more than 30 days. Data on denied transactions are retained
indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a handgun may appeal first 
to the DOJ Crime Information Bureau and then to the Administrator of 
the Division of Law Enforcement Services. A further appeal may be filed 
in State court.

Arrests of denied persons.  DOJ reports denied persons to ATF, the 
Wisconsin Department of Investigation, local police, district
attorneys, and the U.S. Attorney's Office.

2002/2003 legislation.  No significant changes.

Relevant laws.  Wisconsin Statutes 175.30; 175.35; 941.20 et seq;
948.60.

Source of information.  Wisconsin Department of Justice.

Wyoming

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons.  Wyoming law prohibits possession of a firearm by 
a person who has previously pleaded guilty to or been convicted of 
committing or attempting to commit a violent felony or a felony of 
causing bodily injury to a peace officer, and has not been pardoned.

Restoration of rights. A person convicted of a violent felony may
regain the right to possess a firearm through a governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms.  None.

Regulated sales.  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Wyoming unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits.  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A license 
is required to carry a concealed dangerous weapon.

Background checks.  The State is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Wyoming contact the FBI for all
checks required by the Brady Act. The Wyoming Attorney General's
Division of Criminal Investigation conducts background checks on
applicants for concealed weapon licenses, after receiving
applications from county sheriffs. ATF allows a holder of a valid
concealed weapon license to purchase a firearm without a NICS
check.

Waiting period.  No State requirements.

Information from applicants.  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees.  No State requirements.

State data.  A statewide network maintains fully automated records
of criminal histories and fugitives who are wanted in felony or
misdemeanor warrants. Misdemeanor convictions for domestic
violence offenses are flagged within criminal history records.
Domestic violence restraining orders are entered into State and
NCIC protection order files. Wyoming is planning an interface
between the court system, the State file, and NCIC for automated
entry of restraining orders.

Check processing time.  Not applicable.

Retention of records.  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed weapon license is retained indefinitely.

Registration.  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a firearm by the FBI
may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A person who is denied a
concealed weapon license may submit additional documents and
request reconsideration by the Attorney General.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

2002/2003 legislation.  The concealed weapon permit law was amended 
to provide that the Division of Criminal Investigation shall submit 
an applicant's fingerprint card to the FBI for a national background 
check.

Relevant laws.  Wyoming Statutes 6-8-101 et seq.

Source of information.  Wyoming Attorney General. 

American Samoa

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  The Territory of American Samoa does not
allow handguns on the island. Police officers are not required to
carry firearms in the performance of their normal duties. However,
police officers are authorized by statute to carry firearms, providing
they have completed firearms training and are certified by a
competent authority. A person's baggage is checked for firearms
upon arrival. Shotguns of various gauges and .22-caliber rifles are
allowed. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a person who is
prohibited from possession, less than 18 years old (except in limited
circumstances) or intoxicated. A firearm cannot be possessed by a
person who has been convicted of or confined for a dangerous
felony in the territory or elsewhere during the preceding 5 years, or
who is a fugitive from justice, an habitual drunkard, a drug addict, or
currently adjudged mentally incompetent.

Restoration of rights.  Restoration of firearm rights may be given
at the discretion of the attorney general or the Department of Public
Safety, upon review of an application.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful to knowingly possess,
manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a machine gun, a short
barreled rifle or shotgun, or any other firearm for which a valid
license from the commissioner of public safety has not been
obtained. (Exceptions to these prohibitions are stated in the
prohibited weapons statute.)

Regulated sales.  Territorial licensing requirements apply to all
transfers of legal firearms.

Permits.  A license is required to possess, import, or sell firearms.
Each license issued shall specify the number, quantity, and
description of the arms which may be possessed, imported, or sold,
or otherwise transferred. A license to possess must be renewed
every year and must be in the licensee's possession when carrying
such arms.

Background checks.  The background checks required by American Samoa 
law on purchasers of shotguns and .22-caliber rifles are performed by 
the territorial police, after the owner brings in the sales receipt 
and the weapon. The police conduct the checks and issue licenses. The 
process includes checking NCIC through the American Samoa Office of
Territorial and International Criminal Intelligence and Drug 
Enforcement(OTICIDE), as well as checking with police departments on
neighboring islands. NICS checks for the territory are conducted by 
the FBI.

Waiting period.  No requirements.

Information from applicants.  Territorial law allows requests by
the police for any information as may be reasonably required.

Purchaser fees.  A fee of $2 is charged by the police for first time
license applicants, and $2 is charged for renewal of a license. The
late registration fee is $2.

State data.  Information is maintained manually.

Check processing time.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  License records are retained in accordance
with territorial statutes of limitation or as long as a licensee is 
in possession of firearms.

Registration.  Legal firearms are marked with such letters as may
be designated by the commissioner of public safety and also
marked with a number indicating the order of the license and
registration as specified in the license, unless the arm has a 
plainly visible and distinctive serial number stamped on it.

Appeals of denials.  An appeal of a license denial may be addressed 
to the attorney general.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

Relevant laws.  American Samoa Code 46.4201 et seq.

Source of information.  American Samoa Office of Territorial and
International Criminal Intelligence and Drug Enforcement(OTICIDE).

Guam

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Guam law prohibits issuing a firearms
identification card to a person who is a convicted felon, not a
resident of the territory, adjudicated incompetent, subject to a
physical or mental disease which would adversely affect the safe
use of the firearm, under age 18, convicted of a drug offense,
knowingly subject to a restraining order from a current or former
intimate partner, under an indictment or information for any felony
offenses, arrested for or convicted of a family violence offense,
arrested or convicted in any case where personal injury resulted
from the offense, or arrested for or convicted of offenses where a
firearm was an element or factor of the offense.

Restoration of rights.  A convicted felon's right to receive a
firearms identification card cannot be restored. A person convicted
of a misdemeanor where a firearm was an element or factor of the
offense or where personal injury resulted from the offense may
have rights restored 10 years from the judgment date.

Prohibited firearms.  The manufacture, possession, sale, barter,
trade, gift, transfer, or acquisition of any machine guns, submachine
guns, automatic guns, pre-banned and post-banned weapons, or certain 
short firearms is prohibited.

Regulated sales.  All transfers of lawful firearms, except for
temporary transfers at shooting galleries, require that the person
transferring or receiving the firearm hold a current identification
card. All weapons must be safety inspected by the Guam Police
Department's Armory Section. Both parties must appear at the
Armory and Record and ID Sections to conduct the transfer
transaction.

Permits.  A valid identification card is required to own, use, possess, 
carry, acquire, and transfer any lawful firearm. The permit is renewed 
every 3 years on the person's birthday.

Background checks.  The Guam Police Department(GPD)fingerprints all 
applicants for a firearm identification back-ground check and submits 
the prints to the Superior Court of Guam, which conducts the State
Identifications Bureau checks for the Territory. The FBI conducts the 
NICS checks for the Territory. Military personnel with top secret or 
secret clearance have the option to waive background fees by providing 
a copy of their clearance. First time applicants and applicants past 
10 years must undergo a background check.

Waiting period.  New applicants must wait until check results are
received by GPD (about 30 days). The waiting period is waived for
military personnel with a top secret or secret clearance. Applicants
for renewal of a firearms identification do not have a waiting period
if they do not have a criminal case or restraining order that prevents
renewal.

Information from applicants.  All applicants must appear in person 
and provide a certified birth certificate with any and all
certified marriage certificates and divorce decrees or a valid
passport with a full name, date of birth and Social Security number.
An application provided by GPD must be completed, which includes
information on place of birth, addresses, occupation, employer,
race, gender, height, weight, eye color, hair color, and questions
about criminal history and physical and mental abilities.

Purchaser fees.  First time applicants are charged $24 by the
Superior Court for the FBI background information fee. GPD
charges a $10 fee for fingerprinting in order to obtain the
background information. When the background check is cleared
and the application is approved, the applicant is charged a fee 
of $15 for the identification card (renewable every 3 years). There 
is also a $20 fee for permanent registration of each firearm.

State data.  Guam agencies maintain fugitive, criminal history, and
mental health data.

Check processing time.  For first time applicants the processing
time is approximately 4 to 6 weeks. An application will not be
issued until the background check is received.

Retention of records.  GPD retains all identifications indefinitely
and all applications received since 1998 are maintained indefinitely.

Registration.  All weapons must be accompanied by either an
authorized gun dealer receipt, shipped household goods declaration
or a customs declaration sheet, and an inspection sheet from the
GPD armorer prior to registering a weapon at the GPD Records and
ID Section. A transfer from one person to another requires that both
parties be present at the Armory and Records sections. All transfers
require a new registration.

Appeals of denials. Territorial law does not provide a procedure
for appealing an identification denial. Judgments from Superior
Court or U.S. District Court of Guam may reinstate the privilege to
own a weapon.

Arrests of denied persons.  A person in possession of a weapon without 
a valid firearms identification card is in violation of Guam
law and may be arrested.

Relevant laws. 10 G.C.A., Chapter 60: Firearms.

Source of information.  Guam Police Department, Records and ID Section.  

Puerto Rico

FBI conducts NICS checks
Commonwealth conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  The Superintendent of Police of Puerto Rico
shall not issue a license to have or possess firearms to any person
who has been convicted of any of the following offenses or of the
attempt to commit the same, in or outside Puerto Rico: murder in
any degree, man- slaughter, kidnaping, rape, mayhem, intent to
commit any felony, aggravated assault and battery with a weapon,
robbery, burglary, misappropriation, aggravated misappropriation,
arson, aggravated arson, or incest. In addition, a license cannot be
issued to any person who is mentally unbalanced, an habitual
drunkard, addicted to a controlled substance, or an alien, or who
has been a citizen of the United States and renounced such
citizenship, adjudicated as a mental defective by a court, or
discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions, or
is under a court order prohibiting stalking, spying, threatening, or
approaching an intimate partner or children of an intimate partner,
or has a history of violence or aggravated mistreatment.

Restoration of rights.  No regulations cover restoration of rights.

Prohibited firearms.  It is unlawful to sell or keep for sale, or offer,
give, lease or otherwise dispose of or transport any automatic
firearm, or to possess a machine gun, carbine, rifle, sawed-off
shotgun or any other modification of these, or any other firearm that
may be fired automatically.

Regulated sales.  The Weapons Law establishes that no dealer in
firearms or ammunition shall deliver a firearm or issue the
corresponding delivery permit to a purchaser without the latter
producing a license to have and possess a firearm. No weapon is
sold to the holder of a license from which the sales permit has 
been removed. Licensing requirements apply to all firearm sales.

Permits.  A license is required to purchase or carry a firearm.

Background checks.  License applications require background
checks conducted by the Police of Puerto Rico. Applications are
received by certified mail or in person. The commonwealth is not a
point of contact for the NICS. Federally-licensed firearms dealers
must contact the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  The waiting period for the license evaluation
process may be from 5 to 120 days. Information from applicants.  
A license application shall be made under oath and the applicant's
fingerprints are required. The standard ATF form is used for a 
purchase from a dealer.

Purchaser fees.  Commonwealth law requires that every application 
shall be accompanied by an internal voucher for $100.

State data.  The police department maintains an electronic registry.
The Commonwealth has an automated criminal history repository.

Check processing time.  The background check process can take from 4 
months to more than 6 months.

Retention of records.  Approved applications are retained by the
police for a maximum period of 130 days.

Registration.  Every firearm sold is registered with the Superintendent 
of Police.

Appeals of denials.  A license denial can be appealed under the
uniform administrative procedures of the commonwealth.

Arrests of denied persons.  ATF is notified of persons who submit
false information on an application.

Relevant laws.  Laws of Puerto Rico 25-411 et seq; Law No. 54 of
August 15, 1989; Law No. 284 of August 21, 1999; Law No. 404 of
March 1, 2001; Law No. 177 of August 1, 2003.

Source of information.  Statistical Analysis Center.

Virgin Islands

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  Virgin Islands law provides that a license to
have and possess a firearm cannot be issued to a person who has
been convicted in or outside the territory of a crime of violence, a
drug law violation, or a firearms law violation, or is mentally
incompetent, an habitual drunkard, a drug addict, or deemed to be
an improper person by the police. A firearm cannot be sold or
furnished to a minor except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights.  No information is available.

Prohibited firearms.  It is illegal to have, possess, bear, transport
or carry any machine gun or sawed-off shotgun.

Regulated sales.  Licensing requirements apply to all firearm sales.

Permits.  A license is required to possess, transport, or carry a
firearm. A purchase coupon is issued to a license applicant when
the application is approved. The weapon purchased is brought in to
the firearms unit of the Virgin Islands Police Department.
Information about the weapon is recorded and listed on the license
issued to the applicant.

Background checks.  License applications require a background check by 
the Virgin Islands Police Department, which includes contacting the FBI 
for a NICS check. The applicant completes and returns a notarized 
application. If no problems are found during the check, the information 
is forwarded to the Police Commissioner, who approves or disapproves the
application. A purchase coupon takes the place of a NICS check at the 
point of sale.

Waiting period.  Firearm transfers require a 48-hour waiting period,
regardless of when a background check is completed.

Information from applicants.  A license application is accompanied by 
four photographs and notarized statements from character references.
Fingerprints are required. Other required information varies with the 
type of application.

Purchaser fees.  The Virgin Islands charges a $5 application fee, a
$50 registration fee per weapon, and a $15 late registration fee. The
renewal fee is $30 per weapon. New photographs are required with each 
renewal.

State data.  The territory maintains manual criminal history
information.

Check processing time.  No information is available.

Retention of records.  No information is available.

Registration.  After purchase, the bill of sale and the weapon are
brought to the police, who record all pertinent information.

Appeals of denials.  A person who is denied a license can appeal
to territorial court.

Arrests of denied persons.  No information is available.

Relevant laws.  Virgin Islands Code 14-2253; 23-451 et seq.

Source of information.  Virgin Islands Police Department.

Washington, D.C.

FBI conducts NICS checks
District conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons.  A registration certificate for a legal firearm
cannot be issued to a person who is under 18 years of age (those
between the ages of 18 and 21 need a notarized statement from a
parent or guardian), convicted of or under indictment for a crime of
violence or weapons offense, convicted of an offense involving
drugs, assaults, or threats, acquitted by reason of insanity,
adjudicated a chronic alcoholic, committed to a mental hospital,
suffering from a physical defect and unable to use a firearm safely,
adjudicated negligent in a firearm mishap causing death or serious
injury, or otherwise ineligible under District law. Registration
applicants are required to demonstrate adequate vision and pass a
written test evidencing satisfactory knowledge of district firearm
laws.

Restoration of rights.  Persons convicted of offenses involving
drugs, assaults, or threats, and certain other prohibited persons
may be allowed to register a firearm after a 5-year disqualification.

Prohibited firearms.  A registration certificate shall not be issued
for a sawed-off shotgun, machine gun, short-barreled rifle, or
handgun not validly registered prior to September 24, 1976. Handguns 
cannot be purchased, except by law enforcement officers, retired 
District police officers, military personnel, licensed dealers, and
organizations employing at least one commissioned special police 
officer or employee licensed to carry a firearm (where the handgun 
is used solely during the employee's duty hours).

Regulated sales.  Private individuals may only sell or transfer
registered firearms and ammunition to a licensed dealer in the
District, and may only purchase long guns in person from a licensed
dealer. Delivery of a firearm to a District resident will be withheld
until a registration certificate is issued by the Metropolitan Police
Department.

Permits.  A valid registration certificate is required for possession 
or transfer of any firearm.

Background checks.  The Chief of Police conducts background checks and 
issues registration certificates. The District is not a point of 
contact for the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers contact the FBI for 
all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period.  No requirements.

Information from applicants.  Registration information includes the
applicant's name, present address, previous addresses, occupation, 
business address, date and place of birth, gender, history with 
firearms, and the intended use and location of the firearm, along 
with information about the firearm to be transferred and the transferor.
Fingerprints and proof of District residency are required, and two recent
photographs must be submitted.

Purchaser fees.  The fingerprint fee is $35 and the firearms
registration fee is $13.

State data.  Criminal history records are partially automated and
include domestic violence misdemeanor conviction and restraining
order data. Mental health records are checked if a registration
applicant indicates a commitment.

Check processing time.  A check is processed in approximately 6 to 8 
weeks.

Retention of records.  No information is available.

Registration.  All handguns owned prior to September 24, 1976 were 
required to be registered on or before November 22, 1976. Long guns 
acquired after September 24, 1976 must also be registered.

Appeals of denials.  Registration denials and revocations may be
appealed to the Police Department. Evidence supporting
reconsideration must be submitted otherwise the denial or
revocation will be upheld. A police decision may be appealed to 
the District of Columbia Court of Appeals. In the event of a final
unfavorable decision, the applicant or registrant must lawfully
dispose of the firearm.

Arrests of denied persons.  A violation of the District's firearms
control act may result in a $1,000 fine or 1 year in jail, or both.

Relevant laws.  District of Columbia Code 2001, Title 7, Chapter
25; Firearms Control Act of 1975.

Source of information.  District of Columbia Metropolitan Police
Department; United States Attorney's Office.
       
Alabama Mark Hartley, Criminal Justice Information Center, 770
Washington Avenue, Room 350 Montgomery, AL 36130, (334)
242-4900 

Alaska David Schade, Department of Public Safety, Division of
Administrative Services, 5700 East Tudor Road, Anchorage, AK
99507, (907) 269-5708

Arizona Willard Whalen, Department of Public Safety, Concealed
Weapon Permit Unit, P.O. Box 6638, Phoenix, AZ 85005, (602)
223-2704

Arkansas Cora Gentry, State Police AFIS/ID Bureau One State Police 
Plaza Drive, Little Rock, AR 72209, (501) 618-8516 California Steve 
Buford, Department of Justice Firearms Division, P.O. Box 820200, 
Sacramento, CA 94203, (916) 227-4340

Colorado Susan Kitchen, CBI InstaCheck Unit 690 Kipling Street, Room 
3000, Denver, CO 80215, (303) 239-4235

Connecticut Sarah Kasacek, State Police Special Licensing and
Firearms Unit, 1111 Country Club Road, Middletown, CT 06457,
(860) 685-8918

Delaware Elizabeth Shamany, State Police Bureau of Identification,
P.O. Box 430, Dover, DE 19903, (302) 739-5872

Florida Martha Wright, Department of Law Enforcement P.O. Box 1489,
Tallahassee, FL 32302, (850) 488-4931

Georgia Terry Gibbons, Bureau of Investigation Crime Information
Center, P.O. Box 370808, Decatur, GA 30037, (404) 244-2638

Hawaii Liane Moriyama, Criminal Justice Data Center 465 South King 
Street, Room 101, Honolulu, HI 96813, (808) 587-3110

Idaho Robert Taylor, Bureau of Criminal Identification 700 South 
Stratford, Meridian, ID 83642, (208) 884-7132

Illinois Scott Giles, State Police Firearms Services Bureau 100 Iles 
Park Place, Springfield, IL 62708, (217) 782-5015

Indiana Fred Pryor, State Police Firearms Division Government Center 
North, 100 N. Senate Avenue Indianapolis, IN 46204, (317) 232-8263

Iowa Sam Knowles, Department of Public Safety Wallace State Office 
Building, Des Moines, IA 50319, (515) 281-7663

Kansas David Sim, Bureau of Investigation 1620 Southwest Tyler, Topeka, 
KS 66612, (785) 296-8265

Kentucky Joe West, State Police Support Services 1250 Louisville Road,
Frankfort, KY 40601, (502) 695-6205

Louisiana Kenneth Martin, State Police Concealed Handgun Section, P.O. 
Box 66375, Baton Rouge, LA 79896, (225) 925-4867

Maine Barry Hathaway, Department of Public Safety, State Police, 164 
State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333, (207) 624-8784

Maryland W.T. Szimanski, State Police Firearms Enforcement Division, 
7751 Washington Boulevard, Jessup, MD 20794, (410)799-0191

Massachusetts Caroline Sawyer, Criminal History Systems Board, 200 
Arlington Street, Suite 2200, Chelsea, MA 02150, (617)660-4701

Michigan Katie Bower, State Police Criminal Justice Information
Center, 7150 Harris Drive, Lansing, MI 48913, (517) 327-5407

Minnesota Robert Johnson, Department of Public Safety, Bureau
of Criminal Apprehension, 1430 Maryland Avenue, St. Paul, MN
55106, (651) 793-1012

Mississippi Judy Tucker, Department of Public Safety, Firearm
Permit Unit, P.O. Box 958, Jackson, MS 39205, (601) 987-1586

Missouri T. P. McGrail, State Highway Patrol, Criminal Records
and Identification, P.O. Box 568, Jefferson City, MO 65102, (573)
526-6160

Montana Karen Nelson, Department of Justice, CJIS Bureau, 303
N. Roberts, P.O. Box 1417, Helena, MT 59620, (406) 444-9621

Nebraska John Shelton, State Patrol, Communications Division,
P.O. Box 94907, Lincoln, NE 68509, (402) 471-4545

Nevada Bonnie McCabe, Highway Patrol Records and Identification
Services, 808 West Nye Lane, Carson City, NV 89703, (775)
687-1600

New Hampshire Patrick Poirier, Department of Safety, State
Police, James H. Hayes Safety Building, 10 Hazen Drive, Concord,
NH 03305, (603) 271-3036

New Jersey J. F. Corbley / John O'Brien, Division of State Police,
P.O. Box 7068, West Trenton, NJ 08628, (609) 882-2000

New Mexico Paul V. Herrera, Department of Public Safety, Law
Enforcement Records Bureau, P.O. Box 1628, Santa Fe, NM 87504, 
(505) 827-9191

New York Kenneth J. Connolly, Division of Criminal Justice
Services, 4 Tower Place, Albany, NY 12203, (518) 457-4181

North Carolina Gene Melvin, Bureau of Investigation, 3320 Garner Road,
Raleigh, NC 27626, (919) 662-4509

North Dakota Judith Volk, Bureau of Criminal Investigation,
Information Services Division, P.O. Box 1054, Bismarck, ND 58502,
(701) 328-5507

Ohio Lonnie Rudasill, Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, P.O. Box 365, London, OH 43140, (740) 845-2215

Oklahoma Rusty Featherstone, Bureau of Investigation, 6600 North
Harvey Suite 300, Oklahoma City, OK 73116, (405) 879-2535

Oregon William Buckley, State Police Firearms Unit
3772 Portland Road NE, Salem, OR 97303, (503) 378-3070

Pennsylvania John Thierwechter, State Police Bureau of Records
and Identification, 1800 Elmerton Avenue, Harrisburg, PA 17110,
(717) 772-2602

Rhode Island William Devine, Department of the Attorney General,
Bureau of Criminal Investigation 150 S. Main, Providence, RI 02903, 
(401) 274-4400

South Carolina Carlotta Stackhouse, Law Enforcement Division,
4400 Broad River Road, Columbia, SC 29221, (803) 896-7143

South Dakota Robert Grandpre, Division of Criminal Investigation,
500 East Capitol Avenue, Pierre, SD 57501, (605) 773-3331

Tennessee Jeanne Broadwell, Bureau of Investigation, 901 R.S.
Gass Boulevard, Nashville, TN 37216, (615) 744-4208 

Texas David Gavin, Department of Public Safety, Crime Records
Service, P.O. Box 4143, Austin, TX 78765,
(512) 424-2077

Utah Joyce Carter, Bureau of Criminal Identification 4501 South 2700 
West, Salt Lake City, UT 84119, (801) 965-3810

Vermont J. Paul Duquette, Newport Police Department, 222 Main
Street, Newport, VT 05855, (802) 334-6733

Virginia Donna Tate, State Police Firearms Transaction Center,
P.O. Box 2747, Richmond, VA 23261, (804) 674-2210

Washington Mary Neff, State Patrol Criminal History Section, P.O.
Box 42619, Olympia, WA 98504, (360) 570-5230

West Virginia Thomas A. Barrick, Department of State Police, 725
Jefferson Road, South Charleston, WV 25309, (304) 746-2177

Wisconsin Mary Sturdevant, Department of Justice Criminal Information 
Bureau, P.O. Box 2718 Madison, WI 53701, (608) 267-2776

Wyoming James M. Wilson, Division of Criminal Investigation, 316
West 22nd Street, Cheyenne, WY 82002, (307) 777-7181

American Samoa Jacinta Brown, O.T.I.C.I.D.E. P.O. Box 4567, Pago 
Pago, AS 96799, (684) 633-2827

Guam Karen Guerrero, Police Department, Records and ID Section, P.O. 
Box 23909, GMF, Bamgada, GU 96921, (671) 475-8498

Puerto Rico Julio L. Rosa, Department of Justice P.O. Box 9020192, San 
Juan, PR 00902-0192, (787) 729-2484

Virgin Islands Anthenia Brown, Police Department, Alexander Farrelly 
Justice Complex, Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas, VI 00802,(340)774-2211

Washington, D.C. Dean Welch, Metropolitan Police Department, P.O. Box 
1606, Washington, D.C. 20013, (202) 442-4247  

State agency Internet sites

Firearm information pages and checking agency home pages

Alabama Attorney General
<http://www.ago.state.al.us/issue/Alabama_Weapon_Law.
pdf>

Alaska Department of Public Safety
<http://www.dps.state.ak.us/ast/PermitsLicensing/ACHP/>

Arizona Department of Public Safety
<http://www.dps.state.az.us/ccw/welcome.htm>

Arkansas State Police
<http://www.asp.state.ar.us/chl/chl.html>

California Department of Justice Firearms Division
<http://caag.state.ca.us/firearms/>

Colorado Bureau of Investigation Insta-Check Unit
<http://cbi.state.co.us/ic/index.asp>

Connecticut State Police Special Licensing and Firearms Unit
<http://www.state.ct.us/dps/SLFU/index.html>

Delaware State Police Bureau of Identification
 <http://www.state.de.us/dsp/sbi.htm#Firearms>

Florida Department of Law Enforcement
<http://www.fdle.state.fl.us/publications/faq/firearm_faq.asp>

Georgia Bureau of Investigation Crime Information Center
<http://www.state.ga.us/gbi/gunckar.html>

Honolulu Police Department Firearms Unit
<http://www.honolulupd.org/info/gunlaw.htm>

Illinois State Police 
<http://www.isp.state.il.us/services/services.htm>

Indiana State Police 
<http://www.in.gov/isp/firearms/>

Iowa Department of Public Safety 
Division of Administrative Services
<http://www.state.ia.us/government/dps/asd/license.htm>

Kentucky State Police
<http://www.kentuckystatepolice.org/conceal.htm>

Louisiana State Police Concealed Handgun Permit Section
<http://www.lsp.org/handguns.html>

Maryland State Police Firearms Enforcement Section
<http://www.mdarchives.state.md.us/msa/mdmanual/23dsp/html/23
agen.html#firearms>

Massachusetts Firearms Record Bureau
 <http://www.state.ma.us/chsb/frb/frb.html>

Michigan State Police Criminal Justice Information Center
<http://www.michigan.gov/msp>

Mississippi Department of Public Safety
<http://www.dps.state.ms.us/dps/dps.nsf/divpages/hp2firearm?Ope
nDocument>

Montana Department of Justice Legal Services
<http://www.doj.state.mt.us/enforcement/concealedweapons.asp>

Nevada Highway Patrol Firearms Program 
<http://nvrepository.state.nv.us/pos.htm>

New Hampshire State Police
<http://www.state.nh.us/safety/nhsp/plu.html>

New Jersey State Police Bureau of Identification
<http://www.njsp.org/about/id.html>

New Mexico Department of Public Safety
<http://www.dps.nm.org/faq/concealed_weapon.htm>

New York State Police Pistol Permit Bureau
<http://www.troopers.state.ny.us/Firearms/
Firearmsindex.html>

North Carolina Department of Justice
<http://www.jus.state.nc.us/NCJA/guns.htm>

North Dakota Bureau of Criminal Investigation
<http://www.ag.state.nd.us/BCI/BCI.htm>

Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation
<http://www.osbi.state.ok.us/sda.htm>

Oregon State Police 
<http://www.osp.state.or.us/>

Pennsylvania State Police Firearms Division
<http://www.psp2.state.pa.us/ri/>

Rhode Island Attorney General 
Bureau of Criminal Investigation
<http://www.riag.ri.gov/criminal/bci.php>

South Carolina Law Enforcement Division
<http://www.sled.state.sc.us/> 

Tennessee Bureau of Investigation Instant Check System
<http://www.tbi.state.tn.us/divisions/isd_tics.htm>

Texas Department of Public Safety Concealed Handgun Licensing
Section
<http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/
administration/crime_records/chl/chlsindex.htm>

State agency Internet sites

Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification
<http://bci.utah.gov/Brady/BradyHome.html#Brady>

Vermont Department of Public Safety
<http://170.222.24.9/cjs/vtnics.html>

Virginia State Police Firearm Transaction Center
<http://www.vsp.state.va.us/cjis_ftc.htm>

Washington State Department of Licensing
<http://www.dol.wa.gov/ppu/firfront.htm>

West Virginia State Police Legal Division
<http://www.wvstatepolice.com/legal/>

Wisconsin Department of Justice Handgun Hotline
<http://www.doj.state.wi.us/dles/cib/handgunhotline.asp>

Wyoming Attorney General
<http://attorneygeneral.state.wy.us/dci/index.html>

Glossary

Assault weapon  A semiautomatic firearm with a large-capacity
magazine and special features common to military weapons.

Antique firearm  A firearm manufactured in or before 1898 or a
replica thereof, provided it is not designed for using rimfire or
conventional centerfire fixed ammunition; or any muzzle loading
rifle, shotgun or pistol, which is designed to use black powder, or 
a black powder substitute, and which cannot use fixed ammunition.

Curio or relic  A firearm manufactured at least 50 years prior to the
current date or certified by the curator of a municipal, State, or
Federal museum, or that derives a substantial part of its monetary
value from the fact that it is novel, rare, bizarre, or associated 
with some historical figure, period, or event.

Firearm  Any weapon that is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.

Handgun  A firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be
held and fired by the use of a single hand, such as a pistol or
revolver.

Long gun  A firearm with a barrel extended to around 30 inches to
improve accuracy and range, and commonly with a shoulder butt,
designed to be fired with two hands, such as a rifle or shotgun.

Machine gun (automatic firearm)  A firearm that shoots, is designed 
to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more 
than one bullet, without manual reloading, by a single function of 
the trigger. 

Pistol  A weapon originally designed, made, and intended to fire a
projectile from a barrel when held in one hand, and having a
chamber as an integral part of, or permanently aligned with, the
bore, and a short stock designed to be gripped by one hand and at
an angle to and extending below the line of the bore.

Revolver  A projectile weapon, of the pistol type, having a breech
loading chambered cylinder so arranged that the cocking of the
hammer or movement of the trigger rotates it and brings the next
cartridge in line with the barrel for firing.

Rifle  A weapon, designed, made, and intended to be fired from the
shoulder; and designed and made to use the energy of an explosive
in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire only a single projectile 
through a rifled bore for each single pull of the trigger.

Semi-automatic firearm  A firearm that utilizes a portion of the
energy of a firing cartridge to extract the fired cartridge case and
chamber the next round, and which requires a separate pull of the
trigger to fire each cartridge.

Short-barreled rifle  A rifle having one or more barrels less than 16
inches in length, and any weapon made from a rifle, whether by
alteration, modification, or otherwise, if such weapon, as modified,
has an overall length of less than 26 inches.

Short-barreled shotgun  A shotgun having one or more barrels
less than 18 inches in length, and any weapon made from a
shotgun, whether altered or modified, if such weapon has an overall
length of less then 26 inches.

Shotgun  A weapon designed, made, and intended to be fired from
the shoulder, and designed and made to use the energy of the
explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire through a smooth bore
either a number of ball shot or a single projectile for each pull 
of the trigger.

Unsafe handgun  ("Saturday night special" or "junk gun") A handgun 
with a barrel length under 4 inches that is easily concealable and 
not effective for sporting or self defense purposes due to its poor 
quality of construction, inaccuracy, and lack of essential safety 
features.

Definitions are from or adapted from Federal and State Codes (a
jurisdiction's laws should be consulted for its specific definitions)

-------------------------------------------------
Initials and acronyms

ATF     Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives
BJS     Bureau of Justice Statistics
CLEO    Chief Law Enforcement Officer
DOJ     Department of Justice
FBI     Federal Bureau of Investigation
FFL     Federal Firearms Licensee
GCA     Gun Control Act
III     Interstate Identification Index
NCHIP   National Criminal History Improvement Program
NCIC    National Crime Information Center
NICS    National Instant Criminal Background Check System
POC     Point of Contact
-----------------------------------------------------   


End of file
08/04/04 ih