U.S. Department Of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Survey of State Procedures
Related to Firearm Sales, 2005

November 2006, NCJ 214645 


--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs05.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.opj.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#ssprfs
--------------------------------------------------------

Prepared by the 
Regional Justice Information Service 
St. Louis, Missouri

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jeffrey Sedgwick
Director

Report of work performed under BJS 
Cooperative Agreement No. 2005-RU-BX-K016
awarded to the Regional Justice Information 
Service (REJIS), 4255 West Pine Boulevard, 
St. Louis, MO 63108. Contents of this 
document do not necessarily reflect the 
views or policies of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics or the U.S. Department of 
Justice.

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes 
any person to reproduce, publish, translate, 
or otherwise use all or any parts of the 
material in this publication with the 
exception of those items indicating they 
are copyrighted or printed by any source 
other than REJIS.

More information on this subject may be obtained 
from:

Gene Lauver, FIST Manager
Regional Justice Information Service
4255 West Pine Boulevard
St. Louis, MO 63108
Phone: (314) 535-1455, ext. 260
Fax: (314) 535-1729

Devon B. Adams, BJS State Program 
Manager, and Ronald J. Frandsen, 
REJIS, wrote this report. Gene Lauver, 
Michael Bowling, and David Naglich 
assisted in collecting survey data for 
REJIS. 

This report is only available as an electronic 
publication on the BJS World Wide Web 
Internet site at:

<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ssprfs05.htm>

Contents

Introduction

History of the survey 
and related Bulletins   
Survey methodology  
Glossary and acronyms    

Background

Federal prohibitions     
Brady interim system     
National Instant Criminal
Background Check System 
State involvement in firearm
transfer regulation 
Sources of additional 
information    

Firearm sales topics

Prohibited persons  
Prohibitory records 
Types of firearms   
Regulated sales     
Approval systems    
Waiting periods     
Checking process    
Transaction and registration 
records   
Appeals of denials  
Actions against denied persons     
Rejection rates     

Jurisdictional summaries

Information in summaries 
Federal system 

States
Alabama  
Alaska   
Arizona  
Arkansas 
California    
Colorado 
Connecticut   
Delaware 
Florida  
Georgia  
Hawaii   
Idaho    
Illinois 
Indiana  
Iowa
Kansas   
Kentucky 
Louisiana
Maine    
Maryland 
Massachusetts 
Michigan 
Minnesota
Mississippi   
Missouri 
Montana  
Nebraska 
Nevada   
New Hampshire 
New Jersey    
New Mexico    
New York 
North Carolina
North Dakota  
Ohio
Oklahoma 
Oregon   
Pennsylvania  
Rhode Island  
South Carolina
South Dakota  
Tennessee
Texas     
Utah 
Vermont   
Virginia  
Washington     
West Virginia  
Wisconsin 
Wyoming   

Other jurisdictions
American Samoa 
Guam 
Puerto Rico    
U.S. Virgin Islands 
Washington, D.C.    

State procedures tables

Applications for firearm transfers and permits
processed by States      
Applications for firearm permits processed by local
agencies grouped by population level of community served     
Transactions processed by FBI for selected States    
Prohibited persons: statutory basis for denial of firearm 
sale or possession   
Minors: restrictions based on age or juvenile offender status 
   
Regulation of dealer, private, and gun show sales   
Background check and permit procedures    
Fees, record retention, and appeals    
Prohibited and restricted firearms  
National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
(NICS): Checking agencies     
Notification procedures of State agencies regarding
denied persons subject to arrest
ATF investigation of NICS denials by FBI     
Data accessed for firearm background checks: domestic 
violence   
Data accessed for firearm background checks: other 
prohibitions  
Revisions of sales regulations and other significant 
changes in State firearm laws

Reference appendixes

A. Federal and State firearm laws 
B. Federal and State firearm laws by type of section  
C. Federal and State firearm laws by type of transactions  
D. Agencies conducting firearm background checks     
E. State agency Internet sites     

Introduction

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 2005 is
the tenth in a series of Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
reports. This report describes laws, regulations, procedures,
and information systems related to sales and other transfers
of firearms that were in effect as of December 31, 2005.
Procedures summarized in the survey are required by the laws
and regulations of the United States, the 50 States, and
other jurisdictions.

History of the survey and related bulletins  This national
survey is produced by the BJS Firearm Inquiry Statistics
(FIST) project, a component of the National Criminal History
Improvement Program (NCHIP). NCHIP provides funding and
technical assistance to improve the quality, timeliness, and
accessibility of State criminal records and support
interfaces between State and national record systems. The
FIST project was established in 1995 to collect data that
describe the scope and impact of firearm background checks
required under Federal or State law.

The first three editions of the survey primarily described
procedures related to background checks on handgun
purchasers, especially those required by the interim
provisions of the Brady Act. The fourth through ninth
editions described procedures required by the permanent
provisions of the Brady Act or State law for transfers of
handguns and other types of firearms. This edition
incorporates recent changes in Federal and State procedures
and provides updated coverage on topics related to firearm
sales.

Data collected and analyzed by the FIST project are also
reported in BJS Bulletins. Five bulletins reported counts 
of firearm transfer applications and denials for the Brady
interim period. (A cumulative summary is presented in 
Presale Handgun Checks, the Brady Interim Period, 1994-1998, 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ abstract/phc98.htm>.) More
recent bulletins have summarized counts of firearm transfer
applications and denials for the first full 7 years of the
permanent Brady period. For the most recent bulletin, see
Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2005, <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft05.htm>.

(All prior surveys and bulletins may be viewed or ordered
through the BJS web site listed at the end of the Background
section.)

The regular release of updated information in BJS surveys and
bulletins is intended to highlight changes in the number of
firearm transfer applications and denials as well as changes
in the overall denial rate or the reasons for denial. The
changes reported may be influenced by a variety of factors,
including revisions in Federal and State laws, policies, or
procedures, and the availability of different categories of
law enforcement records. BJS anticipates that the procedural
information presented in this report will be used with the
statistical information about background checks to provide 
a more thorough understanding of the scope and impact of
firearm transfer regulations.

Survey methodology  Information for this report was collected
from hundreds of Federal, State, and local agencies,
including law enforcement organizations, statistical analysis
centers, and legislative research bureaus. Descriptions of
procedures and statistical data were voluntarily provided 
by agencies participating in the survey. Data analysis and
supplementary legal research were provided by the Regional
Justice Information Service (REJIS), the organization
conducting the study pursuant to a cooperative agreement 
with BJS.

To ensure the accuracy of the information as of December 31,
2005, a draft of each State's summary was sent to the agency
designated by the State for review and comment. The final
version of each summary, as contained in this report, was
reviewed and approved by a State contact.

Consistent with privacy protection procedures followed by 
the FIST project, the information collected for this survey 
did not disclose the identity of any individual involved in 
a firearm transaction. Additionally, the software provided 
to help agencies submit statistical data to REJIS contains 
a purging mechanism that destroys data in accordance with
applicable Federal or State law.

Glossary

Assault weapon  A semiautomatic firearm with a large-capacity
magazine and special features common to military weapons.

Antique firearm  A firearm manufactured in or before 1898 or
a replica thereof, provided it is not designed for using
rimfire or conventional center fire fixed ammunition; or any
muzzle loading rifle, shotgun or pistol, which is designed 
to use black powder, or a black powder substitute, and which
cannot use fixed ammunition.

Curio or relic  A firearm manufactured at least 50 years
prior to the current date or certified by the curator of a
municipal, State, or Federal museum, or that derives a
substantial part of its monetary value from the fact that 
it is novel, rare, bizarre, or associated with some 
historical figure, period, or event.

Firearm  Any weapon that is designed to or may readily 
be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an
explosive.

Handgun  A firearm that has a short stock and is designed 
to be held and fired by the use of a single hand, such as 
a pistol or revolver.

Long gun  A firearm with a barrel extended to around 30
inches to improve accuracy and range, and commonly with a
shoulder butt, designed to be fired with two hands, such 
as a rifle or shotgun.

Machine gun(automatic firearm) A firearm that shoots, is
designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot,
automatically more than one bullet, without manual 
reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 

Pistol  A weapon originally designed, made, and intended to
fire a projectile from a barrel when held in one hand, and
having a chamber as an integral part of, or permanently
aligned with, the bore, and a short stock designed to be
gripped by one hand and at an angle to and extending below
the line of the bore.

Revolver  A projectile weapon, of the pistol type, having 
a breech loading chambered cylinder so arranged that the
cocking of the hammer or movement of the trigger rotates it
and brings the next cartridge in line with the barrel for
firing.

Rifle  A weapon, designed, made, and intended to be fired
from the shoulder; and designed and made to use the energy 
of an explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire only 
a single projectile through a rifled bore for each single 
pull of the trigger.

Semi-automatic firearm  A firearm that utilizes a portion 
of the energy of a firing cartridge to extract the fired
cartridge case and chamber the next round, and which 
requires a separate pull of the trigger to fire each 
cartridge.

Short-barreled rifle  A rifle having one or more barrels 
less than 16 inches in length, and any weapon made from a 
rifle, whether by alteration, modification, or otherwise, 
if such weapon, as modified, has an overall length of less 
than 26 inches.

Short-barreled shotgun  A shotgun having one or more barrels
less than 18 inches in length, and any weapon made from a
shotgun, whether altered or modified, if such weapon has an
overall length of less then 26 inches.

Shotgun  A weapon designed, made, and intended to be fired
from the shoulder, and designed and made to use the energy 
of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire through 
a smooth bore either a number of ball shot or a single
projectile for each pull of the trigger.

Unsafe handgun  ("Saturday night special" or "junk gun")  A
handgun with a barrel length under 4 inches that is easily
concealable and not effective for sporting or self defense
purposes due to its poor quality of construction, inaccuracy,
and lack of essential safety features.

Definitions are from or adapted from Federal and State 
Codes (a jurisdiction's laws should be consulted for 
specific definitions).

Background

Federal prohibitions  The Gun Control Act(GCA), 18 U.S.C. 
922(d), prohibits the transfer of any firearm to any 
person who --

* is under indictment for or has been convicted of a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year;
* is a fugitive from justice;
* is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled
substance;
* has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed 
to a mental institution;
* is an alien unlawfully in the U.S. or admitted under a
nonimmigrant visa; was discharged from the armed forces 
under dishonorable conditions; has renounced U.S. 
citizenship; 
* is subject to a court order restraining him or her from 
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or
child of an intimate partner; or 
* has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence.

In addition, it is unlawful for a Federal Firearms Licensee
(FFL) to transfer a long gun to a person less than 18 years
old or a handgun to a person less than 21 years old. It is
unlawful, with limited exceptions, for any person to 
transfer a handgun to a juvenile (under 18). (18 U.S.C. 922
(b) and (x)).

Brady interim system  In 1993 the Brady Handgun Violence
Prevention Act (Brady Act) amended the Gun Control Act to
provide a method for blocking transfers to prohibited persons. 
From February 28, 1994, until November 30, 1998, the interim 
provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(s), required an 
FFL to request a background check on a prospective handgun 
purchaser by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer(CLEO) of the 
jurisdiction where the licensee operated. A handgun could be 
transferred if a denial was not transmitted within 5 days 
by the CLEO. The interim provisions allowed States with 
prohibitory statutes comparable to Federal law to utilize 
handgun purchase permits and other alternative procedures.

National Instant Criminal Background Check System  The
permanent provisions of the Brady Act, 18 U.S.C. 922(t),
required establishment of the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) by November 30, 1998. The U.S.
Department of Justice, with the States, developed the system
during the 57-month interim period.

The NICS allows a licensee to contact the system by telephone
or other electronic means for information, to be supplied
immediately, on whether receipt of a firearm by a transferee
would violate Federal or State law. In addition to regulation
of handgun sales, the permanent provisions mandate background
checks on long gun purchasers and persons who redeem a pawned
firearm. A licensee has the option of requesting a check on a
person who attempts to pawn a firearm.

A NICS check by a dealer is not required if a transferee
presents a State permit qualified by the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) as an alternative to
the point-of-transfer check. Qualifying permits are those
which:

allow a transferee to possess, acquire, or carry a 
firearm, and 

were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the State 
in which the transfer is to take place, after verification 
by an authorized government official that possession of 
a firearm by the transferee would not be a violation of 
law.

A permit issued after November 30, 1998, qualifies as an
alternative only if the information available to the State
authority includes the NICS. As of December 31, 2005, 18
States authorized permits that exempted the holder from a
NICS check.

Prior to initiating a NICS check, a licensee must receive 
a completed Firearm Transaction Record (ATF Form 4473) 
and verify the transferee's identity through a photo
identification issued by a government agency. A transferee
may also be required to complete a State disclosure form.
Submitting false information in regard to a firearm
transaction may subject a transferee to arrest and
prosecution under Federal law and many State statutes.

A licensee initiates a NICS check by contacting either the
FBI or a point of contact (POC) agency designated by State
government. Most inquiries are conducted by telephone. The
FBI provides Internet access to dealers through a program
known as "e-check." Computerized access is also available
through some POC agencies. All NICS checks by the FBI are
without charge; POC fees are determined by State law or
agency regulations. 

The FBI and the POC agencies always check three major Federal
databases, the National Crime Information Center (NCIC), the
Interstate Identification Index (III), and the NICS Index. 
If the transferee is not a citizen of the United States, the
NICS will query Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) records. A POC may check additional State records. A
check may include contacting an agency that maintains a
record that the FBI or POC cannot access directly.

After a search of available records, the checking agency
responds with a notice to the licensee that the transfer may
proceed, may not proceed, or is delayed pending further
review of the applicant's record. If further review of a
record indicates the transfer would not violate Federal or
State law, the checking agency notifies the licensee that 
the transfer may proceed. If the licensee does not receive a
response within 3 business days, the transfer may proceed at
the licensee's discretion.

A NICS regulation requires that POC agencies notify the 
FBI of all denied and open transactions and any subsequent
changes to the status of those transactions.

A person who is prohibited from purchasing a firearm may
request the reason for denial from the FBI or POC, which has
5 business days to respond. The applicant may then submit
information to correct the record on which the denial was
based and may be required to contact the agency where the
record originated. As an alternative the applicant's
challenge to the record may be directed to the FBI, which
will contact the denying agency or the source of the record.
A person who is denied by a POC may also have appeal rights
pursuant to State law. 

NICS denial data are electronically transmitted by the FBI 
on a daily basis to ATF's Brady Operations Branch, which 
screens the data and refers potential violations to ATF 
field divisions. Referrals to ATF include cases where the 
FBI discovers that a firearm was transferred to a prohibited
person. An ATF investigation may result in retrieval of the
firearm or a transfer back to the dealer.

In addition to background checks related to firearm transfers, 
the NICS Index may be accessed for information related to a 
permit or license for explosives, or in response to ATF 
inquiries regarding enforcement of Federal firearms laws. 

State involvement in firearm transfer regulation  Each State
determines the extent of its participation in the NICS
process. Three basic forms of State involvement currently
exist:

a POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers
originating in the State;

a POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers;
licensees in the State are required to contact the FBI 
for approval of long gun transfers; or

the State does not maintain a point of contact; licensees 
are required to contact the FBI for NICS checks on all 
firearm transfers originating in the State.

During the survey period the FBI assumed responsibility for
all Georgia checks and for New York handgun transfer checks.
As of December 31, 2005, handgun transfer checks were
conducted by the FBI for 29 States and by POC agencies for 
21 States; long gun transfer checks were conducted by the 
FBI for 37 States and by POC agencies for 13 States. In a 
few States the FBI conducts the NICS check on certain pawn 
transactions instead of the POC. 
Most States have designated a single agency with statewide
jurisdiction as their NICS point of contact. Some States 
have multiple points of contact, which are usually county 
sheriffs or municipal police departments. Local agencies 
access the NICS through a State interface.

In addition to transfer checks, POC agencies may also conduct
NICS checks on persons who apply for a State permit required
to receive a firearm. Agencies that issue ATF-qualified
permits usually request a check by sending information (such
as fingerprints) to the FBI.

The NICS process does not automatically supplant State
firearm transfer regulations. State background check and
permit statutes that existed before the effective date of the
NICS remain in force unless repealed by legislative action or
allowed to expire. The background check requirements of the
Brady Act are the prevailing minimum nationwide. Some States
have enacted additional requirements.

Most background checks required by State laws are conducted
by agencies that also serve as NICS points of contact.
However, transferees in eight States are required to undergo
two checks conducted by different agencies.

Seven States (Delaware, Indiana, Massachusetts, Minnesota,
Missouri, New York, and Rhode Island) have checking agencies
that are not points of contact and licensees in these States
must contact the FBI for NICS checks. In New Jersey the local
agencies that conduct permit checks are not points of contact
and licensees must contact the State Police for NICS sales
checks.

Sources of additional information  NICS regulations have been
promulgated by the FBI (28 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
25) and ATF (27 CFR 478). Internet sites for State agencies
that provide information about firearm laws are listed in the
Appendix. Further information on Federal law and BJS-related
publications is available from the following sites:

ATF: <http://www.atf.gov/firearms/index.htm>

FBI: <http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/nics/index.htm>

BJS: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/guns.htm>

Firearm sales topics–State law

Prohibited persons

The categories of prohibited persons in the Federal Gun
Control Act (GCA) are the prevailing minimum nationwide 
(see Background). Firearm transfer to or possession by such
persons is unlawful. State statutes may include additional 
or more restrictive prohibitions. These prohibitory laws are
intended to prevent firearm possession or purchase by persons
believed to be incapable of handling a weapon in a safe and
legal manner. In some cases Federal and State laws allow a
prohibited person to regain firearm rights. 

The most common categories of prohibited persons are described 
below. The number of States that have enacted each
type of prohibition is listed in parentheses. 

Felons (49 States)-— Generally, a felony is an offense that
carries a penalty of incarceration for more than 1 year. The
GCA prohibits a person who is under indictment for or has
been convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for 
more than 1 year. 

A crime is not within this prohibition if it is an offense
related to the regulation of business practices or a State
offense classified as a misdemeanor and punishable by
imprisonment of 2 years or less. A conviction is not
prohibitory if it was expunged or set aside, or if the
offender was pardoned or had civil rights restored. See 18
U.S.C. 921(a)(20). A conviction in a foreign court is not
prohibitory.

Although statutory definitions vary widely, the laws of 49
States prohibit firearm purchase or possession by at least
some categories of felons. Some statutes disqualify all
convicted felons from firearm possession. Other statutes
disqualify persons who committed specific felonies, which 
may be enumerated in the statute or categorized by terms 
such as "crimes of violence," "serious offenses," or "firearm 
offenses."  Many statutes extend purchase or possession
restrictions to persons convicted of a felony or a similar
offense in other jurisdictions. Only Vermont lacks a statute
that bars firearm possession by a convicted felon.

Federal relief from firearm disabilities may be obtained
through a presidential pardon or an ATF decision. Nearly all
States allow firearm rights to be regained by a pardon or
restoration of civil rights, or by expungement or set aside
of a conviction (see Jurisdictional summaries). Restoration
of State firearm rights may be obtained from the Governor or
through a court order, an administrative proceeding, or the
passage of a certain number of years after conviction or
discharge from a sentence without further violations. 

Many States require several steps before rights are restored.
For example, a person who obtained a pardon or has not
committed a new offense for a specified number of years may
be required to petition a court for an order that restores
firearm rights. The method of restoration may depend on the
type of offense that was committed. In some States certain
offenders can never regain the right to possess a firearm.
 
State relief from firearm disabilities does not automatically
restore rights under Federal law or in another State. A State
proceeding that does not fully restore the right to possess
or receive firearms is insufficient to remove a Federal
disability (27 CFR 478.142).

Besides restricting the rights of convicted felons, 12 States
prohibit firearm purchase or possession by at least some
persons who have been charged with a felony. Colorado and
Florida extend the prohibition to persons who have been
arrested for certain disqualifying offenses. Firearm rights
are restored in these States if an arrest or criminal charge
does not result in a disqualifying guilty plea or conviction.
Misdemeanor offenders (26 States)-— Generally, a misdemeanor
is a crime punishable by incarceration for less than 1 year.
A few States have offenses defined as misdemeanors that are
punishable by incarceration for more than 1 year. The types
of misdemeanor-level offenses included in prohibitory
statutes vary widely. 

Federal law and a few State codes only prohibit a misdemeanor
offender who has been convicted of an act of domestic
violence (generally, an assault against a spouse, an intimate
partner, or a child). Several other States deny a misdemeanor
offender who has been convicted of any crime of violence or a
firearm offense. 

Requirements for misdemeanor offenders to regain firearm
rights after a conviction are generally less stringent than
those for felons. A few States disqualify persons who have
been arrested for or charged with certain misdemeanors.

Fugitives (13 States)-— The GCA, at 18 U.S.C. 921 (a)(15),
defines "fugitive from justice" as any person who has fled
from any State to avoid prosecution for a crime or to avoid
giving testimony in a criminal proceeding. Most States apply
a similar definition and some limit the prohibition to
persons who are wanted for certain types of offenses.

Mentally ill (33 States)-— The GCA prohibits firearm
possession by a person who has been adjudicated as a mental
defective or committed to a mental institution. Only an ATF
ruling may grant relief from this prohibition. 

The definition of "adjudicated as a mental defective" (27 CFR
478.11) includes a person who is found by a court or other
authority to be a danger to himself or others, unable to
manage his own affairs, insane in a criminal case, incompetent 
to stand trial, or not guilty by lack of mental responsibility. 
"Committed to a mental institution" includes an involuntary 
commitment by a court or other authority, but does not include 
a voluntary admission. 

State definitions of disqualifying mental illness are
generally similar to the Federal definition although a
variety of terminology is used. Some States list specific
court orders that will cause a mental illness prohibition. A
person who is prohibited may be able to regain firearm rights
if a certain number of years have elapsed after discharge
from a mental institution, or if documentation from a mental
health professional demonstrates that the person's condition
has stabilized.

Subject to a restraining order (22 States)-— A person 
prohibited under this category is usually subject to a court
order (entitled restraining order, protection order,
injunction, etc.) intended to prevent domestic violence. The
applicable orders commonly restrain the subject from
contacting or harming a spouse, former spouse, child,
domestic partner, or other intimately related person. A
prohibitory order may also restrain other types of unlawful
conduct such as the intimidation of a witness in a criminal
case.

In a few States the prohibition attaches if the order
specifically bars the subject from possessing firearms. A
statute may provide that the order becomes prohibitory when
it is issued after a hearing with the subject present
(instead of ex parte) or entered into a law enforcement
information network. The prohibition will be in effect for
the duration of the order, which may be temporary.

Drug or alcohol abusers and offenders (drug, 30 States;
alcohol, 20 States)-— Many States prohibit persons convicted
of drug sale or possession offenses, either through a statute
that lists a variety of disqualifying offenses or by way of a
separate statute. A few statutes disqualify persons who
committed offenses involving alcohol, such as driving while
intoxicated. Generally, drug and alcohol offenders may regain
firearm rights in the same manner as other prohibited
offenders. 

Another common prohibition involves persons addicted to drugs
or alcohol, who are described by terms such as "addicted to a
controlled substance," "habitually intoxicated," or "chronic
alcoholic."  In several States a firearm cannot be transferred 
to or possessed by a person who is intoxicated. 

Minors (49 States) — The firearm rights of minors are often
restricted solely on the basis of age. State laws include
prohibitions on purchase or possession of firearms by minors
and prohibitions on transfer of firearms to minors. Some of
these laws predate the enactment of federal minimum ages for
possession and purchase of firearms. Limitations based on age
apply to handguns in 49 States and to long guns in 38 States. 

The minimum age for unrestricted purchase and possession of 
a handgun by a minor is usually 18 (28 States) or 21 (17
States). The minimum age for unrestricted purchase and
possession of a long gun by a minor is usually 18 (31
States), with other minimum ages ranging from 12 to 21. In 
Rhode Island a person under age 18 must have a permit to 
participate in legal firearm activities.

The laws provide for numerous exceptions to prohibitions
based solely upon age. Generally, possession of a firearm is
permissible when a minor is engaged in educational or
recreational activities under the supervision of a parent,
guardian, or certified firearms instructor. 

Juvenile offenders (27 States)-— Statutes in this category
prohibit persons who were adjudicated delinquent or committed
an act as a juvenile that would have been a disqualifying
offense if committed by an adult. A juvenile offender's
access to all firearms is restricted in 23 States and access
to handguns is restricted in 4 additional States. (See table
5.) The prohibitions usually continue into early adulthood or
until the person regains firearm rights through a pardon,
court order, or other process. In several States persons who
committed juvenile offenses must follow the same restoration
of rights procedures available to adult offenders.

Aliens (15 States) — The Gun Control Act prohibits transfer
of a firearm to a person who has entered the United States
illegally or has been admitted under a nonimmigrant visa.
Pursuant to the Immigration and Nationality Act, a 
nonimmigrant visa may be issued to an alien who is allowed 
to reside or travel in the United States temporarily. See 
8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15), (26). Certain aliens admitted under a
nonimmigrant visa are exempt from the firearm restrictions.
18 U.S.C. 922(y)(2). 

Among the States Massachusetts prohibits issuance of a
license to carry or a firearm identification card to an
alien; Hawaii (with exceptions) and Missouri require a
purchase permit applicant to be a United States citizen. In
12 other States firearm purchase or possession by an illegal
alien is prohibited. Hawaii, Massachusetts, and Washington
allow certain aliens to apply for a permit to possess a
firearm. 

Other restrictions  Additional categories of prohibited
persons are defined in State statutes, including persons who
have failed to complete a firearm safety course, or renounced
their citizenship, or were dishonorably discharged from
military service. In addition, several States penalize a
"straw purchase," an attempt to buy a firearm on behalf of 
a known prohibited person. (See Jurisdictional summaries for
details.)

Between July 1, 2004, and December 31, 2005, 14 States
enacted prohibited person legislation, including four new
laws that concerned protective orders. New categories of 
prohibited persons included aliens in Arizona, domestic 
violence offenders in South Dakota, and persons convicted 
of stalking in Tennessee. Four States enacted new
legislation regarding restoration of firearm rights.

Prohibitory records

Record systems are necessary to identify persons who are
ineligible to receive and possess a firearm. Prohibitory
records are maintained by Federal, State, tribal, and local
agencies, and may be computerized or on paper. These records
may be in a database that is used for a variety of law
enforcement purposes or in a specialized database that is
used only for background checks on firearm purchase or permit
applicants. The most common types of prohibitory records are
summarized below.

Criminal history  All States maintain a central repository
with criminal history records that include, at a minimum,
felony arrests and dispositions. The first entry for a
subject is normally an arrest record supported by 
fingerprints. Subsequent dispositions that may be recorded
include dismissals of charges, guilty pleas, convictions,
acquittals, admissions to and discharges from correctional
facilities, and probation and parole events. Criminal history
repositories also record modifications such as an expungement
or a set aside of a conviction, a pardon, or a restoration of
civil rights. Agencies that submit records to the
repositories include police and sheriffs' departments,
courts, prosecutors, jails, and prisons.

State criminal record systems differ in regard to procedures,
the extent of automation, and the completeness and
accessibility of the data. Forty-nine States, the District 
of Columbia and Puerto Rico had automated at least some 
criminal history records by December 31, 2003. See Survey 
of State Criminal History Information Systems, 2003,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj. gov/bjs/abstract/sschis03.htm>.

Domestic violence misdemeanors  Forty-five States and the
District of Columbia are able to distinguish between felony
and misdemeanor records in the central repository (Improving
Criminal History Records for Background Checks, <www.ojp.
usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ichrbc.htm>). Because Federal law
prohibits a transfer of a firearm to a person who was
convicted of a domestic violence misdemeanor, all States need
to identify such convictions in their criminal records.
However, a conviction that results from a domestic violence
incident is only prohibitory if it falls within the specific
definition found at 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(33). A State prohibition
may be triggered by a domestic violence offense with a
definition that differs from Federal law.

Domestic violence misdemeanor convictions may be identified
from criminal history records in 44 States. (See table 13.)
These convictions must be distinguished in the records from
misdemeanors that are not prohibitory. Most States identify
prohibitory convictions by use of a "flag," a record entry
that denotes the offense as being the result of a domestic
violence incident. A few States have criminal laws that apply
only in domestic incidents, with convictions pursuant to
these laws identified in the records by an offense code.

If a central repository record does not clearly indicate that
a misdemeanor conviction resulted from domestic violence, a
checking agency may obtain further information from the court
that submitted the record. For example, court records may
disclose the relationship of the victim and the perpetrator.

Restraining orders  An order that restrains acts of domestic
violence or other unlawful conduct is issued by a judge and
usually entered by court or law enforcement personnel into a
State system or NCIC or both. Forty-three States utilize a
centralized court administrative file or a statewide law
enforcement network to record orders. Maintenance of a
registry includes procedures to remove orders that have
expired. 

Federal law requires all States and Indian tribes to accord
full faith and credit to protection orders issued by courts
of other States or tribes if certain conditions are met.

The NCIC protection order file receives entries that meet
Federal criteria from 46 States, including 7 States that do
not have their own registry of orders.

Mental illness  Federal and State prohibitions encompass a
variety of civil court orders, including a commitment to a
mental hospital and a finding that a person is incompetent to
manage his or her affairs. A prohibition may also be caused
by a disposition in a criminal prosecution, such as a finding
of incompetence to stand trial or a verdict of not guilty by
reason of insanity. 

A criminal case disposition is usually reported by the trial
court to the State's central records repository. Civil
commitment records are often protected from disclosure by
privacy laws. However, some States have enacted laws (cited
in appendix tables A, B, and C) that allow such records to 
be used for determining whether an individual is eligible to
purchase a firearm or receive a permit.

Twenty-three States have a database containing prohibitory
mental illness records that are submitted by courts or
treatment facilities. The records are maintained by a
statewide checking agency or a mental health department. 
A variety of dispositions are recorded in these databases, 
with mental hospital commitments being the most common.

In addition, 24 States reported that prohibitory mental
illness dispositions may be found within the central
repository's criminal history records. Insanity and
incompetent to stand trial findings are the most prevalent
dispositions in State criminal records. In a few States 
an agency conducting a background check may obtain data 
directly from a local court or mental health facility. 

Other State records  Centralized data on fugitives from
justice is maintained by 46 States and 21 States have 
records on juvenile offenders or persons who were 
adjudicated delinquent. Several States have specialized
data, such as a file that is used to enforce a purchase limit
of one handgun per month.

Federal databases  The Federal system for background checks
on firearm applicants primarily depends on three databases
administered by the FBI: the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC),  the Interstate Identification Index (III),
and the NICS Index. Checking agencies normally access NCIC
and III, and NICS point of contact agencies also access the
NICS Index. If the transferee is not a citizen of the United
States, the NICS will query records of the Bureau of
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). 

NCIC contains supervised release, federal prisoner,
protection order, foreign fugitive, immigration violator,
wanted person, secret service, violent gang and terrorist,
and sexual offender files. The III is a national system which
points to States with a criminal history record on an
individual. The NICS Index contains records of persons
prohibited by Federal law from receiving a firearm and
includes controlled substance, mental defective, illegal
alien, dishonorable discharge, citizenship renunciation, and
denied person files. Alien registrations and admissions and
other records are contained in several databases managed by
ICE.

Federal, State, tribal, and local agencies supply information
to NCIC and the NICS Index pursuant to law or on a voluntary
basis. During the survey period Connecticut and Georgia
enacted laws that authorize a State agency to share
information with the NICS.

Impediments to record checks  The absence of flags, missing
dispositions, insufficient details on relationships between
victims and offenders, and other incomplete records issues
are the most common impediments to identifying domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions in State databases.
Incomplete records are also the most common difficulty
encountered by statewide restraining order repositories,
mainly due to the inability of courts to provide all
necessary information to the repositories.

Checking agencies' ability to retrieve complete and accurate
mental illness data is significantly affected by the absence
of interfaces between mental health databases and criminal
history repositories, the lack of biometric identifiers in
the records, incomplete automation of record systems, and
privacy laws.

The impediments to checking agency access also inhibit the
ability of States to send records to NCIC and the NICS Index.
See Improving Access to and Integrity of Criminal History
Records, <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iaichr.htm>.
Record improvements The number of criminal history records
held by State repositories increased from over 64 million at
yearend 2001 to 71 million at yearend 2003. During the same
period automation of criminal records increased from 90% to
94%. About 75% of the automated records were accessible
through III at yearend 2003 (available at <http://www.ojp.
usdoj.gov/bjs/crs.htm>).

Types of firearms

A typical definition of a firearm is "any weapon which will
or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a
projectile by the action of an explosive." 44 U.S.C.
921(a)(3). Firearms may generally be divided into two major
categories, handguns and long guns. A handgun is a weapon
that can be held or fired with one hand, such as a pistol or
revolver. A long gun is a weapon that requires two hands to
hold or fire, such as a rifle or shotgun. (Also see the
Glossary on page 2 for definitions.)  State codes sometimes
divide firearms into categories based upon the length of the
barrel.

The sale and possession of handguns is extensively regulated
because a handgun can be easily concealed upon a person and
is carried during the overwhelming majority of crimes
committed while the offender is in possession of a firearm. 
A survey of inmates who carried a firearm while committing 
a crime found that 83% of State inmates and 87% of Federal
inmates possessed a handgun during their offense (Firearm 
Use by Offenders, <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/
fuo.htm>). Long guns are used much less frequently in crime 
and are subject to less extensive regulation than handguns.

Certain types of firearms are regulated because they are
deemed by legislators to be inappropriate for self-defense 
or sporting purposes. The sale and possession of assault
weapons, machine guns, short-barreled ("sawed-off") rifles
and shotguns, and unsafe handguns is often prohibited or
allowed only in limited circumstances. Federal law and the
laws of 43 States either prohibit, severely restrict, or
require registration for at least one type of firearm.

Exceptions to restrictions on certain types of weapons are
often allowed for law enforcement officers and firearm
collectors.

An assault weapon may be a handgun or long gun, but is
distinguished by the presence of special features common to
military weapons. The most common features of an assault
weapon are a semiautomatic firing mechanism that allows a
shot to be fired with each pull of the trigger without
reloading, and a large-capacity magazine that holds numerous
rounds of ammunition. 

Nine States regulate assault weapons either by enacting a
list of makes and models that are banned or restricted, or 
by statutorily defining the attributes of a prohibited 
firearm. The Federal assault weapons ban expired on September 
13, 2004. During the survey period Massachusetts passed an
amendment to keep its assault weapons law in effect and
California added .50 BMG rifles to its roster of regulated
weapons.

A machine gun (automatic firearm) will automatically fire
more than one bullet, without manual reloading, by a single
function of the trigger. Like assault weapons, machine guns
are designed to rapidly fire a high volume of ammunition.
Federal law, 18 U.S.C. 922(o), provides that it shall be
unlawful for a person to transfer or possess a machine gun,
unless it was lawfully possessed before May 19, 1986. In
addition, 39 States regulate machine guns.

A short-barreled rifle has one or more barrels less than 16
inches in length or has an overall length of less than 26
inches due to modification. A short-barreled shotgun has one
or more barrels less than 18 inches in length or has an
overall length of less than 26 inches due to modification.
Short-barreled rifles and shotguns (and machine guns) must 
be registered pursuant to Federal law, 26 U.S.C. 5841.
Thirty-three States regulate short-barreled rifles and 40
States regulate short-barreled shotguns.

An unsafe handgun ("Saturday night special" or "junk gun")
has a barrel length under 4 inches, is easily concealable,
and is not effective for sporting or self defense purposes
due to its poor quality of construction, inaccuracy, and lack
of essential safety features. Seven States forbid sales of
handgun models that are determined to be unsafe. The quality
of a handgun's construction is determined by its melting
point or by technical standards found in State codes.

Other weapons that may be prohibited include zip guns and
firearms that are made for silent discharge or that cannot be
detected by airport security devices.
`    
The primary focus of this report is upon regulation of
transfers involving handguns, long guns, and assault weapons.
Methods of regulating various types of firearms are described
in Regulated sales and Approval systems. Types of firearms
that are exempt from regulation in many jurisdictions are
generally not discussed in this report. These types include
antique, curio, and replica firearms, and weapons that have
been rendered permanently inoperable.
Terms such as firearm, handgun, long gun, and assault weapon,
as defined above, are generally used throughout this report
to facilitate comparisons between the laws and procedures of
the jurisdictions summarized. However, terms and definitions
used in firearm codes vary considerably by jurisdiction. For
the sake of clarity, several of the summaries use terms and
definitions specific to a particular jurisdiction. Readers
are advised to consult a jurisdiction's laws for a complete
understanding of its terminology. (Citations are included in
the jurisdictional summaries, table 5, and appendix tables A,
B, and C.)

Regulated sales

Firearms are usually sold at retail by dealers licensed under
Federal and State laws or by unlicensed persons (private
sales). Most sales occur at the business premises of licensed
dealers or at gun shows, which may include displays by
licensed and unlicensed sellers. In addition to sales and
gifts, firearms may be transferred in pawn transactions,
where a weapon is pledged as collateral for a loan and
redeemed when the loan is repaid. 

Statutes that require prospective purchasers to obtain a
permit or undergo a background check usually allow exemptions
for certain types of persons or transactions. Common 
exemptions are those for purchases by law enforcement 
officers, transfers of antique and replica firearms, and
gifts or loans of firearms from parents or guardians to minor
children.

Dealer transfers  The Brady Act requires a Federal Firearms
Licensee (FFL) to request a NICS check on all persons who
purchase a firearm or redeem a pawned firearm (see
Background). 

In addition to the Federal system, 30 States require licensed
dealers to request a background check or review a prospective
buyer's permit. Of these States 19 regulate dealer transfers 
of all types of firearms, 2 regulate dealer transfers of 
handguns and assault weapons, and 9 regulate only handgun 
transfers by dealers. 

Several States regulate pawn transactions in the same manner
as sales-— by licensing pawnbrokers and requiring a
background check on a person who redeems a firearm. The
pawning of any firearm is prohibited in New Jersey, while
five other States ban the pawning of handguns.

Private sales  The laws of 17 States regulate at least some
private sales by requiring that purchasers obtain a permit 
or undergo a background check before receiving a firearm. Of
these States 10 regulate private transfers of all types of
firearms, 1 (Maryland) regulates private transfers of
handguns and assault weapons, and 6 regulate only handgun
transfers.

Fifteen States regulate all private sales. Colorado and
Oregon only regulate private sales that occur at gun shows.
Delaware, Nevada, and Oregon allow unregulated private
sellers the option of requesting a check on a purchaser.
Gun shows Eight States have statutes that specifically
regulate gun shows. Most of these statutes define a gun show
as an event where a certain number of firearms are exhibited
for transfer (for example, 25 or more in Colorado and Oregon;
50 or more in Connecticut and Illinois; 25 or more pistols or
revolvers or 50 or more firearms, rifles, or shotguns in New
York). Some laws also define a gun show according to the
number of vendors who are exhibiting firearms for transfer.

State laws regulate gun show organizers, vendors, and buyers.
For example, California requires a show organizer to obtain 
a certificate of eligibility from the Department of Justice,
provide local law enforcement with a list of the show's
sellers, and exclude minors unless they are accompanied at
all times by a parent or guardian. Maryland requires
unlicensed gun show sellers to obtain a temporary transfer
permit from the State, have a fixed display, and comply with
all restrictions imposed upon dealer transfers. Any person
who sells a firearm at a Virginia gun show must submit to a
background check and obtain a seller identification number
from the State Police.

Colorado, Connecticut, Illinois (as of July 29, 2005), New
York, and Oregon require vendors to request an instant check
on every unlicensed person who attempts to make a purchase.
Colorado and New York require a show organizer to secure the
presence of at least one licensed dealer to process the
background checks. In Connecticut, Illinois, and Oregon, any
seller may contact the State checking agency directly.

Residency rules  The Gun Control Act generally prohibits
interstate transfers of firearms between unlicensed persons
(18 U.S.C. 922(a)(5)), a prohibition intended to channel
interstate transfers through licensed dealers who are subject
to scrutiny by ATF. A licensed dealer generally cannot
transfer a firearm other than a rifle or shotgun to an
unlicensed person who does not reside in the State where the
licensee's place of business is located. A rifle or shotgun
may be transferred in person by a dealer to a nonresident if
the transfer complies with the laws of the State where the
dealer's place of business is located and the State where the
purchaser resides. (18 U.S.C. 922(b)(3).)  

To ensure compliance with Federal law, many States have passed 
statutes that allow nonresidents to purchase long guns. Three 
States (Maryland, Missouri, and Virginia) require fixed periods 
of residency, ranging from 1 to 6 months, before a person may 
purchase certain firearms. Residency rules are intended to 
prevent nonresidents from purchasing and reselling firearms 
that they could not obtain in their home State.

A State POC may opt to receive notification from NICS when 
a resident of their State attempts to purchase a rifle or
shotgun in another jurisdiction (known as "long gun
notification"). The POC agency may have access to a record 
on the prospective purchaser that is not available to the
checking agency in the other jurisdiction.

Handgun purchase limits  Federal law does not restrict the
frequency of firearm acquisition or the quantity of firearms
that may be acquired. However, a handgun purchase limit of
one per month prevails in California, Maryland, and Virginia.
These limits are intended to deter persons who would purchase
large quantities of handguns for resale to prohibited
persons.

Approval systems

Over 3,000 State and local agencies are required by law to
determine the eligibility of persons who apply to receive a
firearm or a permit that may be used for a purchase. Systems
for determining the legal eligibility of prospective
purchasers may generally be classified as "instant approval,"
"purchase permit," "exempt carry permit" or "other approval"
systems.

Of the 28 States that require a background check or a permit
for a buyer, 15 have instant approval, 12 utilize purchase
permits, and 5 maintain other approval systems. Connecticut, 
Illinois, and New Jersey are each counted twice because 
these States operate permit and instant approval systems. 
Minnesota allows  purchasers the options of obtaining a 1-
year permit or undergoing a background check for a single 
purchase transaction (the "other approval" process).

Exempt carry permits, issued in 17 States (see appendix table
D), are not required for purchase but may be used to exempt
the holder from a background check at the point of sale.

Instant approval  This type of system allows a licensed
firearms dealer to contact a checking agency by telephone 
or other electronic means and receive a response immediately, 
or as soon as possible without delay, as to whether a
prospective purchaser is ineligible under law. Five instant
approval systems (Colorado, Connecticut, Illinois, Oregon,
and Pennsylvania) require some unlicensed sellers to request
a check from a statewide agency. Unlicensed sellers either
contact the checking agency directly or request a check
through a licensed dealer or police station. 

Instant approval laws usually allow a firearm to be 
transferred when the checking agency informs the seller that
the transfer may proceed or if no response is received by the
seller within 3 business days. A few States require all
applicants to wait a certain length of time before receiving
a firearm (see Waiting periods). 

All States with instant approval systems have a NICS point of
contact (see Background) except Delaware. On July 1, 2005,
Georgia discontinued its instant check operations. A Georgia
FFL is now required to contact the FBI for a background
check.

Purchase permits  These documents are issued by a government
agency after a background check and must be presented to a
seller in order to receive a firearm (the required documents
have a variety of titles, such as license or identification
card, but all are referred to below as "permits"). 

The period that a checking agency may investigate a permit
applicant ranges from 2 days in Nebraska to 180 days in New
York. Most purchase permit systems allow a checking agency 7
to 30 days to approve or deny an application. A few States
mandate a waiting period after a permit application is filed
and before the permit may be issued or a firearm may be
acquired.

Federal law does not mandate a permit to purchase firearms.
Twelve States administer purchase permit systems that
regulate sales of handguns. Four of these States also require
a permit to purchase a long gun. Minnesota's permit is
required for purchase of a handgun or an assault weapon.

In addition to the handgun and long gun permits, seven States
require special permits in order to acquire or possess
certain types of firearms, such as machine guns, that are
generally prohibited (see Jurisdictional summaries).

The handgun and long gun purchase permits vary according to
the duration of a permit and the number of firearms that can
be purchased at one time or during the tenure of a permit.
Most handgun permits have a duration of between 10 days and 
1 year, with a few remaining in effect for a longer duration.
Long gun permits generally remain effective for a longer
period than handgun permits. New Jersey's identification card
for long guns remains in effect until revoked for a violation
of law; among the other three States with long gun permits,
the duration ranges from 1 to 5 years. 

Generally, permits with a lengthy duration may be revoked by
the issuing agency if the holder is convicted of a crime or
otherwise becomes ineligible to possess a firearm.

The number of handguns that may be purchased by one person 
is sometimes limited by a State permit. In seven States, only
one handgun may be purchased with a permit. Six of these
States mandate a new permit for a second handgun, while New
York requires an amendment to the purchaser's handgun license. 
Five States allow unlimited handgun purchases during the 
effective period of a permit. Unlimited purchases of rifles 
and shotguns are allowed in the four States that issue long 
gun permits.

In six States holders of purchase permits must undergo
another background check before receiving a firearm from 
a licensed dealer. Connecticut and Illinois mandate the
additional check by statute; in Massachusetts, Minnesota,
Missouri, and New Jersey, purchasers must undergo a NICS
check requested by a dealer because their purchase permits
have not been qualified by ATF as an alternative to the NICS
requirements (see Background).

Exempt carry permits  These documents primarily allow holders
to carry a concealed firearm, but also may be used as purchase 
permits. A carry permit is exempt pursuant to Federal law if 
ATF determines that the permit meets the requirements of the 
Brady Act. Some carry permits may be used to exempt the 
holder from a background check required by State law. In 
addition, a few States exempt certain permit holders from 
waiting period requirements. 

Overall, 44 States require a concealed firearm permit. Four
States generally prohibit carrying a concealed firearm. A
firearm may be carried without a permit in Vermont and Alaska
(an Alaska concealed handgun permit may still be obtained in
order to purchase firearms without a new background check or
receive reciprocity from another State). 

Exempt carry permits were issued in 17 States as of December
31, 2005. Beginning October 19, 2005, ATF decisions changed
the status of carry permits in three states. Holders of
Georgia and Nevada concealed handgun permits were no longer
allowed to purchase a firearm without a new NICS check.
(However, ATF restored the Nevada permit's status as a NICS
alternative on January 5, 2006.)  Alaska now has two types 
of concealed handgun permits: "NICS exempt" and "not NICS
exempt."

Agencies that issue exempt carry permits usually have between
30 and 120 days to approve or deny an application. States
that authorize carry permits are generally categorized as
having either a "shall issue" or a "discretionary" system.
The former system mandates issuance of a permit if no
statutory reason for denial is revealed during a background
check of the applicant. The latter system allows the issuing
officer to consider the applicant's history, character, and
intended purpose for carrying a firearm. 

Most exempt carry permits are valid for 4 or 5 years.
Generally, a permit may be revoked by the issuing agency if
the holder becomes ineligible to carry a concealed firearm.

Other approval systems  These systems combine some of the
characteristics found in instant check and permit systems.
Generally, sellers are required to convey purchaser
information to a checking agency by mail, telephone, or 
other electronic means. Three of five other approval systems
require licensed dealers and private sellers to request
background checks. The California and Maryland systems
function as NICS points of contact.

In other approval systems the checking agency is not required
to respond immediately to the seller, but must respond within
a waiting period or other statutory time limit. The
applicable time periods for a response range from 7 to 10
days. These systems usually allow a transfer to proceed if
the seller has not received a response from the checking
agency by the end of the applicable period.

Checking delays  Several States allow an extension of the
time available to complete a background check if specific
circumstances are present. For example, if an applicant's
history includes a felony arrest without a recorded
disposition, the checking agency may be granted additional
time to contact the agency that originated the record and
inquire about the outcome of charges against the applicant
(for more details, see Checking process). In a few States 
the checking agency is allowed more time to investigate an
applicant who resides in another jurisdiction.

Waiting periods

A waiting period is a length of time after a firearm purchase
application is filed with a seller or a permit application is
filed with a law enforcement agency, that must expire before
transfer of the firearm or issuance of the permit can be
completed. 

The length of time an applicant must wait is sometimes
referred to as a "cooling-off" period, intended to deter
persons who desire a firearm immediately for use in a
specific misdeed. Another purpose of a waiting period is 
to provide sufficient time for law enforcement agencies to
investigate and resolve questions about an applicant's
background, especially if searches of local or manual 
records are necessary. 

Mandatory waiting periods should be distinguished from the
time periods allowed for checking agency inquiries into an
applicant's background (see Approval systems).

Twelve States require waiting periods, ranging from 1 to 14
days. Of these States 11 require a waiting period for handgun
permits or purchases, 2 include assault weapons, and 5
include long guns within their waiting period regulations.

Exemptions from waiting periods have been enacted in some
States for law enforcement officers, holders of valid carry
permits, or other specific classes of persons who have
demonstrated the ability to handle a firearm responsibly.

Several States mandate both a waiting period and a time limit
on inquiries by a checking agency, which may or may not be
the same length of time. The Brady Act provides 3 days for a
checking agency to respond to an inquiry from a licensed
dealer, but does not mandate a waiting period for purchasers
(see Background).

The sole change to waiting period laws between July 1, 2004,
and December 31, 2005, occurred when South Dakota made its
48-hour wait applicable only to pistol sales by licensed
firearms dealers.

Checking process

Development of the NICS has increased the national uniformity
of procedures used to approve or disapprove firearm transfers. 
However, approval systems established by State laws still 
employ a variety of procedures to determine the eligibility 
of prospective purchasers. The process for determining 
eligibility may be divided into application and background 
check stages.

Application  Federal and State laws require prospective
firearm purchasers to provide information that is needed to
initiate a background check. In order to receive a firearm
from a licensed dealer, federal law requires submission of a
Firearm Transaction Record, ATF Form 4473. The form requires
the buyer's full name, residence address, place of birth,
height, weight, gender, date of birth, race, State of
residence, country of citizenship, and alien or admission
number. A Social Security Number is optional.

A few instant approval systems only require information from
the ATF form, but most require the completion of an
additional form as well. All purchase permit systems require
specific information from applicants except in North
Carolina, where the county sheriff is allowed to determine
what information is necessary. State laws vary widely in
regard to the types of information required from applicants.

Depending on the type of approval system, checking agencies
receive applicant information in person or by mail,
telephone, or the Internet. Federal law, at 18 U.S.C.
922(a)(6), makes it unlawful to acquire or attempt to acquire
a firearm by making a false statement or furnishing false
identification to a licensee. Twenty-seven States have
similar laws (see appendix table C). Attempting to obtain a
firearm or a permit under false pretenses may be grounds for
denial of an application, or subject the applicant to a fine
or incarceration.

The laws of 20 States allow a checking agency to charge a fee
for processing a sale transaction or issuing a purchase permit. 
Seven States do not charge a fee for a background check that 
is related to a sale transaction. Fees charged at the point 
of sale (usually collected by dealers and remitted to the 
State) range from $2 in Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Virginia 
to $25 in California and Nevada. 

Checking agencies in Michigan and Minnesota do not charge for
a purchase permit. Hawaiian checking agencies collect a fee
from first-time applicants but do not charge for permit
renewals. Fees charged for purchase permits range from $5 in
a few States to $100 for a firearm identification card or a
license to carry in Massachusetts. Several States include a
charge that covers fingerprint processing by the FBI. In some
States the checking agency can adjust the amount of the fee
or is given discretion as to whether any fee will be charged.

Background check  Many agencies that issue purchase or exempt
carry permits initiate a check by sending an applicant's
fingerprints to a State unit or the FBI or both. The prints
are compared against arrestee records already on file.
Instant check systems compare the applicant's name and other
identifying information against computerized prohibitory
records. Generally, the automated agencies conduct a single
background check that incorporates Federal and State
requirements for each transaction.

A background check may also involve obtaining a record that
is not available in a national or statewide electronic
database. A sheriff's office or police department may search
county court files or other local records. If an electronic
record is not complete, the agency that created the original
record may be contacted to find out if it has been updated.

The effectiveness of background checks is affected by the
degree of automation involved, the types of prohibitory
records available, and the extent to which the records are
complete. The time an agency needs to obtain complete
information may be lengthened if records on an applicant are
maintained in another jurisdiction. A delay may also occur 
if research is needed to determine whether an entry on an
applicant's record disqualifies the person from receiving a
firearm.
Most background checks processed by State approval systems
are initiated with information received by telephone or
computer from a licensed dealer. State instant approval
systems use a variety of terminology, but all generate 
an initial response to the dealer indicating that the
transaction may proceed, may not proceed, or must be delayed
pending further research on an applicant's records. If no
record retrieval problems emerge, most State instant approval
systems are able to process a check and provide a final
response to a dealer in less than 5 minutes. Some systems
complete the checking process in less than 1 minute (see
Jurisdictional summaries).

If a transaction is allowed to proceed, the firearm dealer is
given an approval number to record on the forms filed by the
applicant. Federal and State procedures vary as to the period
of time for which the approval remains valid (the period
during which the applicant must complete a transaction by
receiving a firearm from the seller). For example, an
approval by the FBI is valid for 30 days; an approval of 
a private sale by the Oregon State Police is valid for 24
hours. A person who does not receive the firearm during the
applicable period is required to undergo another background
check.

State laws differ regarding the length of time that a
transaction can be delayed and the circumstances that allow 
a delay. A checking agency's search for a missing arrest
disposition is the most common reason for a delay. If a final
disposition such as a conviction cannot be found, Federal or
State law usually dictates the checking agency's response to
the firearm dealer. Some States apply the Brady Act's rule
that if a disqualifying conviction record is not found within
3 days, a transfer may proceed at the discretion of the
dealer. Other States have laws and regulations that allow
their agencies to deny a transfer if an applicant was
arrested for an offense that would be disqualifying upon
conviction.

A checking agency may continue to research an incomplete
record after a dealer has been allowed to proceed with a
transfer. If a disqualifying record is found at a later date,
the dealer may be contacted to determine if the applicant
completed the transaction and received a firearm. If the
transfer has occurred, law enforcement officers may locate
the purchaser and confiscate the firearm (see Actions against
denied persons).

Transaction and registration 
records  

Federal and State laws mandate the information that must be
provided by prospective firearm purchasers, the types of
information that must be retained or purged by checking
agencies, and time periods for saving or destroying records.
 
Some checking agencies receive and retain paper records of
permit or purchase applications. Nevertheless, most buyer
information is transmitted over the telephone or via computer
by a licensed dealer and stored electronically by a checking
agency.
Retention of information on allowed transactions is often
limited by law because of concern for the privacy of lawful
firearm owners. In contrast, retention of information on
denied transactions is seldom limited, due to its usefulness
for judicial and law enforcement purposes.

Federal law requires destruction of identifying data from
allowed NICS transactions within 24 hours after the dealer is
notified of the decision, except in States where a different
retention period is mandated by law. The new law applies 
only to NICS sales transactions, not to alternative permit
applications. Federal law does not require purging of data
from denied transactions.

Thirty States retain records from sales transactions or
purchase permit applications. Nearly all instant check
agencies retain allowed transaction records for less than 
60 days but retain denied transaction records for more 
than 90 days.  

In States where county sheriffs or municipal police
departments issue permits or purchase approvals, the
retention period for transaction records is usually at the
discretion of the checking agency. Some State agencies are
required to maintain copies of transaction records forwarded
by local checking agencies.

Records of permit applications or sale transactions are
retained by checking agencies in order to monitor agency
performance or achieve a law enforcement objective. With
computerized checking systems, the complete electronic record
of a transaction is generally maintained for a short period
of time in order to facilitate audits of system performance
or correction of errors. In some States certain information
such as a name, approval number, and date from an allowed
transaction may be retained for auditing purposes for a
longer period than other data about the applicant. Retention
of all allowed transaction records is mandated in two States
for certain types of firearms: handguns in California and
regulated firearms (handguns and assault weapons) in
Maryland.

Checking agency records may also be referenced in order to
verify that licensed firearms dealers are maintaining records
as required by law. In States that require a firearm owner to
have a license or identification card, records of approved
applications are retained in order for law enforcement
officers to determine whether a particular person is legally
in possession of a firearm. States that require a waiting
period retain records of allowed transactions in order to
verify that a seller waited the proper length of time before
transferring a firearm to the buyer. Records of denied
transactions are retained to facilitate appeals, arrests, and
prosecutions, and to build databases on prohibited persons.

During the survey period Georgia and South Carolina
eliminated requirements for retention of purchase records.
South Dakota's law on retention of pistol sales records was
made applicable only to licensed dealers.

Registration records, which normally include information on 
a firearm and its owner, facilitate tracing of firearms 
that are resold illegally, used in a crime, or stolen. 
Federal law requires registration of a machine gun or a 
short-barrel rifle or shotgun. Twelve States register at 
least one type of firearm. The types of firearms most 
commonly registered by these States are machine guns, 
assault weapons, and handguns. A few States register short-
barrel rifles or shotguns, or all rifles and shotguns. 
(Statutes requiring registration are listed in appendix C.) 
The laws of several States prohibit registration of 
firearms.

Appeals of denials

Specific procedures for appealing the denial of a firearm
purchase or permit are codified in Federal law and in the
laws of nearly all States that process background checks.
Appeals often serve the practical purposes of resolving
questions of identity and updating incomplete criminal
history records.

Federal law provides the right to challenge a NICS denial 
by the FBI or a State point of contact (see Background). 
The most common State procedure provides an appeal to the
checking agency for reconsideration of a denial, and a
subsequent appeal to a court. 

Seventeen States provide an appeal to the checking agency 
for a person who is denied a firearm purchase or permit. A
different group of 17 States provide an appeal to a court.
(See table 8.) Connecticut and Pennsylvania provide an appeal
to an agency that is separate from the checking unit.

Most purchase permit statutes require the checking agency to
inform an applicant in writing of the reason for a denial.
With instant approval systems an applicant usually is
informed of a denial by the dealer who requested the
background check. The applicant must then call or write the
checking agency to learn the reason for the denial. Statewide
checking agencies often have forms available for requesting
reconsideration. Some States impose a deadline for filing the
initial appeal.

Other agencies involved in firearm appeals are those that
maintain criminal history, restraining order, mental health,
or other records that could disqualify an applicant. The
appellant may be required to obtain data from or submit data
to the agency that originated a disputed record.

Appeals often arise when a denied person claims that he or
she is not the individual named in a disqualifying record
found by the checking agency. To resolve the identity
question, the appellant will ordinarily submit fingerprints
(if they are not already on file) which will be checked
against Federal and/or State arrestee print records. If the
appellant's prints do not match any disqualifying records 
on file, the denial may be reversed. A few States require
submission of fingerprints with all requests for
reconsideration.

Another common appeal issue arises when a denied person
claims that a disqualifying record is incomplete. For
example, if a background check reveals a felony charge
without a recorded disposition, the checking agency may be
required by State law to issue a denial. The applicant may
have the denial reversed by submitting court records to 
prove that the charge was subsequently dismissed. An appeal
procedure may give the denied person the alternative of
requesting that the appellate review agency contact the
agency of record to inquire about a missing disposition.

An appeal may be filed when there is no entry in criminal
history records for a proceeding that restored the
applicant's firearm rights. An administrative agency or a
court may also need to decide whether a pardon or an
expungement of a conviction was sufficient to restore an
applicant's firearm rights.

In addition to record challenge procedures, some States allow
an appellant or the reviewing agency to request an
administrative hearing. Deadlines for administrative decisions 
and subsequent appeals by a denied applicant vary widely by 
State.

The vast majority of disputed firearm denials are resolved 
at the administrative level and are based upon the accuracy 
of records instead of interpretation of the law.

Actions against denied persons

A person who is prevented by a background check from
receiving a firearm or a permit may be in violation of
Federal or State law. A denied person may have acted
illegally by submitting false information or failing to
disclose required information on an application, by
attempting to make a purchase while subject to a 
prohibition, or by attempting to obtain a firearm on 
behalf of a prohibited person. 

Numerous agencies receive notices of denied persons, including 
special police units, ATF, and agencies with jurisdiction over 
the location of the transaction (usually a dealer's premises) 
or the applicant's residence. 

ATF enforcement  NICS denial data are electronically 
transmitted by the FBI on a daily basis to ATF's Brady
Operations Branch. Standard referrals by the FBI contain data
on prohibited persons who unlawfully attempted to purchase a
firearm. 

Some prohibited persons obtain a firearm during an "open
transaction," where the FBI has not completed a check in 3
business days and the dealer is allowed to transfer the
firearm. When the FBI finds a prohibitory record and is
informed by the dealer that a transfer occurred, a "delayed
denial" referral is made to ATF.

Brady Operations searches databases available to ATF for
additional data on denied persons referred by the FBI. After
an initial screening denials are referred to the 19 of ATF's
23 field divisions serviced by Brady Operations, according to
referral criteria for the Federal judicial districts within
each division's territory. (The other four divisions'
territory is comprised of POC States.)

ATF and United States Attorneys have developed referral
criteria for all 94 judicial districts that reflect the types
of cases most likely to merit prosecution. Cases involving
restraining orders, domestic violence misdemeanors, non-
immigrant aliens, violent felonies, warrants, and indictments 
are most often included in referral criteria.

In 2005 the FBI referred 67,713 NICS denials to Brady
Operations. After screening Brady Operations referred 9,575
denials within the established guidelines to field divisions.
Cases that did not meet guidelines were held in a database.
The referred transactions included 3,215 delayed denials and
6,360 standard referrals.

A NICS coordinator in each ATF division receives and
distributes referrals to the appropriate field office. A
State point of contact may also refer denials to the nearest
field office. Special agents at the field offices verify
conviction and prohibition information and conduct additional
investigations. The FBI or the POC is notified if ATF
determines that a person should not have been denied. 

In a delayed denial case, the agent contacts the firearm
purchaser and seizes or takes an abandonment of the firearm
or coordinates a transfer of the firearm to a licensed dealer
or to a third party who is not a prohibited person. In POC
States a retrieval may be handled by local law enforcement, 
a statewide firearms unit, or ATF, depending on jurisdiction
over the dealer and the applicant.

When an investigation is complete, the field office and the
U.S. Attorney decide whether the case merits prosecution. A
case not deemed appropriate for Federal prosecution may be
referred to a State prosecutor. If the U.S. Attorney decides
to prosecute, an arrest is made or a warrant is issued.

Rejection rates

State and local checking agencies received an estimated 3.3
million firearm transfer applications during 2005; an
estimated 65,000 applications were rejected, a rejection rate
of 2% (FBI checks are not included in these figures). The
most common reason for rejection of an application by a State
or local checking agency was the applicant's indictment or
conviction for a felony offense (46%), followed by a
conviction for a domestic violence misdemeanor (12%). (See
Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2005,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bcft05.htm>.)

The 2005 background check statistics included applications
for transfers, permits required for transfers, and carry
permits that could be used to exempt the holder from a check
at the point of transfer. This national estimate combined
actual counts from statewide reporting agencies with an
estimate for aggregated local agencies.

The rejection rates among State and local agencies in 2005
for the various types of firearm approval systems were
estimated to be 2% for instant approvals, 2.4% for purchase
permits, 1.7% for exempt carry permits, and 1% for other
approval systems. 

Statewide rates  The number of applications received and
rejected and rejection rates for statewide agencies during
2005 are reproduced in table 1.

Twelve instant approval systems varied in rejection rates,
ranging from 0.3% in Connecticut to 3.8% in Delaware.
Statewide rejection rates for purchase permit applications
ranged from 1.3% in Hawaii to 2.6% in Illinois. Rejection
rates for nine States that reported exempt carry permit
counts ranged between 0.2% in North Dakota to 7.5% in
Arizona. Rejection rates were also available for the "other
approval" systems in Maryland (1.6%) and California (1.0%).

Variations in rejection rates among States may be influenced
by many interrelated factors including the type of approval
system, the number of years the system has operated, the
extent of State firearm regulation, the length of time
allowed for an agency to complete a check, the decision
process for records with missing dispositions, and the extent
of automation of criminal histories and other records.
Although the full impact of these factors has not been
quantified, a few observations are possible from the limited
information available.

Among the lowest rates were those of New Jersey (0.3%) and
Illinois (0.6%), where an instant check at the point of
transfer is the second step required for approval of
prospective firearm owners. Before an instant sale check can
be conducted, both States require a prospective owner to
obtain some type of purchase permit such as an identification
card or a handgun permit. During the first step of the
process, the rejection rates are considerably higher in New
Jersey (1.7%) and Illinois (2.6%).

Generally, higher rejection rates occur in States that
implemented an instant approval system on or after February
28, 1994, the effective date of the Brady Act. These States
include Tennessee (3.5%) and Colorado (3.1%). Approval
systems established before passage of the Brady Act tend to
have lower rejection rates. In addition to California,
Connecticut, Illinois, and New Jersey, these systems include
Virginia (1.2%) and Wisconsin (1.5%). 

Extensive regulation of firearm sales by States with older
approval systems may influence rejection rates. As
prospective firearm owners become more knowledgeable about
laws and procedures in the States with well-established
systems, some persons with potentially disqualifying records
may be discouraged from applying for a purchase or permit in
those States.

Rejection rates may be influenced by a State's policy toward
applicants who have incomplete records for criminal history
and other disqualifying factors. Checking agencies most
frequently encounter delays while attempting to determine the
final disposition of a criminal charge that is indicated by
an arrest, information, or indictment record. If the final
disposition cannot be found during the time allowed for a
background check, the agency must decide, based on Federal or
State law, whether the application will be approved, denied,
or delayed pending further research. A State's rejection rate
may tend to be low if an approval is mandated and high if a
denial is mandated.

Some States apply the Brady Act's rule that if a 
disqualifying record is not found within 3 days, a transfer
may proceed. Other States have laws and regulations that
allow their agencies to deny or delay a transfer if an
incomplete record is being researched when the time limit 
for a response expires. These types of rules may partially
account for the comparatively high rejection rates in States
such as Colorado and Tennessee.

Local agency rates  Rejection rates among local agencies may
be influenced by many of the same factors that influence the
rates of agencies with statewide jurisdiction.

Local agencies that provided data for the FIST project were
grouped according to the size of the community they served:
small (under 10,000 people), medium (10,000 to 100,000), or
large (over 100,000).

In 2005 rates varied among local agencies by size of the
population served and type of permit. The rejection rate for
purchase permits was highest in large communities (3.3%) and
lowest in small communities (1%). Exempt carry permits
exhibited a similar pattern, with the highest rate occurring
in large communities (1.4%) and the lowest rate occurring in
small communities (0.6%).

FBI rejection rates  Among the States for which the FBI
conducted all NICS checks in 2005, rates ranged from 2.2% 
in Arizona and South Carolina to 0.1% in Massachusetts.

The rejection rate in Massachusetts may have been extremely
low because State law requires that every prospective buyer
obtain a permit from a local police department before
proceeding to a firearm dealer for a NICS check. The local
background check most likely eliminates some applicants
before a NICS check is necessary. In Rhode Island, which also
requires a local agency check that is separate from the NICS,
the FBI rejection rate is only 0.7%. Delaware is similar
because the State Police conduct a check that is separate
from the NICS process. In 2005 the Delaware State Police
reported a rejection rate of 3.8% while the FBI rejection
rate for Delaware was 1.4%.

Jurisdictional summaries

Information included in the Federal and State 
summaries

References on this page to "State" generally include all
jurisdictions summarized (the United States and each State,
Territory, Commonwealth, and District). Topics listed are not
alphabetized; they follow the order of presentation used in
the summaries. Laws that apply nationwide are included in the
Federal summary and are generally not repeated elsewhere.
State participation in the NICS is described in sub-headings
for the summaries.

Prohibited persons  Categories of persons prohibited
permanently or temporarily from purchasing,  possessing, 
or transferring firearms.

Restoration of rights  Pardons, court procedures, or other
means by which adult or juvenile offenders can regain the
right to possess or purchase firearms.

Prohibited firearms  Types of firearms that cannot be
purchased or possessed by any person or that may only be
purchased or possessed pursuant to a limited exception.

Regulated sales  The scope of firearm transfer restrictions
such as background checks, permit and license requirements,
residency rules, and handgun purchase limits. Includes types
of transferors (licensed or unlicensed), firearms (such as
handguns or long guns), and transactions (such as sales or
redemptions) that are regulated.

Permits  Documents (such as a permit, license, or
identification card) issued by law enforcement agencies,
which are required for the purchase, possession, or carrying
of firearms.

Background checks  Procedures and requirements for conducting
criminal history and other checks on firearms purchasers or
permit applicants under Federal and State laws, including
time limits imposed on checking agencies.

Waiting period  A period of time after a firearm purchase
application is filed with a seller or a permit application 
is filed with a law enforcement agency, which must expire 
before transfer of the firearm or issuance of the permit 
may be completed.

Purchaser fees  The amounts charged to firearms purchasers
for background checks or the issuance of documents needed 
for purchase.

State data Automated and manual prohibited person data that
are maintained by State agencies. The data are available to
agencies within the State for background checks on firearm
buyers or permit applicants and may also be available to
agencies outside the State. Local record sources may also be
described.

Check processing time  The length of time needed, on average,
for checking agencies to complete background checks on
routine transactions and those that require additional
research on missing dispositions and other questions.

Retention of records  Time limits on retention of data from
allowed and denied firearm transactions by checking agencies
and other agencies, based on Federal or State law or agency
policies.

Registration  State procedures for maintaining permanent
records on firearms and firearms owners.

Appeals of denials  Statutory or administrative procedures
for appealing a denial of the right to purchase a firearm or
obtain a permit that may be used for a purchase. 

Arrests of denied persons  Arrest and notification procedures
followed by checking agencies in regard to persons who are
denied a firearm or a permit because they submitted false
information or have an outstanding warrant.

2004/2005 legislation  Significant changes in laws related to
firearm sales that became effective between July 1, 2004, and
December 31, 2005.

Relevant laws  Citations to statutes governing the transfer,
possession, and use of firearms.

Source of information  Agencies that contributed to the
survey.

Federal system

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Federal law prohibits firearm possession
by or transfer to a person who is: under indictment for or
convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than
1 year; a fugitive from justice; an unlawful user of or
addicted to any controlled substance; adjudicated as a mental
defective or committed to a mental institution; an illegal
alien or an alien admitted under a nonimmigrant visa;
dishonorably discharged from the armed forces; a renounced
U.S. citizen; restrained by court order from harassing,
stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child; or
convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence. It is unlawful for a federally-licensed dealer to
transfer a long gun to a person under age 18 or a handgun to
a person under age 21. Further, it is unlawful for any person
to transfer a handgun to a juvenile (under 18) or for a
juvenile to possess a handgun, except in limited
circumstances.

Restoration of rights  Federal firearm rights may be restored
by a presidential pardon or by ATF; agency decisions may be
appealed to Federal district court.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions,
to possess or transfer a machine gun or a firearm not
detectable by airport security devices.

Regulated sales  Record checks through the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) are required on
persons who purchase firearms or redeem pawned firearms from
federally-licensed dealers. A licensee has the option of
requesting a check when a firearm is pawned. A handgun cannot
be transferred by a licensee to a person who does not reside
in the State where the licensee's business is located. A long
gun may be transferred in person by a dealer to a nonresident
if the transfer complies with the laws of the State where the
dealer's place of business is located and the State where the
buyer resides. An interstate transfer of a handgun or long
gun between unlicensed persons is prohibited.
Permits  Federal law does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm.

Background checks  NICS checks are conducted by the FBI and
State point of contact (POC) agencies. The FBI checks handgun
and long gun buyers in 29 States and only long gun buyers in
8 additional States. Dealers contact the system by telephone
or other electronic means and receive an immediate response
as to whether a transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or
will be delayed pending further review. If no response is
received within 3 business days, the transfer may proceed.

Waiting period  No Federal requirements.

Purchaser fees  NICS checks by the FBI are without charge.
State laws establish POC fees.

Federal data  The three major Federal databases are the
Interstate Identification Index (III), containing pointers 
to State criminal histories; the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC), which includes protection order, fugitive, 
and other data; and the NICS Index, which includes mental 
defective, illegal alien, denied person, and other data. 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) data are queried 
for non-citizen buyers.

Check processing time  Over 90% of the inquiries conducted by
the FBI in 2005 resulted in an immediate "proceed" response.

Retention of records  Identifying information on transactions
allowed by the FBI is purged within 24 hours. Open transaction 
information is purged within 90 days. Information on 
applicants denied by the FBI is retained indefinitely.

Registration  A short-barrel shotgun or rifle or a machine
gun must be registered.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm after a
NICS check may appeal to the denying agency (FBI or POC) and
may be required to contact the agency that originated the
disqualifying record. As an alternative, the appellant can
ask the FBI to review a POC denial. A further appeal may be
filed in Federal district court.

Arrests of denied persons  The FBI notifies ATF of NICS
denials and persons who obtain a firearm but are subsequently
determined to be prohibited. If an applicant has an
outstanding warrant, the agency with jurisdiction over the
fugitive is notified.

2004/2005 legislation  The assault weapons ban expired on
September 13, 2004. A new section allows certain law
enforcement officers to carry a concealed firearm
notwithstanding any State or local law.

Relevant laws  United States Code 18-922 et seq; 26-5801 et
seq.

Source of information  Federal Bureau of Investigation, NICS
Program Office; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.
Alabama

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits ownership, possession, 
or control of a handgun by a person who has been convicted in 
Alabama or elsewhere of committing or attempting to commit a 
crime of violence or is a drug addict or an habitual drunkard. 
It is illegal to deliver a handgun to any person under the age 
of 18 or to one who the seller has reasonable cause to believe 
has been convicted of a crime of violence or is a drug addict, 
an habitual drunkard, or of unsound mind.

Restoration of rights  A person who has been convicted of a
crime may regain the right to possess a handgun through a
pardon.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal for a person to possess,
obtain, receive, sell, or use a short-barreled rifle or
shotgun, except for a peace officer engaged in official
duties.

Regulated sales  All transfers of firearms conducted by a
licensed importer, manufacturer, or dealer shall be subject
to a NICS check. Residents of adjoining States may purchase
long guns in Alabama unless otherwise prohibited. No person
shall make any loan secured by a mortgage, deposit, or pledge
of a handgun, nor lend, give, or otherwise deliver a handgun
contrary to the provisions of the law. A State license is
required for retail dealers of handguns.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit
is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Alabama contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirement.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Alabama makes fugitive, criminal history,
probation/parole, and domestic violence restraining order
data available on the statewide computer network. Criminal
histories may contain domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions (flagged records) and insanity, incompetent to
stand trial, and involuntary commitment dispositions. A
statewide database of probate court mental health records 
is maintained for the purpose of supplying data to the NICS.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  A form in triplicate is made for every
pistol sold by a licensed dealer. One copy of the form shall
be sent within 6 hours by registered or certified mail to the
chief of police of the municipality or the sheriff of the
county of which the dealer is a resident; the dealer shall
within 7 days send the duplicate to the Secretary of State;
and the dealer shall retain the triplicate for 6 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Code of Alabama 13A-11-50 et seq.

Source of information  Alabama Bureau of Investigation;
Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center.

Contact  Mark Hartley, Criminal Justice Information Center,
770 Washington Avenue, Room 350, Montgomery, AL 36130, (334)
242-4900.

Alaska

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Alaska law makes it a crime for a person
to: knowingly possess a handgun after having been convicted
of a felony or adjudicated a delinquent minor for conduct
that would constitute a felony if committed by an adult by a
court of this State, a court of the United States, or a court
of another State or territory; knowingly sell or transfer a
handgun to a person who has been convicted of a felony by a
court of this State, a court of the United States, or a court
of another State or territory; knowingly sell or transfer a
firearm to a person whose physical or mental condition is
substantially impaired by intoxicating liquor or controlled
substances; knowingly sell a firearm to a person under age
18; or possess a firearm as an unemancipated minor under age
16 without the consent of a parent or guardian. A domestic
violence protective order may prohibit the respondent from
possessing a firearm.

Restoration of rights  The State allows a convicted felon's
right to own a handgun to be restored if the conviction is
pardoned or set aside. If at least 10 years have elapsed
since the offender's unconditional discharge, firearm rights
are restored except for those who committed felony "crimes
against persons."

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to manufacture, possess,
transport, sell, or transfer a prohibited weapon (which
includes a machine gun, short-barrel rifle, or short-barrel
shotgun), unless it is registered under the National Firearms
Act.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits  Alaska does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A person who may legally carry a firearm is not
required to obtain a permit to carry a concealed handgun.
However, a person may obtain a concealed handgun permit in
order to purchase a firearm without a new background check or
receive reciprocity from other States. ATF allows a "NICS
exempt" permit to be used for a purchase without a background
check; other permits are "not NICS exempt."

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Alaska contact the FBI
for all sales checks required by the Brady Act. The Alaska
Department of Public Safety conducts background checks on
applicants for concealed handgun permits that are "NICS
exempt" (includes a NICS check) and "not NICS exempt"
(without a NICS check).

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Alaska maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence protective order data
on a statewide network. Domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions may be identified from flagged criminal history
records created after January 15, 1998. Insanity and
incompetent to stand trial dispositions may be found within
criminal histories.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied 
a concealed handgun permit is retained for a minimum of 5
years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A denial of a
concealed handgun permit application may be appealed to the
commissioner of public safety.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant legislative changes. 
An ATF decision designated "NICS exempt" concealed handgun
permits as an alternative to a NICS purchase check.

Relevant laws  Alaska Statutes 11.61.200; 11.61.210;
11.61.220; 18.65.700; 18.66.100.

Source of information  Alaska Department of Public Safety.

Contact  David Schade, Department of Public Safety, 5700 East
Tudor Road, Anchorage, AK 99507, (907) 269-5708.

Arizona

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Arizona law makes it illegal to sell or
transfer a firearm to a prohibited possessor, defined as any
person who has been found to be a danger to himself or others
by a court order and is under treatment, convicted of a
felony within or without Arizona, adjudicated delinquent,
imprisoned, or is serving a term of probation, parole,
community supervision, work furlough, home arrest, or release
on any other basis because of a domestic violence or felony
offense, or is an illegal alien or a non-immigrant alien. It
is illegal to knowingly transfer a firearm to a person who
intends to use the firearm in the commission of any felony. 
A firearm cannot be transferred to or possessed by a minor
under age 18 except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  Adult felons convicted of "dangerous
offenses" cannot regain the right to possess firearms. All
other felons discharged from probation must wait a certain
length of time, depending on the offense, before applying for
a court order to restore firearm rights. For adult felons the
waiting period is 10 years for "serious offenses" and 2 years
for other offenses. For juvenile felons the waiting period is
until age 30 for dangerous and serious offenses and 2 years
for most other offenses.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to manufacture, possess,
transport, sell, or transfer a prohibited weapon, which
includes a machine gun or a short-barreled rifle or shotgun
(unless it is registered in accord with Federal law).

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on private person-to-person transfers of firearms.

Permits  Arizona does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. Carrying a concealed weapon requires a permit.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Arizona contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. The Department
of Public Safety (DPS) Concealed Weapons Unit conducts
background checks on applicants for concealed carry permits.
ATF allows a holder of a valid Arizona permit to purchase a
firearm in the State without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  There is no fee for a purchase. The concealed
weapon permit fee is $65.

State data  Arizona maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history data on a statewide network. Probation,
parole, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor data are
found within criminal history records. Sex offender
registration and corrections data are also available. The
courts report limited data on involuntary commitments to DPS.
Domestic violence protective orders are entered into a court
repository which is being expanded to include all State
courts.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Data on persons who are denied a
concealed weapon permit are retained for 5 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A person who is
denied a concealed weapon permit may request reconsideration
by submitting additional data to DPS. An administrative
hearing may be held. A further appeal may be filed in
superior court.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  The definition of a prohibited firearm
possessor was amended to include a person who is an illegal
alien or a non-immigrant alien, as defined in 18 U.S.C.
922(g)(5).

Relevant laws  Arizona Revised Statutes 13-905 et seq;
13-3101 et seq.

Source of information  Arizona Department of Public Safety.
Contact  Rene Wilson, Supervisor, Department of Public
Safety, Concealed Weapon Permit Unit, P.O. Box 6488, Phoenix,
AZ 85005, (602) 223-2704.

Arkansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Arkansas law provides that no person
shall possess or own any firearm who has been convicted of a
felony, adjudicated mentally ill, or committed involuntarily
to any mental institution. No person under the age 18 shall
possess a handgun except in limited circumstances. It is
illegal to furnish a firearm or other deadly weapon to a
minor (under 18) without the consent of a parent or guardian,
or to furnish a handgun or prohibited weapon to a felon, or
to knowingly sell, rent, or transfer a firearm to a person
prohibited by State or Federal law.

Restoration of rights  The Governor may restore a felon's
right to own a firearm upon a recommendation from a chief law
enforcement officer if the underlying offense did not involve
the use of a weapon and occurred more than 8 years ago.
Restoration of rights may also occur with a pardon.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to use, possess, make, repair, sell, or otherwise deal in a
machine gun or sawed-off shotgun or rifle, or a firearm
specially made or specially adapted for silent discharge.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of adjacent States may
purchase long guns in Arkansas unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  Arkansas does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Arkansas contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. The Arkansas
State Police conducts background checks on applicants for
concealed handgun permits. ATF allows a holder of a valid
concealed handgun permit to purchase a firearm without a new
NICS check, if the permit was issued on or after April 1,
1999.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history,
restraining order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor
conviction data are available on the statewide network.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied 
a concealed handgun permit is retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Arkansas Code 5-73-101 et seq; 5-73-301 et
seq.

Source of information  Arkansas State Police and the Office
of the Attorney General.

Contact  Lt. Cora Gentry, Arkansas State Police Concealed
Handgun Licensing Section, 1 State Police Plaza Drive, Little
Rock, AR 72209, (501) 618-8600.

California

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who has been convicted of a felony in
California or another jurisdiction or a misdemeanor specified
in State law; is addicted to any narcotic drug; is prohibited
as a condition of probation; is subject to a protective
order; was adjudged a ward of the juvenile court; or is
mentally ill or disabled as defined in State law. A firearm
cannot be transferred to a minor (under 21 for handguns;
under 18 for long guns) except in limited circumstances.
Handgun owners must pass a safety course or show proof of
exemption.

Restoration of rights  Firearm rights may be restored by a
Governor's pardon (if the conviction did not involve use of a
deadly weapon) or if an underlying conviction is reopened and
the subject pleads to a lesser charge. Persons convicted of
specified misdemeanors or committed to a mental institution
may have their rights restored by the proper court. Those who
committed disqualifying acts as juveniles may have their
right to possess a firearm automatically restored at age 30
if no additional violations occur.

Prohibited firearms  Short-barreled rifles and shotguns,
unsafe handguns, machine guns, assault weapons, and several
other types of firearms are prohibited, with limited
exceptions.

Regulated sales  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by State-licensed dealers and unlicensed persons and
for pawn redemptions processed through dealers. Additional
regulations apply to gun shows. Handgun purchases are 
limited to 1 in a 30-day period.

Permits  A permit is required to possess a machine gun or 
an assault weapon. Carrying a concealed firearm requires a
license. A permit is required to use a firearm solely for
entertainment purposes.

Background checks  The California Department of Justice(DOJ)
is a NICS point of contact and conducts all checks required
by Federal and State law. Gun show transfers and other
private sales are processed through a licensed dealer or law
enforcement agency. Dealers contact DOJ with a computerized
"point-of-sale device."  An entertainment firearms permit
(for entertainment activities only, not for routine purchase)
is allowed by ATF as a NICS alternative.

Waiting period  A 10-day wait is required for all firearms,
regardless of when a check is completed.

Purchaser fees  DOJ charges $25 for a check on a single
handgun or an unlimited number of long guns, and $21 for
additional handguns purchased at the same time (if exempt
from the one per 30-day rule). A dealer may charge an
additional $10 fee per firearm to process a private transfer.

State data  California maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, restraining order, domestic violence
conviction (flagged records), probation/parole, juvenile, and
prohibited armed persons data. DOJ maintains a database of
prohibited mental patients and some may also be included in
criminal histories.

Check processing time  Background checks are processed within
the 10-day waiting period.

Retention of records  Data on approved long gun transactions
may be retained for 5 days; data on prohibited long gun
transfers are retained indefinitely. Other transaction data
are retained indefinitely in the State's Automated Firearms
System (AFS).

Registration  Handguns are not registered, but the automated
files maintain a record of handgun sales and transfers. New
residents must report handgun ownership within 60 days of
moving to California. Assault weapons must have been
registered prior to the registration deadline.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
appeal to California DOJ.

Arrests of denied persons  In cases involving falsified
applications or outstanding warrants, DOJ informs the agency
with jurisdiction over the individual. Persons with warrants
cannot receive a firearm if a conviction would disqualify
them. DOJ enforcement and local law enforcement serve search
warrants and arrest and prosecute armed prohibited persons
who are found to be in possession of firearms.

2004/2005 legislation  Assault weapon permit and registration
requirements were amended to include .50 BMG rifles. An
entertainment firearms permit was authorized. An eligibility
check is required before the return of seized firearms.

Relevant laws  California Penal Code 12000 et seq; Welfare
and Institutions Code 8100 et seq.

Source of information  California Department of Justice.

Contact  Steve Buford, Department of Justice Firearms
Division, P.O. Box 820200, Sacramento, CA 94203, (916)
227-4340.

Colorado

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Colorado law forbids transfer of a
firearm to any person who is: prohibited by Federal or State
law; arrested for or charged with a crime for which the
person, if convicted, would be prohibited by Federal or State
law; or the subject of an indictment, information, or felony
complaint alleging a crime punishable by imprisonment
exceeding 1 year. A firearm cannot be possessed by a person
who is a previous felony offender or was adjudicated for 
an act that would be a felony if committed by an adult. A
firearm cannot be possessed by or transferred to a person 
who has not attained the age of 18 years, except in limited
circumstances. It is illegal to knowingly obtain a firearm 
on behalf of a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights  Felons and juvenile offenders may
regain firearm rights if they receive a pardon from the
President or the Governor.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to knowingly possess a dangerous weapon, which includes a
machine gun, short shotgun, or short rifle.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers or at a
gun show. Residents of any State may purchase long guns in
Colorado unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  Colorado does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The Colorado Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by Federal and State law. Licensed firearms dealers
in Colorado request instant checks by using a 1-800 number or
by accessing CBI's web site. Gun show transactions are
processed through dealers. State law mandates denial of a
person arrested or indicted for a potentially disqualifying
offense if no final disposition of the case is noted in
databases searched.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  CBI does not charge a fee for an instant
check. A licensed dealer may charge a fee not to exceed 
$10 for processing a gun show transaction.

State data  Colorado maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation, parole, restraining order, and
flagged domestic abuse misdemeanor data on a statewide
network. CBI receives court records of persons who have been
adjudicated as a juvenile delinquent. Criminal histories may
contain insanity and incompetent to stand trial dispositions.
Data on persons who are incapacitated or committed for drug,
alcohol or mental health treatment are reported by State
courts to the NICS.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are processed
within 1 hour; transactions requiring additional research 
are processed within 3 days.

Retention of records  CBI purges data from allowed NICS
transactions within 24 hours. Data from denied transactions
may be retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
request reconsideration by submitting additional information
to CBI.

Arrests of denied persons  All persons who are denied or 
have an outstanding warrant are reported to Federal, State, 
and local law enforcement agencies with jurisdiction over 
the applicant's residence and the dealer's premises.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Colorado Revised Statutes 12-26.1-101;
18-12-101 et seq; 24-33.5-424.

Source of information  Colorado Bureau of Investigation.
Contact  Susan Kitchen, CBI InstaCheck Unit, 690 Kipling
Street, Room 3000, Denver, CO 80215, (303) 239-4235.

Connecticut

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A pistol permit or an eligibility
certificate shall not be issued to a person who failed to
complete a firearm safety course. A person may not obtain a
pistol permit or an eligibility certificate or possess a
handgun if the person is: convicted of a felony, any of 11
specified misdemeanors, or a serious juvenile offense;
discharged from custody within the preceding 20 years after
being found not guilty of a crime by reason of mental
disease; confined to a hospital for psychiatric disabilities
within the preceding 12 months by court order; subject to a
restraining, protective, or firearm seizure order; prohibited
by Federal law; an illegal alien; or under age 21. A firearm
may not be possessed by a person who has been convicted of a
felony, a serious juvenile offense, or a domestic violence
misdemeanor, is subject to a restraining, protective, or
firearm seizure order, or is prohibited by Federal law.

Restoration of rights  The Board of Pardons may restore the
right to possess a firearm or it may override a conviction.

Prohibited firearms  Assault weapons and sawed-off shotguns
are prohibited, with few exceptions.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who apply for a permit or receive a firearm, except
for a long gun transfer between unlicensed persons who are
not at a gun show. A person who becomes ineligible to possess
a firearm must transfer all firearms owned within 2 business
days and notify the Department of Public Safety of the
transfer. Firearms dealers must have a State permit for
retail sales of handguns.

Permits  An eligibility certificate or pistol permit is
required to purchase a handgun. Both documents are valid for
5 years, allow unlimited purchases, and will waive the long
gun waiting period. Carrying a handgun also requires a pistol
permit, with a 60-day permit issued by a local official
required as a prerequisite to receiving the 5-year permit
issued by the Connecticut State Police (CSP).

Background checks  CSP is a NICS point of contact and
conducts checks on applicants for pistol permits, eligibility
certificates, and firearm purchases. Applications are
approved or denied within 8 weeks for a pistol permit or 90
days for an eligibility certificate. Instant checks on buyers
are conducted by telephone (1-888-335-8438 in the State).

Waiting period  A 14-day waiting period, which begins when 
an application is filed, is required for a long gun transfer,
unless the buyer has a valid permit or qualifies for an
exemption.

Purchaser fees  A fee of $70 is charged to receive a 60-day
and a 5-year pistol permit. Eligibility certificates cost
$35. An additional $24 is charged to cover the FBI
fingerprinting fee for criminal history.

State data  Connecticut maintains fugitive, criminal history,
probation, parole, protective order, flagged domestic abuse
misdemeanor, involuntary commitment, and juvenile data.
Criminal histories may contain insanity dispositions or
commitments to a mental institution.

Check processing time  Sale checks are normally processed 
in less than 30 seconds if no eligibility questions arise,
within 1 minute if there is an eligibility question, or
within 3 days if further research is needed.

Retention of records  CSP maintains a database of valid
permits and keeps denied purchase applications for 5 years.
Data from approved NICS transactions are not retained.

Registration  Data on the sale, weapon, buyer, and seller are
recorded on a registration form for a handgun or long gun.
Machine guns are registered. A certificate of possession 
is required for an assault weapon legally owned prior to
10/1/93.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm purchase
may appeal to CSP. A denial or revocation of a pistol permit
or eligibility certificate may be appealed to the Board of
Firearm Permit Examiners.

Arrests of denied persons  Cases involving falsified
applications or attempts by prohibited persons to buy
firearms are referred to the Firearms Trafficking Unit.

2004/2005 legislation. Amendments incorporated Federal
restrictions into firearm possession and permits laws and
require the State to transmit prohibited person data to 
NICS.

Relevant laws  Connecticut General Statutes 29-27 et seq;
53-202 et seq; 53-217a et seq.

Source of information  Connecticut State Police, Special
Licensing and Firearms Unit (860) 685-8290.

Contact  Capt. Michael Guillot, Commanding Officer, Special
Licensing and Firearms Unit, 1111 Country Club Road,
Middletown, CT 06457, (860) 685-8290.

Delaware

FBI conducts NICS checks  
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  Delaware law prohibits purchase or
possession of a firearm by any person who is: convicted of 
a felony or crime of violence involving physical injury to
another; committed for a mental disorder to any hospital,
mental institution, or sanitarium; convicted for unlawful
use, possession, or sale of a narcotic, dangerous drug,
central nervous system depressant or stimulant, or controlled
substance; adjudicated delinquent for conduct which if
committed by an adult would constitute a felony; subject to a
protection from abuse order; or convicted of any misdemeanor
crime of domestic violence as defined by statute. It is
unlawful to transfer a firearm to a child under 18 years of
age without parental consent or to a person who intends to
commit certain crimes. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm
to or obtain a firearm on behalf of a prohibited person. A
handgun cannot be sold to a person under the age of 21 or to
an intoxicated person. A juvenile cannot possess a handgun
unless engaged in lawful activity under adult supervision.

Restoration of rights A convicted felon's right to own a
firearm may be restored through a Governor's pardon. A person
who committed a disqualifying misdemeanor may regain firearm
rights 5 years after conviction; those who committed
disqualifying juvenile offenses regain their rights at age
25.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to sell, transfer, buy, receive, or possess a sawed-off
shotgun or machine gun or any other firearm adaptable for 
use as a machine gun.

Regulated sales  Delaware law requires background checks on
persons who purchase a handgun or rifle from a licensed
dealer, but a shotgun purchase is exempt. Checks through a
licensed dealer are optional for private sales. A handgun
dealer is required to have a State license.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  State law requires that licensed dealers
call the Delaware State Police (DSP) for instant sales checks
by using a 1-800 number. DSP has a maximum of 3 days to
complete a check. A holder of a concealed handgun permit
issued by a county superior court is exempt from the check
required by State law. Delaware is not a point of contact 
for the NICS; dealers must contact the FBI for checks 
required by the Brady Act on handgun, rifle, and shotgun 
buyers.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  DSP does not charge a fee for an instant
check. A dealer may charge a fee not to exceed $20 per
criminal history check to process a private sale.

State data  Delaware maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation, parole, juvenile, mental health,
restraining order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor
data on a statewide network.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 6 minutes. Transactions requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 14
minutes.

Retention of records  DSP retains records of approved
transactions for 60 days and records of denied transactions
indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by DSP
may petition for amendment of errors in the record. A further
appeal may be filed in superior court. The superior court's
refusal to issue a concealed handgun permit may be appealed
to the State supreme court.

Arrests of denied persons  In cases involving falsified
applications, DSP informs the agency with jurisdiction over
the individual. When a person is denied because of an
outstanding warrant, the agency with jurisdiction over the
dealer is notified to apprehend the suspect.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Delaware Code 11-1441 et seq; 24-901 et seq.

Source of information  Delaware State Police.
Contact  Elizabeth Shamany, State Police Bureau of
Identification, P.O. Box 430, Dover, DE 19903, (302)
739-5872.

Florida

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Florida law prohibits a transfer of a
firearm to a person who: has been convicted of a felony, a
delinquent act that would be a felony if committed by an
adult and the offender is under 24 years of age, or a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence; had adjudication of
guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on any
felony or misdemeanor crime of domestic violence and 3 years
have not elapsed since the completion date of any court
provisions; has been indicted for a felony; is subject to a
protective order; has been arrested for a "dangerous crime"
or other enumerated offenses; or is a minor under the age 
of 18 and lacks permission of a parent or guardian. It is
illegal to acquire a firearm for the use of a prohibited
person. A firearm cannot be possessed by a person who is 
a minor, a felon, a delinquent, restrained by a domestic
violence injunction, a violent career criminal, mentally
incompetent, a drug addict, or a chronic alcoholic.

Restoration of rights  Florida allows a convicted felon's
right to own firearms to be restored through a pardon from
the jurisdiction where the felony conviction occurred. A
person convicted of a delinquent act that would be a felony
if committed by an adult can regain firearm rights when the
jurisdiction of the court expires.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions,
for any person to own or have care, custody, possession, or
control of a short-barreled rifle or shotgun or a machine gun
which is or may readily be made operable.

Regulated sales  Background checks are required for firearm
sales by licensed importers, manufacturers, and dealers.
Certain pawnshop redemptions are also subject to checks.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A
license is needed to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks  The Florida Department of Law Enforcement
(FDLE) is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts
instant checks required by Federal and State law. Checks on
firearms redeemed within 90 days of being pawned may be
conducted by the FBI; if a weapon is redeemed after 90 days,
the check is conducted by FDLE. If a purchaser is not
disapproved within 3 business days, the dealer must contact
FDLE before releasing the firearm.

Waiting period  Handgun purchases require a waiting period 
of 3 business days, beginning with the transfer of money or
other valuable consideration to the dealer, regardless of
when a background check is completed. Some counties extend
the waiting period by ordinance.

Purchaser fees  FDLE currently charges $5 for a check. The
maximum fee allowed by statute is $8.

State data  Florida maintains fugitive, criminal history,
restraining order, juvenile, probation, and parole data.
Criminal histories may contain domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions and findings of insanity or incompetent to stand
trial.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 4 minutes. Transactions requiring
additional research are normally processed in fewer than 
3 days.

Retention of records  Information on an approved transaction
is destroyed by FDLE within 2 days after the response to 
a licensee's request for a check. Information on denied
transactions is retained for 1 year on paper and 2 years 
in electronic format.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
appeal through the FDLE within 21 days of the non-approval
issuance. In order for FDLE to process the appeal after 21
days, a licensed firearm dealer must conduct another
background check. Alternatively, a denied person may request
the NICS to process an appeal after the 21 day period has
expired. 

Arrests of denied persons  A person with an outstanding
warrant is reported to agencies with jurisdiction over the
fugitive and the location of the dealer. All denied persons
are reported monthly to ATF, special agency personnel, and
local law enforcement by the Firearm Purchase Program.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Florida Statutes 790.001 et seq.

Source of information  Florida Department of Law Enforcement,
Firearm Purchase Program.

Contact  Martha Wright, Department of Law Enforcement, P.O.
Box 1489, Tallahassee, FL 32302, (850) 488-4931.

Georgia

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits receipt, possession,
or transfer of a firearm by a person who is on probation as 
a first offender or has been convicted of a felony in a court
of Georgia, any other State, the United States, or any
foreign nation. A person under the age of 18 may only possess
a handgun in certain circumstances, unless the person has
been convicted of a forcible offense or adjudicated
delinquent.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon may regain the right
to possess firearms if the person is granted a pardon and the
Pardon and Parole Board specifically restores possession
rights.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to possess a sawed-off shotgun, sawed-off rifle, or machine
gun.

Regulated sales  State law provides that all transfers or
purchases of firearms conducted by a licensed importer,
manufacturer, or dealer shall be subject to the NICS. A
resident of any State may purchase rifles and shotguns in
Georgia unless otherwise prohibited. A State license is
required for a dealer of handguns or short-barreled 
firearms.

Permits  Georgia does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit issued by a county probate court is
required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Georgia contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act and State law.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Georgia maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation, parole, flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor, and protective order data. Insanity,
incompetent to stand trial, and involuntary commitment
dispositions are contained in a database maintained by the
Georgia Bureau of Investigation and may also be included in
criminal histories.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  The statute that required the Georgia
Bureau of Investigation to conduct instant sales checks was
amended to provide that all transfers or purchases of
firearms conducted by a licensed importer, manufacturer, or
dealer shall be subject to the NICS. An amendment authorized
the Georgia Crime Information Center to provide criminal
history, wanted person, and involuntary hospitalization
records to the NICS. In addition, a holder of a Georgia
concealed handgun permit is no longer allowed to purchase a
firearm without a NICS check, pursuant to an ATF decision.

Relevant laws  Official Code of Georgia 16-11-101.1 et seq;
16-11-171; 16-11-172; 35-3-34; 43-16-2.

Source of information  Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Crime
Information Center.
Contact  Terry Gibbons, Bureau of Investigation Crime
Information Center, P.O. Box 370808, Decatur, GA 30037, 
(404) 244-2638.

Hawaii

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits ownership,
possession, or control of a firearm by a person who is: 
a fugitive from justice; indicted or bound over for or
convicted in Hawaii or elsewhere of a felony, a crime of
violence, or an illegal drug sale; addicted to drugs or
alcohol; acquitted of a crime on grounds of mental disease;
diagnosed as having significant behavioral, emotional, or
mental disorders; under 25 years old and adjudicated to have
committed certain crimes; or subject to a restraining order
that prohibits firearm possession. A U.S. citizen must be age
21or older to apply for a permit to acquire. Handgun permit
applicants must complete a hunter education or firearm safety
course. A long gun cannot be transferred to a person under
age 18.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon may possess a
firearm if the right to acquire firearms was specifically
restored by a Governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms  Since July 1, 1992, an assault pistol
cannot be brought into Hawaii and, if legally owned before
that date, can only be transferred to a licensed dealer or a
county chief of police. Possession, sale, or transfer of an
automatic firearm or a short barrel rifle or shotgun is
prohibited. It is unlawful to possess or sell a handgun made
of zinc alloy with a melting temperature of less than 800
degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales  Hawaii law requires a permit to acquire the
ownership of any firearm. A firearms dealer is required to
have a State license.

Permits  A permit to acquire, valid for 10 days, is required
for every purchase of a handgun. A permit to acquire, valid
for 1 year, is required for unlimited purchases of long guns.
A license is needed to carry a handgun. Certain aliens may
obtain a permit to acquire or use a firearm.

Background checks  Four police departments are points of
contact for the NICS and conduct checks required by Federal
and State law on applicants for permits to acquire handguns
or long guns. State law mandates that a permit application 
be approved or denied within 20 days. ATF allows permits to
acquire and licenses to carry to be used for purchases in
lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period  A 14-day waiting period, which begins when an
application is filed, must expire before a permit to acquire
may be issued, regardless of when a background check is
completed.

Purchaser fees  First-time permit applicants are charged $24
to subsidize the FBI fingerprint check.
State data  Hawaii's criminal justice information system
contains criminal histories, domestic violence misdemeanors
(flagged records), and some restraining orders. A wants and
warrants file is being developed. Criminal histories may
include an acquittal by reason of insanity or an involuntary
commitment to a mental institution. A State mental health
facility database is queried and files are manually reviewed
for names with a positive hit. Data may be obtained from a
private mental health agency if a permit applicant signs a
waiver or the agency receives State funding.

Check processing time  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records  Information on permit applications is
retained permanently.

Registration  All firearms acquired in Hawaii or brought 
into the State are required to be registered, except for 
certain antique or inoperable devices.

Appeals of denials  State law does not provide an appeal
procedure for permit denials.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Hawaii Revised Statutes 134-1 et seq.

Source of information  Hawaii Criminal Justice Data 
Center; Honolulu Police Department.

Contact  Liane Moriyama, Criminal Justice Data Center, 
465 South King Street, Room 101, Honolulu, HI 96813, 
(808) 587-3110.

Idaho

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Idaho law does not allow persons
convicted of certain felonies to ship, transport, possess, 
or receive firearms. It is unlawful for persons who were
previously convicted of these felonies (or comparable
offenses in other U.S. jurisdictions) to purchase, own,
possess, or have custody or control of any firearm, unless
the conviction was nullified by expungement, pardon, setting
aside the conviction, or restoration of civil rights. A
firearm cannot be sold to or possessed by a minor under the
age of 18 without the written consent of a parent or
guardian.

Restoration of rights  Some convicted felons regain firearm
rights upon completion of imprisonment, probation, or parole.
Other felons, except for those convicted of specified
offenses, may apply to the commission of pardons and parole
for restoration of firearm rights if 5 years have elapsed
after final discharge. The restoration laws apply to persons
who have been convicted of a felony and achieved final
discharge in Idaho or another State or jurisdiction.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Idaho unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit
is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Idaho contact the FBI
for all background checks required by the Brady Act. County
sheriffs conduct background checks on applicants for
concealed weapon permits. ATF allows a holder of a valid
concealed weapon permit to purchase a firearm without a new
NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data. Idaho maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history data on a statewide network, as well as 
a sex offender registry. Domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions are found within criminal history records 
and civil protection orders are entered into the NCIC 
protection order file.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law. A person who is denied a
concealed weapon permit may bring a civil action in the
county of application or Ada County.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  An amendment clarified that procedures
for restoration of Idaho firearm rights apply to persons who
have been convicted of a felony and achieved final discharge
in another State or jurisdiction.

Relevant laws  Idaho Code 18-310; 18-3302 et seq.

Source of information  Idaho State Police.

Contact  Dawn A. Peck, State Police Bureau of Criminal
Identification, 700 South Stratford, Meridian, ID 83642,
(208) 884-7136.

Illinois

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Firearm Owners Identification (FOID)
cards cannot be issued to persons who are prohibited by any
Illinois statute or Federal law. State law prohibits firearm
possession by a person who is: under 21 years of age and has
been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense
or adjudged delinquent; under 21 and lacks parental consent
to possess firearms; a convicted felon; a narcotics addict;
mentally ill or retarded; an illegal alien; subject to a
protective order; convicted of a firearm or domestic violence
offense; or adjudicated delinquent for an offense that would
be a felony if committed by an adult. It is illegal to make 
a straw purchase for a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights  A felon may regain firearm rights if
relief from an Illinois conviction is granted. A person who
committed a forcible felony must complete the sentence and 
20 years without additional violations before applying to 
the Circuit Court. A person who committed a non-forcible 
felony may apply to the Director of State Police.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to sell, manufacture,
purchase, possess, or carry a machine gun, a short-barreled
rifle or shotgun, or a firearm shaped like a wireless
telephone. A dealer cannot transfer a handgun made of zinc
alloy or other metal which will melt or deform at a
temperature of less than 800 degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales  A person who receives a firearm from a
licensed dealer or from an unlicensed person at a gun show
must display a valid FOID card and undergo a background
check. Private sellers must retain transaction records 
for 10 years. Long guns may be purchased in Illinois by 
residents of adjacent States and other nonresidents who 
meet certain requirements.

Permits  An Illinois resident must possess a valid FOID card
in order to buy a firearm or ammunition. The card is valid
for 5 years, with no limit on the number of firearms
purchased. State law does not provide for concealed firearm
permits.

Background checks  The Illinois State Police (ISP) is a point
of contact for the NICS and conducts checks required by
Federal and State law. Checks are conducted on applicants for
FOID cards, with a maximum of 30 days allowed to process an
application. The Firearm Transfer Inquiry Program (FTIP) Unit
of ISP conducts instant checks on persons who receive a
firearm at a licensed retail store or gun show. Sellers use 
a toll free number to request checks.

Waiting period  After a sale application is filed, the wait
is 24 hours for a long gun and 72 hours for a handgun,
regardless of when a check is completed.

Purchaser fees  ISP charges $5 for a FOID card and $2 for 
the FTIP inquiry at the time of a request from an Illinois 
FFL.

State data  A statewide network contains automated data on
fugitives, criminal history, and convictions. Other files
cover mental health, juveniles, protective orders, and
domestic violence convictions.

Check processing time  FTIP inquiries requiring limited
analysis are completed in less than 2 minutes. Inquires
requiring a more in-depth analysis are completed within 
3 business days, in accordance with the time frame of the 
Brady Act.

Retention of records  FOID applications are retained on
microfilm and FOID denial data is kept for 10 years. FTIP
denied transaction data is retained indefinitely. 

Registration  Firearms are registered by some local
governments, but not by the State.

Appeals of denials  A FOID card denial or revocation may 
be appealed to the director of State Police and further 
to circuit court (denials for certain reasons can only be
appealed to circuit court). The same procedure applies to 
a purchase denial because it results in a FOID revocation.

Arrests of denied persons  A person with an outstanding
warrant is reported by ISP to the agency with jurisdiction
over the fugitive. Denied persons are referred to a unit
within ISP which analyzes denial information and reports
significant violations to ATF.

2004/2005 legislation  A background check is now required 
on a person who receives a firearm at a gun show from an
unlicensed seller. Other amendments covered orders of
protection and persons who make a purchase without having 
a FOID card.

Relevant laws  Compiled Statutes 430:65/0.01 et seq;
720:5/24-1 et seq; 725:5/112A-14.5.

Source of information  Illinois State Police.

Contact  Lt. Richard Rodrick, Bureau Chief, Illinois State
Police, Firearms Services Bureau, 100 Iles Park Place,
Springfield, IL 62708, (217) 782-3310.

Indiana

FBI conducts NICS checks

State conducts separate checks
Prohibited persons  Indiana law prohibits a sale, gift, or
other transfer of a handgun or an assault weapon to a person
under 18 years of age, except in limited circumstances. It is
unlawful to sell, give, or in any manner transfer a handgun
to a person who is convicted of a felony, adjudicated a
delinquent child for an act that would be a felony if
committed by an adult, a drug abuser, an alcohol abuser, or
mentally incompetent. Further, it is unlawful to purchase a
handgun with the intent to transfer it to a person known to
be ineligible to receive it. A firearm cannot be possessed by
a person who is prohibited by a protective order, has been
convicted of a serious violent felony or domestic battery, or
is less than 18 years of age (except in limited
circumstances).

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess 
a handgun may be restored by post-conviction relief or a
Governor's pardon. A person who has been convicted of
domestic battery may petition the court for restoration of
firearm rights not earlier than 5 years after the date of
conviction. Persons who have been adjudicated delinquent 
can regain their rights at age 23.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to manufacture, cause to be manufactured, import, keep for
sale, offer or expose for sale, give, lend, or possess a
sawed-off shotgun, or to own or possess a machine gun.

Regulated sales  State law requires a background check on a
person who obtains a handgun license or buys a handgun from 
a licensed dealer. Residents of contiguous States may 
purchase long guns in Indiana unless otherwise prohibited. 
A retail dealer of handguns must have a State license. It 
is illegal to secure a loan by a mortgage, deposit, or 
pledge of a handgun.

Permits  Indiana does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A handgun license is required for personal
protection (concealed carry), hunting, and target 
shooting.

Background checks  The Indiana State Police (ISP) conducts
background checks on applicants for handgun licenses. A
person without a license who receives a handgun from a 
dealer must undergo a telephone instant check by ISP. After
receiving a dealer's request for a check, ISP has until the
end of the next business day to advise of a prohibition.
Indiana is not a point of contact for the NICS. Licensed
dealers in the State must contact the FBI for all checks
required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Fees charged  The ISP charges $3 for an instant check, $5 
for a hunting and target license, and $15 for a personal
protection license.

State data  The statewide network available for background
checks includes automated criminal history, wanted person,
protection order, and juvenile offender data. Domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions may be found in court
records.

Check processing time  No information is available.

Retention of records  Limited data on approved transactions
(buyer name, dealer and approval numbers, and transaction
date) may be retained by ISP for not more than 1 year; other
data on approvals may be retained for up to 30 days. Data on
denied transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration  Handguns are voluntarily registered in Indiana;
there are no State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a handgun by ISP
may appeal to that agency or to the agency with the
disqualifying record. A further appeal may be filed in
circuit court. A purchase denial by the FBI may be appealed
pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  ISP informs ATF of persons who
submit false information on a firearm application. A person
with an outstanding warrant is reported to the agency with
jurisdiction over the fugitive.

2004/2005 legislation  Amendments provide that a handgun
license may only be issued to a citizen or to a noncitizen
who is allowed by federal law to carry a firearm in the 
U.S. A person who is prohibited by court order from
possessing a handgun or has been convicted of a crime of
domestic violence (and no rights have been restored) may 
not obtain a license.

Relevant laws  Indiana Code 34-26-2-12; 35-47-1-1 et seq.

Source of information  Indiana State Police.

Contact  Lt. Jerry Berkey, Indiana State Police, Records
Division, Traffic Records Operations Manager, 100 N. Senate
Avenue—IGCN, Indianapolis, IN 46204, (317) 232-8263.

Iowa

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 

State requests handgun NICS checks
Prohibited persons  Applicants for permits to acquire pistols
and revolvers must meet all Federal requirements for
possessing firearms. Additionally, Iowa law prohibits issuing
a permit to a person who is less than 21 years of age, has
been convicted of a felony, is addicted to the use of alcohol
or a controlled substance, has a history of repeated acts of
violence, has been convicted of certain misdemeanor crimes of
assault, or has been adjudged mentally incompetent. A person
who is convicted of a felony or adjudicated delinquent for
conduct that would constitute a felony if committed by an
adult cannot possess or receive a firearm. It is illegal to
sell, loan, give, or make available a long gun to a person
below the age of 18 or a handgun to a person below the age of
21, except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  Iowa allows a convicted felon's right
to own a handgun to be restored through a pardon or a special
restoration of rights with firearms privileges.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to knowingly possess a machine gun, short-barreled rifle,
short-barreled shotgun, silenced firearm, or any part or
combination of parts designed or intended to be used to
convert any device into a prohibited firearm.

Regulated sales  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun
sales by licensed dealers, pawnshops, and unlicensed persons.

Permits  Iowa requires an annually renewed permit to acquire
pistols or revolvers, unless the purchaser holds a valid
permit to carry firearms. An unlimited number of handguns can
be purchased with either permit.

Background checks  Ninety-nine county sheriffs are partial
points of contact for the NICS, conducting checks of
applicants for permits to acquire or carry handguns. State
employees and nonresidents are checked by the Iowa Department
of Public Safety. Licensed dealers in Iowa contact the FBI
for checks on persons who purchase long guns or redeem a
firearm without a permit. ATF allows a holder of a valid
permit to acquire or carry to make a purchase without a new
NICS check.

Waiting period  An Iowa permit to acquire handguns becomes
valid 3 days after the date of application unless the
applicant is found to be disqualified.

Fees charged  There is no statutory fee for a permit to
acquire handguns. The statutory fee for a new permit to carry
weapons is $10 and a renewal is $5. Some sheriffs charge a
fee for processing a permit.

State data  Iowa maintains fully automated fugitive, criminal
history, protective order, and flagged domestic abuse
misdemeanor data on a statewide network. Checking agencies
also have access to some probation, parole, and juvenile
data. Insanity dispositions may be included in criminal
histories and some agencies check county court records to
obtain mental incompetence data.

Check processing time  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records  Sheriffs retain approved permits for
the remainder of the issuing year plus an additional 3 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a permit under
Iowa law can appeal to Iowa district court. A person who 
is denied under Federal law can appeal to the FBI's NICS 
Program Office.

Arrests of denied persons  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested by the checking agency in some cases.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Iowa Code 702.7; 724.1 et seq.

Source of information. Iowa Department of Public Safety.
Contact  Sam Knowles, Department of Public Safety, Wallace
State Office Building, Des Moines, IA 50319,(515)281-7663.

Kansas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  It is illegal to knowingly transfer a
firearm with a barrel less than 12 inches to a person under
18 years of age, or to knowingly transfer a firearm to a
person who is both addicted to and an unlawful user of a
controlled substance, or has been convicted of a felony
described in the criminal disposal of firearms statute. A
firearm cannot be possessed by a person who is both addicted
to and an unlawful user of a controlled substance, or has
been convicted of a felony or adjudicated as a juvenile
offender, under circumstances described in the criminal
possession of a firearm statute. A person less than 18 years
of age cannot knowingly possess a firearm with a barrel less
than 12 inches except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  The prohibition against possession 
of a firearm no longer applies if 5 years (or 10 years in
certain cases) have elapsed since the date of conviction for
a felony or release from imprisonment for a felony (whichever
date is later) or adjudication as a juvenile offender. Rights
are not restored to certain offenders who possessed a firearm
at the time of commission of the offense. An expungement or 
a pardon may also restore possession rights in certain cases.

Prohibited firearms  It is a criminal use of a weapon to
knowingly sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry a
shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches in length or any
other firearm designed to discharge or capable of discharging
automatically more than once by a single function of the
trigger. This prohibition does not apply to certain persons
and uses.

Regulated sales  Kansas law does not require background
checks on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States
are allowed to purchase long guns from a licensed importer,
manufacturer, dealer, or collector in Kansas unless otherwise
prohibited.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm.
State law does not provide for a permit to carry a concealed
firearm.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Kansas contact the FBI
for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  Kansas maintains criminal history, protection
from abuse order, juvenile offender, and offender
registration data on the statewide criminal justice
information system. Domestic violence misdemeanor 
convictions may be identified within criminal history by 
statutory citation.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by 
the FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  The prohibited weapons statute was
amended to allow an exception for the transportation or 
sale of such weapons to a laboratory certified by the 
U.S. Department of Justice.

Relevant laws  Kansas Statutes 21-4201 et seq.

Source of information  Kansas Bureau of Investigation.

Contact  David Sim, Bureau of Investigation, 1620 
Southwest Tyler, Topeka, KS 66612, (785) 296-8265.

Kentucky

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Kentucky law prohibits the possession,
manufacture, or transport of a firearm by a person who has
been convicted of a felony in any State or Federal court, and
by any youthful offender convicted of a felony offense under
the laws of Kentucky. No person shall knowingly sell or
transfer a firearm to any person prohibited from possessing
the firearm. A handgun cannot be possessed, manufactured, or
transported by a person under the age of 18 except in limited
circumstances. It is unlawful for any person to
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly provide a handgun to
a person under the age of 18, or for a parent or guardian to
provide a handgun to a juvenile child or ward in certain
circumstances.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess 
a firearm may be restored through a full pardon from the
Governor or the President, or through relief by the 
Secretary of the Treasury.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  Residents of States contiguous to the
Commonwealth of Kentucky may purchase rifles, shotguns, and
any other firearms which they are permitted to purchase under
federal law from properly licensed dealers, manufacturers,
importers, or collectors located in the Commonwealth. All
such sales shall conform to the requirements of Federal law,
the Kentucky Revised Statues, applicable local ordinances,
and the law of purchaser's State.

Permits  Kentucky does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm. A license is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Kentucky contact the
FBI for all background checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  Kentucky maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, and domestic violence restraining order
data on a statewide network. Misdemeanor convictions
involving domestic violence may be found in court records and
the Kentucky State Police criminal history repository. Review
of the specific facts underlying a conviction must be
undertaken to determine whether the offense in question
satisfies the criteria of "misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence" as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(33).

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI can appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  When a person subject to a
restraining order attempts to buy a firearm in violation 
of federal law, the Justice Cabinet must make a reasonable
effort to notify the petitioner of the order if a
notification request has been made.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Kentucky Revised Statutes 237.020 et seq;
431.064; 527.010 et seq.

Source of information  Kentucky State Police.

Contact  Joe West, State Police Support Services, 1250
Louisville Road, Frankfort, KY 40601, (502) 695-6205.

Louisiana

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Louisiana law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who has been convicted of certain State
felonies (or a similar offense in another jurisdiction),
unless the person has not been convicted of a felony for a
period of 10 years from the date of completion of sentence,
probation, parole, or suspension of sentence. It is a crime
to intentionally supply a felon with a firearm. A firearm
cannot be sold or otherwise delivered to a person under the
age of 18. It is unlawful for a person who has not attained
the age of 17 years to possess a handgun except in limited
circumstances. Ownership or possession of a firearm may be
prohibited under a misdemeanor sentence for domestic abuse
battery.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess 
a firearm may be restored in Louisiana through a Governor's
pardon or by certain law enforcement officers. Upon
completion of sentence, probation, parole, or suspension of
sentence, convicted felons may apply to the sheriff of their
parish of residence (or in Orleans parish, the superintendent
of police) for a permit to possess firearms.

Prohibited firearms  No person (with limited exceptions)
shall sell, keep or offer for sale, loan or give away,
purchase, possess, carry, or transport a machine gun.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Louisiana unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun. 
A person authorized by law to purchase a machine gun from a
manufacturer or merchant must present a permit.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Louisiana contact 
the FBI for all background checks required by the Brady 
Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  A fully automated statewide computer network
contains fugitive data and criminal histories that include
domestic violence offenses. A protective order registry is
maintained by the judicial administrator's office.
Documentation of services or treatment received at a public
mental health facility is available to the State Police for
concealed handgun permit checks.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  Machine guns, firearms with obliterated serial
numbers, short barrel rifles and shotguns, and certain
modified firearms are required to be registered.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  A new section makes it a crime to
intentionally supply a felon with a firearm.

Relevant laws  Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:35.3; 14:91;
14:95 et seq; 40:1379.3: 40:1751 et seq.

Source of information  Louisiana State Police.

Contact  Sgt. Randy Fandal, State Police Concealed Handgun
Section, P.O. Box 66375, Baton Rouge, LA 79896, (225)
925-4867.

Maine

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Maine law prohibits ownership, possession, 
or control of a firearm by a person who has: been convicted 
or found not criminally responsible by reason of mental 
disease or defect of committing a crime punishable by
imprisonment for 1 year or more, a crime in another State
that is similar to an offense punishable by imprisonment for
1 year or more in Maine, or a firearm or dangerous weapon
crime; engaged in conduct as a juvenile that if committed by
an adult would have been a disqualifying conviction; or is
subject to a domestic violence restraining order. An
individual may not transfer a handgun to a person under 18
years of age (except in limited circumstances) and a licensed
dealer may not sell or deliver a handgun to a person under 21
years of age. It is unlawful for a person other than a parent
or guardian to transfer a long gun to a person under 16 years
of age.

Restoration of rights  Firearm rights may be restored by a
court order or a Governor's pardon. A person convicted of a
disqualifying offense may apply to the Commissioner of Public
Safety for a permit to possess a nonconcealable firearm if 5
years have elapsed since the date of final discharge from the
sentence. The commissioner's decision may be appealed to
superior court. (This permit is limited to weapons such as
black powder guns that are not defined as firearms under
Federal law.)  Nonviolent juvenile offenders regain firearm
rights 3 years after completion of their dispositions or upon
reaching 18 years of age, whichever is later.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal for a person to possess a
machine gun, except for law enforcement or military personnel
in the discharge of official duties or if the machine gun is
possessed in accordance with the National Firearms Act.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits  Maine does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed firearm.
An offender whose rights have been restored may be issued a
possession permit but cannot carry a concealed firearm. This
permit does not authorize the holder to possess a weapon
defined as a firearm under federal law.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Maine contact the FBI
for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  State agencies maintain criminal history, 
fugitive, juvenile offense, domestic violence restraining 
order, and motor vehicle data. Criminal histories may contain
insanity and incompetent to stand trial dispositions.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  An issuing authority must make
permanent records of concealed firearms permits that are
issued.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.
2004/2005 legislation  A new section imposes a tax on firearm
and ammunition sales by licensed dealers for the purpose of
funding courthouse security.

Relevant laws  15 MRSA 393; 17-A MRSA 554A; 

17-A MRSA 554B; 17-A MRSA 1051; 25 MRSA 2001-2006.

Source of information  Maine State Police.

Contact  Sgt. William Gomane, Maine State Police Special
Investigations Unit, State House Station #164, Augusta, 
ME 04333, (207) 624-7212.

Maryland

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks 
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A "regulated firearm" (handgun or assault
weapon) cannot be transferred to or possessed by a person who
is: convicted of a crime of violence, a felony, or any common
law offense or misdemeanor that carries more than a 2-year
term of imprisonment; a fugitive; an habitual drunkard;
addicted to a controlled substance; mentally disordered as
defined in State law; under 21 years of age; less than 30
years of age and was adjudicated delinquent; or subject to a
protective order. In addition, it is illegal to transfer a
regulated firearm to a person who is visibly under the
influence of alcohol or drugs or a participant in a straw
purchase. A regulated firearm buyer is required to complete 
a safety training course. A long gun cannot be purchased by 
a person under the age of 18 or possessed by a person who
suffers from a mental disorder.

Restoration of rights  The right to own a firearm may be
restored by a Governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to possess or transfer an assault pistol on or after 7/1/94,
or to possess a short-barreled rifle or shotgun. Any type of
handgun that is not on the Maryland handgun roster may not 
be manufactured for sale in the State.

Regulated sales  Background checks are required on all
persons who buy a regulated firearm. A dealer is required to
have a Maryland regulated-firearms license. An unlicensed
person selling at a gun show must obtain a temporary transfer
permit, have a fixed display, and comply with the same
restrictions imposed upon licensed dealers. Regulated firearm
purchasers must have resided in Maryland for 90 days, and are
limited to one purchase every 30 days. Residents of adjacent
States may purchase long guns from licensed dealers in
Maryland unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
permit issued by the secretary of the Maryland State Police
(MSP) is required to carry a handgun.

Background checks  The Maryland State Police is a partial
point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on
regulated firearms buyers. Dealers transmit applications to
MSP by certified mail or fax. Private sales are processed
through dealers or MSP installations. Checks must be
completed within 7 days unless placed on hold because of a
criminal proceeding without a disposition. The FBI checks all
redemptions and sales of long guns not regulated by Maryland
law.

Waiting period  Transfers of regulated firearms require a
7-day waiting period that begins when an application is
forwarded, regardless of when a check is completed.

Purchaser fees  A $10 application fee is required.

State data  Maryland maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history files, plus restraining order, flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor, probation, and parole data.
Information on mentally ill persons who attempt to purchase
firearms is maintained when it is voluntarily provided by
family members or other persons.

Check processing time  Routine applications are processed in
about 5 days. Additional research is normally completed in
less than 1 month.

Retention of records  Permanent transaction records,
containing the caliber, make, model, serial number, and
special characteristics of each regulated firearm transferred
are maintained by MSP. Denied applications are retained
indefinitely.

Registration  Machine guns and assault pistols (owned before
7/1/94) must be registered.

Appeals of denials  A person denied a regulated firearm can
appeal to MSP and further to State court.

Arrests of denied persons  All denied persons are reported to
the MSP Firearms Enforcement Section.

2004/2005 legislation  An amendment provided penalties for
failure to surrender firearms to law enforcement while
subject to a protective order.

Relevant laws  Code of Maryland: Criminal Law Title 4; Public
Safety Title 5.

Source of information  Maryland State Police Licensing
Division, Firearms Registration Section.

Contact  Sgt. Frank Smith, Supervisor, Firearms Registration
Section, 7751 Washington Boulevard, Jessup, MD 20794, (410)
799-0191.

Massachusetts

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  A firearm identification card or license
to carry will not be issued to: a person who is convicted or
adjudicated a youthful offender or delinquent child in
Massachusetts, another State, or a federal jurisdiction for
commission of a felony, a misdemeanor punishable by more than
2 years imprisonment, a violent crime, or a weapon or drug
offense; or to a person who is mentally ill, a drug or
alcohol addict, under age, subject to a protection order, or
a wanted person. An identification card or a license cannot
be used to buy a firearm, rifle, or shotgun for the unlawful
use of another or for transfer to an unlicensed person. A
permit to purchase may be issued with restrictions to a
person who is not a minor if it appears that the purchase is
for a proper purpose.

Restoration of rights  A person who committed a disqualifying
adult or juvenile offense (except for certain offenses) may
possess a rifle or shotgun 5 years after completion of a
sentence or an adjudication without new violations, if this
right is fully restored in the jurisdiction where the
adjudication or conviction occurred. Addicted persons or
persons confined for mental illness may apply for restoration
if 5 years have elapsed after completion of treatment.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to possess a machine gun
(with limited exceptions) or a sawed-off shotgun. A firearm
cannot be sold if it does not meet certain manufacturing
standards or pass a firing test.

Regulated sales  A permit is required to receive a rifle,
shotgun, or "firearm" from a dealer or private person. Weapon
types are mainly distinguished by barrel length: rifles,
equal to or greater than 16 inches; shotguns, equal to or
greater than 18 inches; "firearms," less than 16 inches or
shotguns less than 18 inches. Firearms cannot be pawned. A
dealer must have a State license.

Permits  Two classes of licenses to carry allow, for 6 years,
possession of certain types of weapons: Class A, large
capacity firearms, rifles, and shotguns; Class B, non-large
capacity firearms, and large capacity rifles and shotguns. A
firearms identification card allows, for 6 years, possession
of rifles, shotguns, ammunition, and chemical mace or similar
substances. Certain firearm purchases require a permit that
is valid for 10 days. A machine gun permit may be issued to a
police instructor or a collector. Temporary licenses and
permits may be issued to nonresidents and aliens, with
certain restrictions.

Background checks  A new electronic system enables licensing
authorities to conduct criminal history fingerprint checks on
license and identification card applicants. Authorities not
yet on the system forward prints to the Massachusetts State
Police (MP), which conducts a check. MP informs a licensing
authority of check results within 30 days; the authority
renders a decision within 40 days from the date of
application. Dealers use the State system to verify a buyer's
eligibility; the FBI is contacted for all NICS checks.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  A $100 fee is charged for licenses to carry,
identification cards, and permits to purchase.
State data  The State maintains fully automated criminal
history, probation, parole, juvenile, domestic restraining
order, and fugitive data. Domestic assault and other violent
misdemeanors are found in criminal histories. Licensing
authorities contact the Department of Mental Health by phone
or e-mail. The State will notify the licensing authority of
any disqualifying events which may occur after the license is
issued.

Check processing time  No data are available.

Retention of records  Licensing authorities keep copies of
approved and denied applications indefinitely. Information 
on applicants is also maintained in the Firearms Record 
Bureau database.

Registration  Rifles, shotguns, and firearms purchased in
Massachusetts are registered. New residents have 60 days 
to register their firearms.

Appeals of denials  Identification card and license to carry
denials may be appealed to State district court.

Arrests of denied persons  An applicant who is denied a
license or identification card may be arrested if the person
has an outstanding warrant.

2004/2005 legislation  New laws set up a licensing review
board, kept an assault weapons ban in effect, and extended
the term of identification cards and licenses.

Relevant laws  Massachusetts General Laws, chapter 140,
section 121 et seq; chapter 269, section 10.

Source of information  Massachusetts Criminal History 
Systems Board.

Contact  Barry LaCroix, Criminal History Systems Board, 200
Arlington Street, Suite 2200, Chelsea, MA 02150, (617)
660-4704.

Michigan

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A license to purchase a handgun may not
be issued to a person subject to an order or disposition
pursuant to: involuntary hospitalization or alternative
treatment, legal incapacity, personal protection, stalking, a
restraining order, release subject to protective conditions,
or found not guilty by reason of insanity. A license may not
be issued to a person who is under 18, is not a U.S. citizen
or resident alien, is not a resident of Michigan, has a
pending felony charge, is prohibited from possessing, using,
or transporting a firearm due to certain types of felonies,
has been adjudged insane, is under an order of involuntarily
committed, or has been adjudged legally incapacitated. A
license may be denied if the licensing agency has probable
cause to believe that the applicant would be a threat to
himself or herself or to other individuals, or would commit
an offense with the pistol. An applicant must score 70% or
more on a pistol safety questionnaire. It is illegal to sell
a long gun to a person who is under 18 or has been indicted
for or convicted of a felony. A firearm cannot be possessed
by a person less than 18 who is not under the supervision of
an individual 18 or older.

Restoration of rights  State law allows persons convicted of
nonviolent or drug offenses to regain the right to own a
handgun 3 years after completion of their sentences. Violent
offenders may have their rights restored 5 years after
completion of a sentence, if approved by a county Concealed
Weapons Licensing Board, or upon appeal to circuit court.
Rights may also be restored if a conviction is expunged or
set aside or the offender is pardoned. However, current
Federal law does not recognize restoration by a licensing
board after July 1, 2001.

Prohibited firearms  A person shall not manufacture, sell,
offer for sale, or possess a machine gun or a short-barreled
shotgun or rifle, with limited exceptions.

Regulated sales  A person shall not purchase a handgun
without first having obtained a license. Handguns cannot be
pawned for resale. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Michigan unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A license (valid for 10 days) is required for every
purchase of a handgun unless the purchaser holds a license to
carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  Checks on applicants for handgun purchase
licenses are conducted by 595 sheriffs and police
departments, which are partial points of contact for the
NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Michigan must contact the
FBI for checks on sales and redemptions of long guns required
by the Brady Act. ATF allows a handgun purchase license (but
not a concealed carry license) to be used at the point of
sale in lieu of the NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Fully automated fugitive, criminal history,
restraining order, probation/parole, adjudicated mentally
defective, and juvenile (if reportable to the State) data are
available statewide. Criminal histories may contain insanity
dispositions. Flagged domestic violence misdemeanors may be
located through an automated pointer that requires manual
research. Some corrections data are also available.

Check processing time  Routine license applications are
normally processed by non-automated agencies in less than 1
hour and by automated agencies in less than 5 minutes.
Applications requiring additional research are normally
processed in less than 5 days.

Retention of records  State law requires that sheriffs and
police departments retain approved license applications for 6
years. Denied applications are kept at the discretion of the
licensing agencies.

Registration  Michigan requires registration of handguns.
Copies of the registration are retained by the registering
law enforcement agency and the Michigan State Police.

Appeals of denials  A person denied a handgun purchase or
concealed carry license may appeal to circuit court or
through NICS.

Arrests of denied persons  Persons with outstanding warrants
are arrested in some cases.

2004/2005 legislation  A new section requires use of the NICS
and ICE databases during permit checks.

Relevant laws  Michigan Compiled Laws 3.111 et seq; 28.421 et
seq; 750.222 et seq.

Source of information  Michigan State Police.

Contact  Katie Bower, State Police Criminal Justice
Information Center, 7150 Harris Drive, Lansing, MI 48913,
(517) 322-5518.

Minnesota

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  Minnesota law prohibits firearm
possession by certain persons who are under age 18, convicted
of or adjudicated delinquent for or charged with committing
crimes of violence, mentally ill, drug addicts, domestic
violence offenders, convicted of a crime punishable by
imprisonment for more than 1 year, fugitives, or illegal
aliens, or who have been dishonorably discharged from the
military or have renounced U.S. citizenship.

Restoration of rights  A person convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for committing a crime of violence cannot possess
a firearm unless the offender was discharged from a sentence
before August 1, 1993, firearm rights have been restored by
court order under 609.165.1(d), and no further conviction or
adjudication for another crime of violence has occurred. A
person convicted of a gross misdemeanor may regain firearm
rights if 3 years have expired since the date of conviction.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to own or possess a machine gun or short-barreled shotgun. A
"Saturday Night Special Pistol" cannot be sold by a licensed
dealer or manufactured or assembled by any person.

Regulated sales  A background check is required on a person
who attempts to obtain a permit or buy a handgun or an
assault weapon from a licensed dealer. Residents of
contiguous States may purchase long guns in Minnesota unless
otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A resident may obtain a transferee permit which is
valid for 1 year and allows unlimited purchases of handguns
and assault weapons. A permit to carry is required to possess
a concealed firearm and also constitutes a transferee permit.
In the alternative, a buyer may undergo a background check
for each purchase of an unlimited number of handguns or
assault weapons.

Background checks  Five-hundred sixty-eight sheriffs and
police departments conduct checks after receiving transferee
permit applications or transfer reports (on persons without
permits) from dealers. A permit shall be issued or denied
within 7 days of application. After a transfer report is
filed, a dealer may complete the transaction if a notice of
disqualification from the checking agency is not received
within 5 business days. In addition, dealers contact the FBI
for checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No person shall deliver a handgun or assault
weapon until 5 business days after the date the agreement to
transfer is delivered to a chief of police or sheriff. All or
part of the waiting period may be waived by the checking
agency because of a threat to the life of the transferee or a
member of the transferee's household.

Purchaser fees  There is no fee for a transferee permit or a
transfer report. A fee not to exceed $10 may be charged for a
check on a carry permit applicant.

State data  A statewide network maintains automated criminal
history, fugitive, juvenile, and order for protection data.
Domestic violence misdemeanors are identified in criminal
histories by the offense charge. Checking agencies call the
Department of Human Services for involuntary commitment data.
Criminal histories may contain incompetent to stand trial and
involuntary commitment dispositions.

Check processing time  Background checks are normally
completed in less than 5 days.

Retention of records  Copies of applications are retained at
the discretion of the checking agency. However, a sheriff or
chief of police will not maintain any record of an approved
transferee's identity if that person requests return of the
transfer report.

Registration  A report of ownership must be filed for a
machine gun or short-barreled shotgun.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a permit or
firearm may appeal to the district court.

Arrests of denied persons  A person who makes a false
statement on a permit or transfer application may be charged
with a gross misdemeanor.

2004/2005 legislation  After the concealed weapon permit law
was found unconstitutional, a new permit law was enacted and
made retroactive to April 28, 2003.

Relevant laws  Minnesota Statutes 609.165; 609.66 et seq;
624.71 et seq.

Source of information  Minnesota Department of Public Safety.

Contact  Robert Johnson, Dept. of Public Safety, Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension, 1430 Maryland Avenue East, St. Paul
MN, 55106, (651) 793-1012.

Mississippi

FBI conducts NICS checks 

Prohibited persons  Mississippi law makes it unlawful to
sell, give, or lend a firearm to a person whom the transferor
knows to be a minor under 18 years of age or intoxicated. A
person convicted of a felony under the laws of Mississippi,
any other State, or the United States cannot possess any
firearm. It is an act of delinquency for a person under the
age of 18 years to knowingly possess a handgun, except in
limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess 
a firearm can be restored by a Governor's pardon, Federal
relief, or a certificate of rehabilitation from the court of
conviction.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Mississippi contact
the FBI for all background checks required by the Brady Act.
The Mississippi Department of Public Safety conducts
background checks on applicants for concealed handgun
licenses. ATF allows a valid license issued to an individual
to be used for a purchase without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  There is no State waiting period to purchase
a firearm.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  Mississippi maintains an automated message switch
that allows local agencies to access the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and the Interstate Identification
Index (III). Arrest and disposition records on felonies and
misdemeanors are available online, along with fugitive from
justice information.

Check processing time  No statewide data are available.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied 
a concealed handgun license is retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law. A person who is denied a
concealed handgun license may appeal to the commissioner of
public safety and further to the circuit or county court.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  An amendment to the concealed handgun
statute provided that a license may not be issued if an
applicant is disqualified to possess or own a weapon based 
on Federal law.

Relevant laws  Mississippi Code 45-9-101; 97-37-1 et seq.

Source of information  Mississippi Department of Public
Safety. (Note: The Department of Public Safety is the agency
responsible for the issuance of individual firearm permits
and does not regulate the purchasing of firearms.)

Contact  James Gann, Department of Public Safety, Firearm
Permit Unit, P.O. Box 958, Jackson, MS 39205,(601)987-1586.

Missouri

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  Missouri law requires that an applicant
for a permit to acquire a concealable firearm (handgun) be at
least 21 years old (23 years old to obtain a concealed carry
permit), a U.S. citizen, and a State resident for at least 6
months. A permit cannot be issued to a person who: has pled
guilty to, been convicted of, is a fugitive from justice for,
or currently charged with a crime punishable by imprisonment
for a term exceeding 1 year under the laws of any State or
the U.S., or a weapons misdemeanor; has been dishonorably
discharged from U.S. armed forces; is publicly known to be
habitually intoxicated or drugged; is currently adjudged
mentally incompetent; has been committed to a mental health
facility; or has rendered a false statement on the
application. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a person
who is not entitled to possess it, is less than 18 years old
(without consent of the child's parent or guardian), or is
intoxicated. It is unlawful to receive a handgun without
obtaining a valid permit or to deliver a handgun to a person
who lacks a valid permit.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to own a
handgun may be restored through a Governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell
a machine gun or a short-barreled rifle or shotgun.

Regulated sales  Permit regulations pertain to all handgun
transfers by licensed dealers, pawnshops, and unlicensed
persons. Residents of contiguous States may purchase long
guns in Missouri unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  Missouri mandates a permit to acquire a concealable
firearm, which is valid for 30 days and may be used to
purchase one handgun. An endorsement issued by a county
sheriff is required to carry a concealed handgun. This
endorsement requires passing an approved firearms safety
training course.

Background checks  One-hundred fourteen county sheriffs and
the St. Louis County Police Department conduct background
checks on applicants for permits to acquire handguns. A
permit shall be issued or denied within 7 business days. The
State is not a point of contact for the NICS. Licensed
firearms dealers in Missouri contact the FBI for all checks
required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  A fee not to exceed $10 is charged for a
permit to acquire. A concealed carry permit has an initial
fee not to exceed $100 and is good for 3 years; the renewal
fee is not to exceed $50.

State data  Missouri maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, domestic violence restraining order,
probation, and parole data on a statewide computer network.

Criminal histories may contain flagged domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions and insanity dispositions.

Check processing time  No statewide information is 
available.

Retention of records  Sheriffs are required to keep a record
of all applications for permits to acquire and the actions
taken on applications, and to preserve all returned permits.
The permit statute does not specify a record retention
period.

Registration  Handguns are not registered by the State, but
are registered by county and municipal law enforcement
agencies.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a permit may
appeal to small claims court in the county where they reside
and the permit was requested.

Arrests of denied persons  An applicant may be arrested for
obtaining a permit upon a false representation.

2004/2005 legislation  An amendment allows county sheriffs to
use their revolving funds to cover the costs associated with
processing concealed carry permits.

Relevant laws  Missouri Revised Statutes 407.500, 407.505;
571.010 et seq.

Source of information  Missouri State Highway Patrol.

Contact  Timothy P. McGrail, State Highway Patrol, Criminal
Records and Identification Division, P.O. Box 9500, Jefferson
City, MO 65102, (573) 526-6160.

Montana

FBI conducts NICS checks
Prohibited persons  Montana law makes it unlawful for a
person to purposely or knowingly purchase or possess a
firearm after the person has been convicted of certain
felonies or an equivalent offense under the law of another
State or the United States. A minor child under the age 
of 14 years cannot carry or use firearms in public without 
adult supervision.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess 
a firearm may be restored by a Governor's pardon or upon
completion of the sentence, except for certain offenders 
who must apply to the district court for a permit to 
purchase and possess firearms.

Prohibited firearms  It is an offense, except under certain
circumstances, to possess a sawed-off rifle or a sawed-off
shotgun.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Montana unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A permit to purchase a firearm is only required for
certain offenders who must apply to the district court. A
permit is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Montana contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. County sheriffs
conduct background checks on applicants for concealed weapon
permits. ATF allows a holder of a valid concealed weapon
permit to purchase a firearm without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  Montana maintains fully automated fugitive and
criminal history data on a statewide network. Criminal
histories may contain flagged domestic violence misdemeanor
convictions and dispositions of acquitted by reason of mental
defect. State law requires entry of domestic violence
restraining orders into the NCIC protection order file. 

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed
weapon permit application may be appealed to a Montana
district court.

Arrests of denied persons  A person who is denied a concealed
weapon permit may be arrested if wanted in an outstanding
warrant.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Montana Code 45-8-301 et seq; 46-18-801.

Source of information  Montana Department of Justice.

Contact  Nancy Bloom, Department of Justice, CJIS Bureau, 
303 N. Roberts, P.O. Box 1417 Helena, MT 59620, (406) 
444-2802.

Nebraska

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A handgun transfer certificate cannot be
issued to a person who is under 21 years of age or whose
purchase or possession of a handgun would be in violation of
applicable Federal, State, or local law. It is unlawful to
knowingly and intentionally obtain a handgun for the purpose
of transferring it to a prohibited person. It is unlawful for
a handgun to be possessed by or transferred to a person under
the age of 18, except in limited circumstances. A person who
has previously been convicted of a felony in any United
States jurisdiction or is a fugitive from justice cannot
possess a firearm.

Restoration of rights  A person who was convicted of a felony
may possess a firearm if restoration of such rights is
included in a pardon.

Prohibited firearms  It is an offense, except under certain
circumstances, to possess a sawed-off rifle or a sawed-off
shotgun.

Regulated sales  A transfer certificate is required to
purchase, lease, rent, or receive a handgun from a licensed
dealer or an unlicensed person, with limited exceptions.

Permits  The transfer certificate needed to receive a handgun
is valid for up to 3 years and may be used for an unlimited
number of purchases. State law does not provide for concealed
firearm permits.

Background checks  Ninety-three county sheriffs and the
Lincoln and Omaha Police departments are partial points of
contact for the NICS. These agencies conduct checks required
by Federal and State law on applicants for handgun transfer
certificates. The application may be made in person or by
mail. State law allows a maximum period of 2 days to
investigate and decide on an application for a certificate.
Licensed firearms dealers in Nebraska contact the FBI for
checks on long gun purchasers required by the Brady Act. ATF
allows a handgun transfer certificate to be used in lieu of 
a NICS check at the point of sale.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  State agencies charge $5 for a background
check.

State data  Nebraska maintains a statewide network with
automated data on fugitives, criminal histories, domestic
violence restraining orders, probation, parole, and mental
health commitments. Criminal histories may contain flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor convictions.

Check processing time  Routine applications are normally
processed in less than 1 day. Applications requiring
additional research are normally processed in less than 2
days.

Retention of records  Approved and denied permit applications
are retained at the discretion of the checking agencies.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A denial or revocation of a handgun
transfer certificate may be appealed to the county court.

Arrests of denied persons  Persons who are denied handgun
transfer certificates because they submitted false
information or have an outstanding warrant are arrested in
some cases.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Nebraska Revised Statutes 28-1201 et seq;
69-2401 et seq.

Source of information  Nebraska State Patrol.

Contact  John Shelton, State Patrol, Communications 
Division, P.O. Box 94907, Lincoln, NE 68509, (402) 
479-4099.

Nevada

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Nevada law prohibits possession or
control of a firearm by a child under 18 years of age, except
in limited circumstances. It is illegal to recklessly or
knowingly sell or barter a handgun to a child who is under
age 18. A person shall not own, possess, or have custody or
control over any firearm if the person has been convicted of
a felony under the laws of Nevada, another State, or the
United States, or is a fugitive, an unlawful drug user or
addict, adjudicated mentally ill, committed to a mental
health facility, or illegally in the U.S. It is illegal to
knowingly transfer a firearm to a person who is under
indictment for or convicted of a felony, a fugitive,
adjudicated mentally ill, committed to a mental health
facility, or illegally in the U.S. A person on probation for
a gross misdemeanor conviction is prohibited from possessing
a firearm during the duration of probation.

Restoration of rights  Restoration may occur through a
Governor's pardon that does not restrict the right to bear
arms. If a pardon does not restore civil rights, the person
may apply to a board of pardon commissioners, whose decision
may be appealed to Nevada district court.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to knowingly or willfully
possess, manufacture, or dispose of a short-barreled rifle or
shotgun, with limited exceptions. A person shall not
manufacture or cause to be manufactured, or import into the
State, or keep, offer or expose for sale, or give, lend,
possess or use a machine gun, unless authorized by federal
law.

Regulated sales  Pursuant to an executive order of the
Governor, Nevada enforces the Brady Act's requirement of
background checks on firearm transfers by licensed dealers.
State law gives unlicensed sellers the option of requesting a
check on a purchaser from the Nevada Point-Of-Sale Firearms
Program. Residents of contiguous States (except California)
may purchase long guns in Nevada unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  State law does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit issued by a county sheriff is required 
to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks  The Department of Public Safety(DPS)is 
a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by the Brady Act. Licensed firearms dealers in
Nevada request instant checks by telephone. In addition, DPS
conducts checks requested by unlicensed sellers, which must
be completed within 3 business days.

Waiting period  No State requirements. Clark County requires
a 72 hour wait for first time handgun buyers.

Purchaser fees  The fee for a firearms background check is
$25.

State data  Nevada maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor, 
and protective order data on a statewide network. Mental 
health facilities may be contacted by DPS for data on 
mental illness prohibitions.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 3 minutes. Transactions requiring
additional research normally are processed in less than 3
days.

Retention of records  Identifying data from allowed NICS
transactions are purged within 24 hours. Data from denied
transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration  Firearms are not registered in Nevada except 
in Clark County.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
request reconsideration from the DPS Records and Technology
Bureau and/or the FBI. A person who is denied a concealed
firearm permit may file a petition in Nevada district court.

Arrests of denied persons  DPS notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information on purchase forms. When a person is
denied because of an outstanding warrant, DPS notifies the
agency with jurisdiction over the site of the transaction.

2004/2005 legislation  The statute that generally prohibits
possession of a short-barreled firearm was amended to allow
exceptions for a collector's item, curio, or relic. ATF
determined that a Nevada concealed handgun permit was no
longer an alternative to a NICS sale check as of 10/19/05
(however, ATF restored alternative status on 01/05/06).

Relevant laws  Nevada Revised Statutes 176A.860; 202.253 et
seq; 213.090.

Source of information  Department of Public Safety.

Contact  Bonnie McCabe, Department of Public Safety Records
and Technology Bureau, 808 West Nye Lane, Carson City, NV
89703, (775) 687-1600.

New Hampshire

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A firearm cannot be owned, possessed, or
controlled by a person who has been convicted of certain
felonies in any United States jurisdiction. No person shall
sell, deliver, or otherwise transfer a firearm to a person
who has been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony. It is
illegal to sell, barter, hire, lend, or give a handgun to a
minor (under age 18) except in limited circumstances. A
licensed dealer shall not sell handguns to nonresidents who
are prohibited in their States of residence. It is illegal 
to knowingly attempt to purchase a firearm while subject to 
a protective order.

Restoration of rights  A felon convicted in New Hampshire may
regain firearm rights through a full and unconditional pardon
by the Governor or an annulment of the conviction.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  New Hampshire law requires a retail seller
of handguns to obtain a license from the selectmen of a town
or the chief of police of a city. The State conducts
background checks on persons who purchase handguns from
licensed dealers.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit
is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The New Hampshire Department of Safety
(DOS) is a partial point of contact for the NICS, processing
background checks on persons who purchase or redeem handguns
from licensed dealers. An instant check may be requested by
way of a 1-800 number. A handgun transfer may proceed if the
dealer is not informed of a prohibition by DOS within 3 days.
In addition, licensed firearms dealers in New Hampshire
contact the FBI for checks on persons who purchase or redeem
long guns.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  New Hampshire maintains fugitive, criminal
history, restraining order, and flagged domestic violence
misdemeanor data on a statewide computer network. Criminal
histories may contain insanity and incompetent to stand 
trial dispositions.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes. Transactions requiring
additional research normally are processed in less than 4
hours.

Retention of records  State law requires destruction of
information on approved transactions within 24 hours after
approval (except for request dates and approval numbers,
which may be maintained indefinitely). Information on denied
transactions shall be retained for 3 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person denied a handgun by DOS may
appeal to that agency and further to superior court.

Arrests of denied persons  If an applicant submits false
information, DOS notifies ATF and agencies with jurisdiction
over the venue of the transaction and the person's residence.
In cases involving outstanding warrants, DOS notifies the
agency with jurisdiction over the fugitive.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  New Hampshire Revised Statutes, Chapters 159
and 159-D.

Source of information  New Hampshire State Police.

Contact  Joanne Leppard, Gunline Supervisor, Department of
Safety, State Police, 33 Hazen Drive, Concord, NH 03305,
(603) 271-6452.

New Jersey

State conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  A handgun permit or firearm identification 
card cannot be issued to a person who is convicted of a crime, 
drug dependent, confined for a mental disorder, an habitual 
drunkard, physically unable to handle firearms, found to have 
submitted false information, under age 18 (for an 
identification card) or 21 (for a permit), barred from firearm 
possession by court order, or adjudicated delinquent for 
firearm, weapon, explosive, or destructive device offenses or 
offenses enumerated in NJS 2C:43-7.2. Issuance of a permit must 
not contravene the interest of public health, safety, or welfare. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall acquire or possess a 
firearm except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms may be restored if the offender's criminal record is
expunged by the court.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions,
to possess, manufacture, cause to be manufactured, transport,
ship, sell, or dispose of a  sawed-off shotgun, machine gun,
or assault firearm.

Regulated sales  Permit regulations apply to all handgun
transfers, and an identification card is required to receive
a long gun. A firearm cannot be security for a loan. A dealer
must have a State license.

Permits  State law mandates a permit to purchase a handgun,
which is valid for 90 days and may be renewed for an
additional 90 days. A firearms purchaser identification card,
which is valid until revoked for a violation of law, is
required for unlimited long gun purchases. A permit is required 
to carry a handgun. A license issued by the superior court is 
required to purchase or possess a machine gun or an assault 
firearm.

Background checks  Applicants for permits and identification
cards are checked by 505 local police departments and the New
Jersey State Police (NJSP) for some unincorporated areas. If
no cause for denial exists, a permit or identification card
shall be granted within 30 days (45 days for a nonresident)
from the completion date of the investigation of the
applicant. In addition, NJSP is a point of contact for the
NICS and conducts all checks required by the Brady Act.
Licensed dealers call NJSP for instant checks on purchasers
who have obtained a permit or an identification card.

Waiting period  No handgun shall be delivered by a licensed
dealer unless a valid permit is exhibited and at least 7 days
have elapsed since the date of application for the permit.

Purchaser fees  The fingerprint fee is $54. Document fees are
$2 for a handgun permit and $5 for an identification card. An
assault firearm or machine gun license costs $75.

State data  New Jersey maintains fugitive, criminal history,
domestic violence restraining order, misdemeanor, juvenile,
and probation/parole data. NJSP's NICS unit accesses
Department of Mental Health data and local police may check
county mental illness records. Some mental health
dispositions may be included in criminal histories.

Check processing time  Permit and identification card
applications are normally processed in less than 1 month, 
or less than 6 months if additional research is needed.

Retention of records  Permit and identification card
applications are retained indefinitely by police departments.
NJSP purges identifying data from allowed NICS transactions
within 24 hours; denial data are retained indefinitely.

Registration  Handguns and assault firearms are registered.

Appeals of denials  A permit or identification card denial
may be appealed to the superior court for the county where
the application was filed, with notice to the issuing
authority. A purchase denial may be appealed to the NICS
unit.
Arrests of denied persons  Local police departments arrest
denied persons in some cases. NJSP's NICS Unit reports all
denied persons to the Firearms Investigation Unit. NCIC
felony warrants are reported to the fugitive unit; other
felony warrants are reported to local departments.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  New Jersey Statutes 2C:39-1 et seq; 2C:58-1 
et seq.

Source of information  New Jersey State Police.

Contact  S.M. Rowley / John O'Brien, Division of State
Police, P.O. Box 7068, West Trenton, NJ 08628, (609)
882-2000.

New Mexico

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  New Mexico makes it unlawful for a person
under the age of 19 to knowingly possess or transport a
handgun, except in limited circumstances. It is unlawful for
a firearm to be received, transported, or possessed by a
felon, defined as a person convicted of a felony offense by 
a court of the United States or of any State or political
subdivision thereof and less than ten years have passed since
the person completed a sentence or period of probation
(whichever is later) and the person has not been pardoned or
received a deferred sentence.

Restoration of rights  State law allows a convicted felon's
right to possess firearms to be restored by a Governor's
pardon or upon the expiration of 10 years after completion 
of a sentence or a period of probation without additional
violations.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  New Mexico law does not require background
checks on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States
may purchase firearms in New Mexico unless otherwise
prohibited.

Permit  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in New Mexico contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  New Mexico maintains criminal history, flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor, and juvenile data on a
statewide network. These files are partially automated, with
search requests made by teletype to the Department of Public
Safety. A domestic violence protection order database is
being developed.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  New Mexico Statutes 29-19-1 et seq; 30-7-1 et
seq.

Source of information  New Mexico Department of Public
Safety.

Contact  Paul V. Herrera, Department of Public Safety, Law
Enforcement Records Bureau, P.O. Box 1628, Santa Fe, NM
87504, (505) 827-9191.

New York

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  New York law prohibits issuing a license
to carry or possess a handgun to any person who is under 21,
is not of good moral character, has been convicted of a
felony or "serious offense," suffers from mental illness or
has been confined to any hospital or institution for mental
illness, has had a license revoked, is under a suspension or
ineligibility order, or did not complete a safety course and
test (Westchester County only), or concerning whom good cause
exists for denial. A long gun cannot be possessed by a person
who has been convicted of a felony or serious offense or
certified not suitable to possess a rifle or shotgun. A
person under 16 cannot possess a firearm except in limited
circumstances. It is unlawful to knowingly purchase a firearm
on behalf of a prohibited person.

Restoration of rights  Certificates of relief from disabilities 
and good conduct are issued at the discretion of the court of 
conviction or the Board of Parole. Even if relief from a 
firearms disability is granted, a licensing official may rely 
on the underlying conviction to deny a handgun license 
application.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to possess a short barrel
rifle or shotgun, a machine gun, a disguised gun, or an
assault weapon, with limited exceptions.

Regulated sales  Every person who receives a handgun must
have a license. A firearms dealer is required to have a New
York license. A NICS check through a dealer is required on
all persons who receive a firearm at a gun show.

Permits  Each handgun purchased requires a license, issued by
a designated county or city judicial or law enforcement
officer, which specifies conditions for possession and
carrying. A license is valid throughout the State, except 
in New York City, where additional rules of validity apply.
Licenses are valid until revoked but have a fixed duration 
in New York City (3 years) and in Nassau, Suffolk, and
Westchester counties (5 years). Purchasing additional
handguns requires a license amendment.

Background checks  Sheriffs and police departments conduct
checks of handgun license applicants on behalf of licensing
officers. Fingerprints of applicants are processed by the
Division of Criminal Justice Services and the FBI.
Applications must be acted upon within 6 months unless there
is good cause for delay. A NICS check is required for
amendments to non-expiring licenses unless a check on the
holder occurred during the preceding 5 years. Dealers contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act, and for gun
show transfer checks required by New York law. ATF allows a
license to be used for a purchase from a dealer without the
Brady check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  Handgun license fees vary by issuing
authority, but are at least $99, the cost of State and
Federal fingerprint processing.

State data  New York maintains criminal history, fugitive,
order of protection, and domestic violence misdemeanor data.
Limited mental health information is available from the New
York State Office of Mental Health, on patients and former
patients of State-operated mental health facilities. Criminal
histories may contain dispositions of incompetent to stand
trial or not responsible by reason of mental disease.

Check processing time  No statewide data available.

Retention of records  The State Police Pistol Permit Bureau
receives copies of approved license applications, renewals,
and amendments. Denied applications are retained at the
discretion of the licensing authorities.

Registration  Handguns are registered in New York.

Appeals of denials  State law does not provide an appeal
procedure for handgun license denials.

Arrests of denied persons  Persons denied a license are
arrested in some cases.

2004/2005 legislation  Amendments to the penal laws increased
the criminal penalties for persons who illegally possess or
sell multiple firearms.

Relevant laws  Penal Law articles 265 & 400; General Business
Law article 39-DD.

Source of information  New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services.
Contact  Gina L. Bianchi, Esq., Division of Criminal Justice
Services, 4 Tower Place, Albany, NY 12203, (518) 457-4181.

North Carolina

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  North Carolina law requires that an
applicant for a handgun purchase permit be of good moral
character and desire possession of the weapon for protection,
target shooting, collecting, or hunting. A permit may not be
issued to a person who is: under indictment for or convicted
of certain felonies; a fugitive; an unlawful user of drugs or
a drug addict; adjudicated mentally incompetent or committed
to a mental institution; an illegal alien; dishonorably
discharged from the armed forces; subject to a domestic
violence restraining order; or who has renounced U.S.
citizenship. It is illegal for a minor under the age of 18 
to possess a handgun and for a minor under the age of 12 
to possess any firearm, except in limited circumstances. 
A firearm cannot be purchased by a person who has been
restrained by a domestic violence order, convicted of a
felony, acquitted by reason of insanity, or determined to
lack the capacity to stand trial.

Restoration of rights  Firearm rights may be regained only 
if a conviction has been expunged or set aside (the person 
is not considered to have been convicted).

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful to manufacture, possess,
sell, purchase, or acquire a fully automatic firearm, a
short-barrel rifle or shotgun, or certain other firearms or
to manufacture, sell, give away, or possess machine guns,
sub-machine guns, or other like weapons, except in limited
circumstances.

Regulated sales  Handgun permit requirements apply to all
transfers by licensed dealers and unlicensed persons.

Permits  State law requires a permit, valid for 5 years, to
purchase a handgun unless the purchaser has a valid North
Carolina permit to carry a concealed handgun. A person who
may possess a machine gun is required to obtain a permit 
from the county sheriff.

Background checks  One hundred county sheriffs are partial
points of contact for the NICS and conduct checks on
applicants for permits to purchase or carry a handgun. State
law allows a sheriff 30 days to decide on a purchase permit
application. Licensed dealers in North Carolina contact the
FBI for checks on long gun sales and firearm redemptions. ATF
allows handgun purchase and carry permits to be used at the
point of sale in lieu of the NICS check. These permits can be
used to purchase multiple long guns, but only in a single
transaction.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  State law mandates a charge of $5 for
processing a purchase permit application.
State data  North Carolina maintains fully automated
fugitive, criminal history, probation, parole, flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor conviction, and motor vehicle
data on a statewide network. State law requires prompt entry
of all domestic violence orders into the NCIC protection
order file. Local mental health records may be accessed
manually by checking agencies.

Check processing time  No statewide information is available.

Retention of records  Identifying data from permit
transactions allowed by NICS are purged within 90 days.
County sheriffs destroy permits and licenses after 10 years;
other records are destroyed when their reference value ends.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  Handgun permit denials may be appealed to
the Chief District Court Judge for the district in which the
application is filed.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  Restrictions on the ownership or
possession of a handgun by a felon were made applicable to
any firearm without exception. A valid North Carolina
concealed handgun permit may now be used to purchase a pistol
without first obtaining a separate purchase permit.

Relevant laws  North Carolina General Statutes 14-269.7 et
seq; 14-402 et seq.

Source of information  North Carolina State Bureau of
Investigation; North Carolina Department of Justice.

Contact  Gene Melvin, Bureau of Investigation, 3320 Garner
Road, Raleigh, NC 27626, (919) 662-4509.

North Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  North Dakota law prohibits ownership,
possession, or control of a firearm for a period of 10 years
by a person who has been convicted anywhere of a felony
involving violence or intimidation, or for a period of 5
years by a person convicted of any other felony or a
misdemeanor involving violence or intimidation committed
while using a firearm or dangerous weapon. A person who was
diagnosed and confined or committed to a hospital or
institution in North Dakota or elsewhere as mentally ill or
mentally deficient is prohibited from purchasing, possessing,
or controlling a firearm except when the person has not
suffered from the disability for the previous 3 years. It is
illegal for a handgun or other firearm to be transferred if
the transferor knows or has reasonable cause to believe that
the transferee is a prohibited person. A handgun cannot be
possessed by or transferred to a person under the age of 18
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  A person who has been convicted of a
felony or a disqualifying misdemeanor will regain the right
to possess a firearm 5 or 10 years (depending on the type of
offense committed) after the date of conviction or the date
of release from incarceration or probation, whichever is
later.

Prohibited firearms  No person may possess, obtain, receive,
sell, or use a short-barreled rifle or shotgun, or purchase,
sell, have, or possess a machine gun or fully automatic
rifle, unless the person is within one of the limited
exceptions.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits  North Dakota does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm. A license is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in North Dakota contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. The North
Dakota Bureau of Criminal Investigation (BCI) conducts
background checks on applicants for concealed weapon
licenses. ATF allows a holder of a valid license to purchase
a firearm without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  North Dakota maintains partially automated
fugitive and criminal history data on a statewide network.
Court protection order data are also available. An automated
protection order system allows electronic entry of records by
courts.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied 
a concealed weapon license is retained for 6 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law. A denial of a concealed
weapon license may be appealed to North Dakota district
court.

Arrests of denied persons  BCI notifies other agencies of
concealed weapon license applicants who have outstanding
warrants.

2004/2005 legislation  The statute that regulated the
purchase of a rifle or shotgun by a North Dakota resident in
a contiguous State was repealed.

Relevant laws  North Dakota Century Code 62.1-01 et seq.

Source of information  North Dakota Office of the Attorney
General, Bureau of Criminal Investigation.

Contact  Judith Volk, Bureau of Criminal Investigation,  
P.O. Box 1054, Bismarck, ND 58502, (701) 328-5507.

Ohio

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  No person shall knowingly acquire, have,
carry, or use any firearm if the person is a fugitive from
justice; under indictment for or convicted of any felony
offense of violence; adjudicated as a delinquent child for an
offense that if committed by an adult would have been a
felony offense of violence; under indictment for or convicted
of any offense involving possession or sale of drugs;
adjudicated as a delinquent child for an offense that if
committed by an adult would have been an offense involving
possession or sale of drugs; drug dependent; a chronic
alcoholic; under adjudication of mental incompetence;
committed to a mental institution; subject to hospitalization
by court order; or an involuntary patient who is not
hospitalized only for observation. It is unlawful to transfer
a firearm to a prohibited person. A handgun cannot be
transferred to or purchased by a person under 21 years of
age. It is unlawful for any type of firearm to be transferred
to or purchased by a person under 18 years of age, except in
limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  A person convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for a felony offense of violence or a drug offense
may have firearm rights restored by a court of common pleas
if the person has been law abiding since completion of the
sentence or adjudication, and is not otherwise prohibited.

Prohibited firearms  No person shall knowingly acquire, have,
carry, or use any dangerous ordnance, which includes any
automatic or sawed-off firearm or zip-gun. Certain exceptions
are allowed.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearm purchasers. Residents of adjacent States may
purchase long guns in Ohio unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun. A person
who is qualified to acquire, possess, carry, or use any
automatic or sawed-off firearm or zip-gun must apply to the
sheriff of a county or safety director or police chief of a
municipality for a license or temporary permit.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Ohio contact the FBI
for all background checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Ohio maintains automated fugitive, criminal
history, domestic violence misdemeanor, probation, and parole
data on a statewide network. The bureau of criminal
identification and investigation maintains involuntary
commitment data that is accessed only during a check on 
a concealed handgun license applicant. Domestic violence
restraining order data is maintained by counties and 
entered into the NCIC protection order file.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by 
the FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Ohio Revised Code 2923.11 et seq.

Source of information  Ohio Office of the Attorney General,
Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.

Contact  Lonnie Rudasill, Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation, P.O. Box 365, London, OH 43140, (740)
845-2215.

Oklahoma

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Oklahoma law prohibits transfer of a
firearm to a person who is under 18 years of age (except in
limited circumstances), to any convicted felon or adjudicated
delinquent, or to any individual who is under the influence
of alcohol or drugs or is mentally or emotionally unbalanced
or disturbed. It is unlawful for a firearm to be possessed or
controlled by a person who is a convicted felon, adjudicated
as a delinquent child or a youthful offender, or subject to
Department of Corrections supervision, probation, parole, or
inmate status.

Restoration of rights  In Oklahoma a convicted felon's right
to possess a firearm may be restored if the person was
convicted of a non-violent felony, has received a full and
complete pardon from the proper authority, and has not been
convicted of any other felony offense which has not been
pardoned. An adjudicated delinquent regains the right to
possess a firearm when 10 years have elapsed since the
adjudication occurred.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to possess or control a
sawed-off shotgun or a sawed-off rifle, unless the firearm
has been registered pursuant to Federal law.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Oklahoma unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A permit
is required to carry a concealed handgun.
Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Oklahoma contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Oklahoma maintains fully automated criminal
history data on a statewide network. Domestic violence
misdemeanor convictions may be identified in criminal history
records by the title of the charging offense. Criminal
histories may include dismissals based on insanity or
hospital commitments. Involuntary commitment records are
searched by the Department of Mental Health during a check on
an applicant for a concealed handgun license. Fugitive
warrants and domestic violence restraining orders are entered
into NCIC files.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal under Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Oklahoma Statutes 21-1271.1 et seq.

Source of information  Oklahoma State Bureau of
Investigation.

Contact  Rusty Featherstone, Bureau of Investigation, 6600
North Harvey, Suite 300, Oklahoma City, OK 73116, (405)
879-2536.

Oregon

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Oregon law prohibits the knowing
possession of a firearm by a person who is under 18 years of
age, a juvenile offender, convicted of a felony, committed to
the Department of Human Services (DHS), or found to be
mentally ill and ordered not to purchase or possess a
firearm. It is unlawful to intentionally transfer a firearm
to a person who is under 18 years of age, convicted of a
felony, named in a felony arrest warrant, free on felony
pretrial release, committed to DHS, found to be mentally ill
and ordered not to purchase or possess a firearm, or
convicted within the previous 4 years of a misdemeanor
involving violence (assault in the 4th degree, menacing,
reckless endangering, or intimidation in the 2nd degree).
Further, it is unlawful to ship, transport, receive, sell, 
or otherwise furnish a firearm in furtherance of a felony.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess a
firearm may be restored by expungement or the passage of 15
years since completion of a sentence for a felony which did
not involve criminal homicide or the use of a weapon,
provided there is only one felony conviction on the person's
record. Other prohibited persons may petition a justice court
or circuit court for relief.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful to knowingly possess a
machine gun, short-barreled rifle, or short-barreled shotgun,
unless the firearm is registered as required under Federal
law.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase a firearm from a licensed dealer or at 
a gun show. A seller who is not subject to these requirements
may voluntarily request a background check on a purchaser.

Permits  Oregon does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A license is required to carry a concealed weapon.

Background checks  The Oregon State Police Firearms Unit is a
point of contact for the NICS and conducts all checks
required by Federal and State law. Licensed dealers call a
1-800 number for the Firearms Unit. Unlicensed sellers may
call the 1-800 number or complete a transfer through a
dealer. Queries are processed on the purchaser and the weapon
being sold; the caller is given a transaction number for an
approval or informed that the applicant is denied. An
approval number is valid for 24 hours on a private sale or 30
days on a dealer transfer.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  A fee of $10 is charged for a background
check by the Firearms Unit.

State data  Oregon maintains criminal history, flagged
domestic violence misdemeanor, fugitive, stolen gun,
restraining order, and juvenile data on a statewide computer
network. A DHS database contains mental illness and
commitment information.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes. Transactions that require
additional research are normally processed in less than 3
days.

Retention of records  The firearms unit retains records of
approved and denied transactions for 5 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
appeal to the State Police Identification Services Section.

Arrests of denied persons  For persons who submit false
information or have outstanding warrants, the Firearms Unit
notifies the agency with jurisdiction over the individual.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.
Relevant laws  Oregon Revised Statutes 166.170 et seq.

Source of information  Oregon State Police.

Contact  Marie Severson, State Police Firearms Unit, 3772
Portland Road NE, Salem, OR 97303, (503) 378-3070.

Pennsylvania

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits firearm possession by
a person who is convicted of an "enumerated offense" or an
equivalent offense in another jurisdiction, a fugitive from
justice, convicted of certain drug offenses or equivalent
offenses in other jurisdictions, convicted of three
alcohol-related driving offenses in a 5-year period,
adjudicated incompetent or involuntarily committed to a
mental institution, an illegal alien, subject to an active
protection from abuse order; adjudicated delinquent for
certain offenses, or under 18 (with limited exceptions).
State records that are prohibiting under Federal law include
all convictions for a felony, a misdemeanor 1, a misdemeanor
for which a person could have been sentenced to more than 2
years in prison, or a domestic violence misdemeanor
conviction as defined by the Lautenberg Amendment.

Restoration of rights  A prohibited person may apply to the
court of common pleas in their county of  principal residence
for relief from disability under certain conditions (but such
relief does not restore federal rights). A prohibition based
on juvenile records terminates 15 years after the last
applicable delinquent adjudication or upon the person
reaching the age of 30, whichever is earlier under certain
conditions.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal to sell or possess a
machine gun, a sawed-off shotgun with a barrel less than 18
inches, or a firearm made or adapted for concealment or
silent discharge, except when in compliance with the National
Firearms Act.

Regulated sales  Background checks are required on persons
who purchase any firearms from a licensed dealer and on all
private transfers of handguns except those between certain
related persons. A firearms dealer conducting any business in
Pennsylvania must have a State license. Private transfers of
long guns must comply with Federal law. Handguns cannot be
pawned.

Permits  A permit is not required to buy a firearm. A license
is required to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks  The Pennsylvania State Police (PSP) is a
NICS point of contact for checks on sales or redemptions
required by Federal and State law. State licensees contact
the Pennsylvania Instant Check System (PICS) by using a
toll-free number. On average, 57% of checks are handled
through automation and an Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
component. If a potentially prohibiting record is identified
or the buyer is not a State resident, the call is
automatically transferred to a staff operator.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  State law requires a fee of $2 for each
background check and a $3 surcharge for each taxable sale of
a firearm.

State data  A statewide network contains automated criminal
history, fugitive, protection order, probation, and parole
data. Mental health data supplied by county officials are
available to PICS staff only to enforce the State firearms
act. Updated records from research and denial challenges are
kept to eliminate duplicate research on future transactions.
A conviction determined to involve domestic violence is
flagged and record upgrades will incorporate flagging
routines.

Check processing time  Approximately 57% of calls are
approved automatically, averaging less than 1.5 minutes. An
additional 34% of calls are approved during the initial call
with the assistance of an operator. The remaining calls are
either denied on the initial call by the operator or placed
in research.

Retention of records  Information on the subject of a
background check is not retained by PICS upon approval of a
transaction. PICS retains records on denied persons for 6
months on paper (8 years if a challenge occurs) and 20 years
in electronic format.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied by PICS may file a
challenge with the PICS Challenge Unit. Subsequent appeals
may be filed with the State attorney general and commonwealth
court.

Arrests of denied persons  Notice of persons who submit false
purchase applications is given to local, State, and Federal
(ATF) authorities. If a fugitive is identified at the time of
purchase, the local agency with jurisdiction is notified
immediately.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Title 18,
Chapter 61 (Uniform Firearms Act).

Source of information  Pennsylvania State Police.

Contact  Lt. Joseph G. Elias, Director, Firearms Division,
Bureau of Records & Identification, 1800 Elmerton Ave.,
Harrisburg, PA 17110, (717) 783-5598.

Rhode Island

FBI conducts NICS checks
State conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  A firearm shall not be purchased or
possessed by a person who is convicted of a crime of violence
in Rhode Island or elsewhere, a fugitive from justice,
convicted of a domestic violence felony, in community
confinement or subject to electronic surveillance or
monitoring as a condition of parole, mentally incompetent, a
drug addict, an habitual drunkard, or an illegal alien. It is
unlawful to sell, transfer, give, or convey a firearm to a
person under 18 years of age without consent of a parent or
guardian. A person under 18 years of age cannot possess a
firearm except in limited circumstances. Handgun purchasers
must be 21 years of age and complete a firearm safety course.
It is unlawful to sell a handgun to a person under the age of
21 or to a person otherwise prohibited. A domestic abuse
protective order may prohibit a defendant from buying or
receiving firearms.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to own
firearms may be restored through a Governor's pardon.

Prohibited firearms  No person shall manufacture, sell,
purchase, or possess a machine gun, or possess or control a
sawed-off shotgun or sawed-off rifle unless the person is
within one of the limited exceptions.

Regulated sales  State law requires a background check on any
person who purchases a firearm. Any citizen of the United
States may purchase a long gun in Rhode Island unless
otherwise prohibited. A retail dealer of firearms must have 
a license from a city, town, or political subdivision of the
State.

Permits  Rhode Island does not require a permit to purchase
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.
A person under 18 years of age must have a permit to
participate in legal firearm activities.

Background checks  Thirty-nine local police departments
conduct checks on firearms purchasers required by Rhode
Island law. Sellers transmit purchase applications by
certified mail or in person to the police departments. If a
notice of denial is not received by the seller within 7 days,
a transfer can proceed. The State is not a point of contact
for the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Rhode Island
contact the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  A 7-day waiting period, which begins at noon
on the day after an application is filed, is required for all
firearm transfers, regardless of when a background check is
completed.

Purchaser fees  Fees are not mandated by State law but are at
the discretion of the police departments.

State data  Rhode Island maintains automated fugitive,
criminal history, probation, parole, restraining order, and
flagged domestic violence misdemeanor data on a statewide
network.

Check processing time  Background checks are normally
completed within 5 days.

Retention of records  The checking agency and the State
attorney general receive copies of each purchase application
and are required to retain approved and denied applications
for no more than 30 days. Original copies of applications
must be retained by sellers for 6 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  State law does not provide a procedure
for appealing a firearm denial. A person who is denied by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  Amendments allow a district or family
court to require a defendant, after a hearing and pursuant to
the issuance of a domestic abuse protective order, to
surrender possession of firearms and refrain from purchasing
or receiving firearms for the duration of the order.

Relevant laws  Rhode Island General Laws 8-8.1-3; 11-47-1 et
seq;15-15-3.

Source of information  Rhode Island Department of the
Attorney General.

Contact  William Devine, Department of the Attorney General,
Bureau of Criminal Investigation, 150 S. Main, Providence, 
RI 02903, (401) 274-4400.

South Carolina

FBI conducts NICS checks 

Prohibited persons  South Carolina law prohibits handgun
sales to or possession by any person who is convicted of a
crime of violence in any U.S. jurisdiction, a fugitive from
justice, an habitual drunkard, a drug addict, adjudicated
mentally incompetent, a member of a subversive organization,
under 21 years of age (with limited exceptions), or adjudged
unfit to carry or possess a pistol.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to own a
handgun may be restored if that person receives a pardon or
an expungement of the conviction, unless the offense
committed was a crime of violence.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions,
for a person to transport, store, keep, possess, sell, rent,
or give away a machine gun, military firearm, or sawed-off
shotgun or rifle. No licensed retail dealer may hold, store,
handle, sell, offer for sale, or otherwise possess a pistol
or other handgun with a die-cast, metal alloy frame or
receiver which melts at a temperature of less than 800
degrees Fahrenheit.

Regulated sales  Retail dealers of handguns must have a State
license. A person who buys a handgun from a licensed dealer
must be a South Carolina resident. A resident of any State
may purchase a long gun in South Carolina unless otherwise
prohibited.
Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. The
South Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED) issues
concealed handgun permits and special licenses required for
possession, transportation, or sale of machine guns.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in South Carolina contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. ATF allows
a concealed handgun permit issued by SLED to be used for a
purchase without a NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  South Carolina maintains fully automated
fugitive, criminal history, juvenile, and flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor data on a statewide network. Domestic
violence restraining orders with proper identifiers are
entered into the NCIC protection order file.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun permit is retained by SLED indefinitely.

Registration  Every person permitted to possess a machine
gun, sawed-off shotgun, or sawed-off rifle must register the
firearm with SLED.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A person who is
denied a concealed handgun permit may appeal to the Chief of
SLED or his designee and further to an administrative law
judge.

Arrests of denied persons  SLED notifies other agencies of
concealed handgun permits applicants who have outstanding
warrants.

2004/2005 legislation. Amendments deleted the requirement
that every pistol purchaser must complete a State application
and the requirement that a licensed firearms dealer must keep
a record of every pistol sold.

Relevant laws. South Carolina Code of Laws 16-23-10 et seq;
23-31-10 et seq.

Source of information  South Carolina Law Enforcement
Division.

Contact  Carlotta Stackhouse, Law Enforcement Division, 4400
Broad River Road, Columbia, SC 29221, (803) 896-7143.

South Dakota

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  South Dakota law prohibits possession or
control of a firearm by a person who has been convicted in
the State or elsewhere of a crime of violence or a felony
controlled substance or marijuana violation, or who has a
prior conviction for drug possession. No person who has been
convicted of a domestic violence misdemeanor may possess or
have control of a firearm for 1 year from the date of
conviction. A person under the age of 18 cannot knowingly
possess a handgun except in limited circumstances. It is
illegal to transfer a firearm to a known prohibited person or
to a person under the age of 18 if the transferor knows or
reasonably believes that the minor recipient intends to use
the firearm to commit a crime of violence.

Restoration of rights  The right to possess a firearm may be
restored through a Governor's pardon or the passage of time.
A person who was last discharged from prison, jail,
probation, or parole for a crime of violence or a felony
controlled substances or marijuana violation (except mere
possession) more than 15 years ago regains the right to
possess or control a firearm. The time period is 5 years for
felony possession of controlled substances or marijuana, and
1 year for a domestic violence misdemeanor. However, no
person convicted of a crime of violence may ever lawfully
purchase a pistol at retail.

Prohibited firearms  It is illegal, with limited exceptions,
to knowingly possess a controlled weapon, which includes a
machine gun or short shotgun.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. A State application is required to
purchase a pistol from a licensed dealer if the purchaser
does not have a permit to carry a concealed handgun.
Residents of other States may purchase long guns in South
Dakota unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm. A
permit is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in South Dakota contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  A licensed firearms dealer may not deliver a
handgun to a purchaser until 48 hours have elapsed from the
time of the sale, regardless of when a background check is
completed. Holders of valid, concealed handgun permits are
exempt from the waiting period.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  South Dakota maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor,
probation, parole, and protective order data on a statewide
network. Criminal histories may contain insanity or
incompetent to stand trial dispositions. A driver's history
file is available to check for additional data.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  A licensed firearms dealer who sells a
pistol shall within 6 hours send by first class mail or hand
deliver the completed application to the chief of police of
the municipality or the sheriff of the county of which the
purchaser is a resident. State law requires chiefs of police
and sheriffs to retain their copies of pistol applications
for a period of 1 year.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  New laws forbid a person who was
convicted of a domestic violence misdemeanor from possessing
a firearm for 1 year and prohibit registries of firearms
owners or concealed pistol permit holders. Amendments make
waiting period and application form statutes applicable only
to pistol sales by Federal firearm licensees.

Relevant laws  South Dakota Codified Laws, Chapters 22-14 and
23-7.

Source of information  South Dakota Attorney General's
Office.

Contact  Robert Grandpre, Attorney General's Office, Division
of Criminal Investigation, 1302 East Highway 14, Pierre, SD
57501, (605) 773-3331.

Tennessee

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Tennessee law prohibits the intentional,
knowing, or reckless sale, loan, or gift of a firearm to a
person who is a minor or intoxicated. A licensed dealer
cannot sell a firearm to a person who is convicted of
stalking, addicted to alcohol, or ineligible to receive a
firearm under 18 U.S.C. 922. A firearm transfer is denied if
the buyer was charged with a crime for which a conviction
would cause a prohibition under State or Federal law, and the
final disposition of the case has not occurred or is not
recorded. A handgun cannot be possessed by a person who is
convicted of a felony involving the use of force, violence,
or a deadly weapon, convicted of a felony drug offense, less
than 18 (with limited exceptions), or under the influence of
alcohol or any controlled substance.

Restoration of rights  Firearm rights may be regained by a
convicted felon who obtains a pardon, a set aside or an
expungement of the conviction, or restoration of civil rights
by a circuit court. A person convicted of a felony involving
use or attempted use of force, violence, or a deadly weapon,
or a felony drug offense cannot possess a handgun even if
civil rights have been restored.

Prohibited firearms  It is an offense to intentionally or
knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell 
a machine gun or short-barrel rifle or shotgun, except in
limited circumstances.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase a firearm. A
permit is required to carry a handgun.

Background checks  The Tennessee Bureau of Investigation
(TBI) is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all
checks required by Federal and State law. Licensed dealers
contact TBI by telephone or by internet via a secure server;
high volume dealers may also use computers with a
"point-of-sale device."

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  TBI may charge a reasonable fee, not to
exceed $10, for a background check.

State data  Tennessee's law enforcement communications
network maintains criminal history, fugitive, flagged
domestic abuse misdemeanor, restraining order, and sex
offender data. The Administrative Office of the Courts
forwards not guilty by reason of insanity dispositions to 
TBI for entry into criminal history records.

Check processing time  Transactions are normally processed 
in less than 5 minutes or in less than 1 day if additional
research is required.

Retention of records  Information on approved transactions 
is not retained by TBI, except for approval numbers and dates
assigned. Information on denied transactions is retained
indefinitely, but is destroyed if the decision is reversed 
on appeal.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who requests reconsideration of
a TBI denial is furnished a letter of instructions and an FBI
final disposition form, which must be filled out by the
arresting agency or clerk of the appropriate court and
returned to TBI. For a denial based upon an arrest with no
disposition recorded, TBI has 15 calendar days after the
applicant appeals to obtain the final disposition. If TBI
cannot obtain the disposition, the dealer is notified that
the transaction is a "conditional proceed," (neither denied
nor approved) and the dealer may lawfully transfer the
firearm.

Arrests of denied persons  TBI notifies ATF of persons who
submit false information on an application. For persons with
outstanding warrants, TBI notifies the agency with
jurisdiction over the dealer's premises and the agency which
entered the warrant.

2004/2005 legislation  An amendment prohibits licensed
firearms dealers from selling firearms to persons who have
been convicted of the offense of stalking.

Relevant laws  Tennessee Code 39-17-1301 et seq.

Source of information  Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.

Contact  Jeanne Broadwell, Bureau of Investigation, 901 R.S.
Gass Boulevard, Nashville, TN 37216, (615) 744-4208.

Texas

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Texas law prohibits possession of a
firearm by a person who has been convicted of any felony or a
Class A misdemeanor involving a member of the person's family
or household, and 5 years have not elapsed since the person's
release from confinement or supervision. A firearm cannot be
possessed by a person who is subject to certain protective
orders. It is unlawful to knowingly transfer a handgun to a
person who intends to use it unlawfully or in the commission
of an unlawful act, or is subject to an active protective
order. A firearm cannot be knowingly transferred to a person
who is younger than 18 years (without parental consent),
intoxicated, or a convicted felon.

Restoration of rights  A person who has been convicted of any
felony or a Class A misdemeanor involving a member of the
person's family or household may possess a firearm if 5 years
have elapsed since the person's release from confinement or
supervision. A convicted felon with restored rights may only
possess a firearm on the premises where the person lives.

Prohibited firearms  It is an offense to intentionally or
knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a
machine gun, a short-barrel rifle or shotgun, or a zip gun
except in limited circumstances.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits  No permit is required to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Texas contact the FBI
for all background checks required by the Brady Act. The
Texas Department of Public Safety conducts background checks
on applicants for concealed handgun licenses. ATF allows a
holder of a valid concealed handgun license to purchase a
firearm without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  Texas maintains fully automated fugitive,
criminal history, flagged domestic violence misdemeanor,
protective order, juvenile, probation, and parole data on a
statewide network. Court records are manually checked for
mental illness dispositions.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied a
concealed handgun license is retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A denial of a
concealed handgun license application may be appealed to
justice court.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.
2004/2005 legislation  Certain persons with deferred
adjudications more that 10 years old are no longer
disqualified from obtaining a concealed handgun license.
Renewed concealed handgun licenses were given a 5-year
duration and license requirements for nonresidents of Texas
were amended. The process for recognizing licenses from
another State was amended to require use of NCIC and III in 
a background check.

Relevant laws  Texas Penal Code 30.06; 42.12; 46.01 et seq;
Government Code, Chapter 411, Subchapter H.

Source of information  Texas Department of Public Safety.

Contact  Valerie Fulmer, Department of Public Safety,
Administration Division, P.O. Box 4087, Austin, TX 78773,
(512) 424-2092.

Utah

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  A firearm cannot be purchased,
transferred, or possessed by a Category 1 or Category 2
restricted person. A Category 1 restricted person has been
convicted of a violent felony, is on parole or probation for
a felony, is on parole from a secure facility, or has been
adjudicated delinquent within the past 10 years for an
offense which if committed by an adult would have been a
violent felony. A Category 2 restricted person has been
convicted of or is under indictment for a felony, has been
adjudicated delinquent within the past 7 years for an offense
which if committed by an adult would have been a felony, is
an unlawful user of a controlled substance, is in possession
of a dangerous weapon and a controlled substance, has been
found not guilty by reason of insanity or found mentally
incompetent to stand trial for a felony, has been adjudicated
mentally defective or committed to a mental institution, is
an illegal alien, has been dishonorably discharged from the
armed forces, or has renounced U.S. citizenship. A minor
under 18 cannot possess a handgun, sawed-off rifle or
shotgun, or automatic weapon except as provided by Federal
law. It is illegal to provide a firearm to a minor who is
prohibited or lacks parental consent.

Restoration of rights  The right to possess a firearm may be
restored if a conviction is expunged or otherwise removed
from the record.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers.

Permits  Utah does not require a permit to purchase 
firearms. A permit is required to carry a concealed 
firearm.

Background checks  The Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification
(BCI) is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts all
checks required by Federal and State law. Licensed firearms
dealers request instant checks by using a 1-800 number, a
regular telephone number, or a computer. Holders of concealed
firearm permits issued by BCI are exempt from point-of-sale
background checks under an ATF ruling and Utah law. BCI
verifies the validity of permits presented to dealers.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  BCI charges $7.50 for a background check.

State data  Utah maintains automated fugitive, criminal
history, flagged domestic abuse misdemeanor, restraining
order, adjudicated mentally defective, and motor vehicle 
data on a statewide network. Criminal histories may include
various mental health dispositions.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 5 minutes.

Retention of records  State law allows BCI to retain data on
approved transactions for a maximum period of 20 days. Dealer
numbers and transaction numbers and dates are maintained for
12 months. Data on denied transactions are retained
indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
appeal to BCI and further to the Commissioner of Public
Safety. An appeal may also be filed with the FBI or the State
that maintains the prohibitory record. A concealed firearm
permit denial may be appealed to a State of Utah review
board.

Arrests of denied persons  A person who submits false
information on an application or has an outstanding warrant
is reported by BCI to the agency with jurisdiction over the
location of the dealer. Federal offenders are reported to
ATF.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Utah Code 53-5-702 et seq; 76-10-501 et seq.

Source of information  Utah Bureau of Criminal
Identification.

Contact  Joyce Carter, Bureau of Criminal Identification,
4501 South 2700 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84119, (801)
965-3810.

Vermont

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Vermont law prohibits a person, firm, or
corporation, other than a parent or guardian, from selling 
or furnishing a firearm to a minor under the age of 16 years.
(An instructor or a teacher may furnish firearms to pupils
for instruction and drill.)  A handgun cannot be possessed 
or controlled by a child under the age of 16 years without 
the consent of a parent or guardian.

Restoration of rights  No State requirements.

Prohibited firearms  A person who possesses, sells, or 
offers for sale a zip gun shall be imprisoned or fined 
or both.

Regulated sales  Vermont does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers. Residents of contiguous States may
purchase long guns in Vermont unless otherwise prohibited.

Permits  State law does not require a permit to purchase a
firearm or to carry a concealed firearm.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Vermont contact the
FBI for all background checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  The State of Vermont maintains automated
information on criminal histories, fugitives from justice,
abuse prevention orders, probation, and parole. Domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions are flagged within criminal
history records. Insanity dispositions may also be included
in criminal histories.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  State agencies are not required to
retain any firearm transaction records. Firearm dealers are
required to retain sales records for 6 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Vermont Statutes 13-4001 et seq.

Source of information  Vermont Department of Public Safety;
Newport City Police Department.

Contact  J. Paul Duquette, Newport City Police Department,
222 Main Street, Newport, VT 05855, (802) 334-6733.

Virginia

State requests NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Virginia law prohibits: possession of a
firearm by a person who is acquitted of certain offenses by
reason of insanity; purchase or possession of a firearm by a
person who has been adjudicated incompetent or incapacitated,
or involuntarily committed; purchase of a firearm by a person
who is subject to a protective order; purchase of a handgun
by certain persons who have been convicted of two misdemeanor
drug offenses within 36 months; possession of a firearm by a
person who has been convicted of a felony or found guilty as
a juvenile of a delinquent act which would be a felony if
committed by an adult; possession of an assault firearm or
other firearm by a person who is not a U.S. citizen or
lawfully admitted for permanent residence; and possession of
a handgun or an assault firearm by a person under 18 years of
age.

Restoration of rights  The Governor may grant a pardon or
removal of political disabilities to a person who committed 
a felony or a delinquent act, and may condition reinstatement
of firearm rights. The circuit court may issue a permit to
carry a firearm to a person whose civil rights have been
restored.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful to possess a sawed-off
shotgun or rifle (except for limited purposes), or to sell,
transfer, or possess a plastic firearm or certain
semi-automatic shotguns.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase firearms from licensed dealers. Virginia
residents may purchase firearms upon proof of residency in
the State for at least 30 days. A person cannot purchase more
than one handgun in a 30-day period unless authorized by the
State Police or specifically exempted by State law.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase a firearm. A
permit issued by a circuit court is needed to carry a
concealed handgun. The Virginia State Police (VSP) is the
issuing agency for nonresident concealed handgun permits.

Background checks  VSP is a point of contact for the NICS and
conducts all checks required by Federal and State law. Some
dealers request instant checks by using a 1-800 number or the
mail to contact the Firearms Transaction Program. High-volume
dealers in the Direct Access Program use dial-in technology
to request checks.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  VSP charges $2 for a check on a Virginia
resident and $5 for a nonresident.

State data  Virginia maintains fully automated criminal
history, fugitive, juvenile, mental health, protective order,
flagged domestic violence misdemeanor, drug user, and
misdemeanor drug convictions data. A calendar file is
maintained for handgun purchases. Criminal histories may
include various mental health dispositions.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 2 minutes. Transactions that require
additional research are normally processed in less than 1
day.

Retention of records  Data on approved transactions may be
retained for no more than 30 days. Multiple handgun
transaction records and a log of requests (with purchaser
name, dealer and approval numbers, and date) may be
maintained for 12 months. Records of denied transactions are
retained for 2 years.

Registration  Machine guns are registered.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm may
request correction of a criminal history record or appeal to
the VSP, or institute a civil action within 30 days of such
denial.

Arrests of denied persons  VSP arrests all persons denied
because of an outstanding warrant and arrests persons who
submit false information in some cases. Using set criteria,
VSP, in conjunction with commonwealth attorneys, decides
which denied persons should be prosecuted under Virginia 
law.

2004/2005 legislation  Amendments covered restrictions on
noncitizens, exemptions to handgun purchase limits, record
checks, possession by persons adjudicated delinquent, and 
gun shows. Statutes that regulated interstate sales were
repealed.

Relevant laws  Code of Va. Title 18.2, Ch. 7, Art. 7.

Source of information  Virginia State Police.

Contact  Donna Tate, State Police Firearms Transaction
Center, P.O. Box 85608, Richmond, VA 23285-5608, (804)
674-2210.

Washington

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits ownership,
possession, or control of a firearm by a person who is
convicted, found not guilty by reason of insanity, or
adjudicated in juvenile court for a serious offense, felony,
or misdemeanor as specified by statute; involuntarily
committed for mental health treatment; under 18 years of age;
or free on bond or personal recognizance pending trial,
appeal, or sentencing for a serious offense. Offenders under
the supervision of the department of corrections shall not
own, use, or possess firearms. A person at least 18 but less
than 21 may possess a handgun only in certain places.
Children under 18 may possess certain firearms for events
such as hunting or trapping under a valid license, target
shooting or practicing at an established range, or an
organized competition.

Restoration of rights  Firearm possession rights may be
restored by a court of record or a Governor's pardon. A
person convicted of a felony or found not guilty by reason 
of insanity who has no prior violation and no subsequent
violation for any offense for 5 years (3 years if convicted
of a nonfelony offense) after completing a sentence may
petition the court of record. Certain offenders are not
eligible for restoration.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful, with limited exceptions,
for any person to manufacture, own, buy, sell, loan, furnish,
transport, or have in possession or under control any machine
gun, short-barreled shotgun, or short-barreled rifle.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.
Residents of other States may purchase long guns in
Washington unless otherwise prohibited. A firearms dealer 
is required to have State and Federal licenses.

Permits  A license is required to carry a concealed handgun.
An alien lawfully present in the U.S. must obtain a license
to possess or carry any firearm.

Background checks  Sheriffs and police departments are
partial points of contact for the NICS and request handgun
NICS checks for persons who do not possess a concealed pistol
license (CPL). Applications are received from dealers in
person, by fax, or by regular or certified mail. A handgun
may be delivered to the purchaser when the dealer is notified
of an approval or after 5 business days have elapsed. The
time allowed for a check may be extended up to 30 days when
an applicant's record lacks certain dispositions, or up to 60
days for a person who is a new Washington resident or lacks
required identification. The FBI conducts long gun NICS
checks, handgun checks when the person has a valid CPL, and
pawn redemption checks.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  None.

State data  A statewide network maintains automated fugitive,
criminal history, restraining order, and flagged domestic
violence misdemeanor data. Some juvenile data are also
available. Checking agencies receive Department of Social and
Health Services commitment data from the NICS Index Denied
Persons File and are instructed to check with local mental
health agencies by letter, telephone, or e-mail if necessary.
Criminal histories may include insanity or incompetent to
stand trial dispositions.

Check processing time  Background checks are completed in
less than 60 days.

Retention of records  Under State law a checking agency shall
retain or destroy handgun purchase applications in accord
with 18 U.S.C. 922. Identifying data from allowed NICS
transactions are purged within 24 hours. Denied applications
are retained indefinitely. The department of licensing may
keep copies or records of handgun purchase applications.

Dealers retain copies of applications for 6 years.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a handgun purchase
may appeal to superior court, directly to the FBI, or to
their local agency.

Arrests of denied persons  In cases of outstanding warrants,
checking agencies normally notify the agency with
jurisdiction over the fugitive.

2004/2005 legislation  Amendments made a verdict of not
guilty by reason of insanity the equivalent of a guilty
verdict for purposes of determining eligibility to possess 
a firearm and restoration of rights.

Relevant laws  WA. Revised Code 9.41.010 et seq.

Source of information  Washington State Patrol.

Contact  Ms. Mary Neff, Washington State Patrol Criminal
History Section, P.O. Box 42619, Olympia, WA 98504, (360)
570-5230.

West Virginia

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  West Virginia law prohibits possession of
a firearm by a person who is convicted in any court of a
crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year,
addicted to alcohol, an unlawful user of or addicted to any
controlled substance, adjudicated as a mental defective or
committed involuntarily to a mental institution, an illegal
alien, dishonorably discharged from the armed forces, subject
to a domestic violence protective order, convicted in any
court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence, or a minor
under the age of 18 (except in limited circumstances). It is
illegal to sell, rent, give, or lend a firearm to a
prohibited person.

Restoration of rights  State law provides that prohibited
persons may petition the circuit court of the county where
they reside for an order which allows firearm possession. The
court may enter an order if it finds such person capable of
exercising the responsibility concomitant with possession of
a firearm.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful for any person to carry,
transport, or possess any machine gun or submachine gun or
any other fully automatic weapon, except in compliance with
Federal law.

Regulated sales  West Virginia law does not require
background checks on firearms purchasers.
Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. 
A license is required to carry a concealed handgun.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in West Virginia contact
the FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  West Virginia maintains fully automated fugitive
and criminal history data on a statewide network. Domestic
violence misdemeanor convictions may be found within criminal
history records. A registry of domestic violence protective
orders is being developed.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  No State requirements.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law.

Arrests of denied persons  Not applicable.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  West Virginia Code 61-7-1 et seq.

Source of information  West Virginia State Police.

Contact  First Lieutenant Michael G. Corsaro, West Virginia
State Police, 725 Jefferson Road, South Charleston, WV 25309,
(304) 746-2170.

Wisconsin

FBI conducts long gun NICS checks
State requests handgun NICS checks

Prohibited persons  State law prohibits firearm possession by
or transfer to a person who has been convicted of a felony in
Wisconsin or of a similar crime elsewhere, adjudicated
delinquent for an act that would be a felony if committed by
an adult, found not guilty of a felony in Wisconsin or of a
similar offense in another jurisdiction by reason of mental
disease or defect, committed for treatment and ordered not to
possess a firearm, enjoined or ordered not to possess a
firearm under a domestic violence injunction, or is under 18
years of age (except in limited circumstances).

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to possess
firearms may be restored by a Governor's pardon or Federal
relief. A person who was adjudicated delinquent as a juvenile
(after April 1994) may regain firearm rights if the court
determines that the offender is not likely to act in a manner
dangerous to public safety.

Prohibited firearms  No person, with limited exceptions, may
sell, possess, use, or transport any machine gun or other
fully automatic weapon, or sell, offer to sell, transport,
purchase, or possess a short-barreled shotgun or
short-barreled rifle.

Regulated sales  State law requires background checks on
persons who purchase handguns from licensed dealers.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. State
law does not provide for concealed firearm permits.

Background checks  The Wisconsin Department of Justice (DOJ)
is a point of contact for the NICS and conducts checks on
handgun purchasers required by Federal and State law.
Licensed firearms dealers request instant checks by using a
1-800 number to contact DOJ. State law requires that a check
be completed before 48 hours have expired; however, the time
limit may be extended by 3 days for felony charges with no
recorded disposition. Dealers contact the FBI for checks
required by the Brady Act on persons who purchase a long gun
or redeem a pawned firearm.

Waiting period  A 48-hour waiting period is required for
handgun sales regardless of when a check is completed. The
waiting period begins when DOJ acknowledges receipt of
purchaser information from a dealer.

Purchaser fees  A fee of $8 is charged for a background
check.

State data  A statewide network maintains fully automated
fugitive, criminal history, juvenile, involuntary commitment,
restraining order, and flagged domestic violence misdemeanor
data. Probation and parole files are kept manually.

Check processing time  Routine transactions are normally
processed in less than 2 minutes. Transactions that require
additional research normally are processed in less than 1
day.

Retention of records  State law requires that DOJ destroy all
records from approved transactions within 30 days. Data from
denied transactions are retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a handgun may
appeal first to the DOJ Crime Information Bureau and then 
to the Administrator of the Division of Law Enforcement
Services. A further appeal may be filed in State court.

Arrests of denied persons  DOJ reports denied persons to 
ATF, the Wisconsin Department of Investigation, local police,
district attorneys, and the U.S. Attorney's Office.

2004/2005 legislation  No significant changes.

Relevant laws  Wisconsin Statutes 175.30; 175.35; 941.20 et
seq; 948.60.

Source of information  Wisconsin Department of Justice.

Contact  Mary Sturdevant, Department of Justice Criminal
Information Bureau, P.O. Box 2718, Madison, WI 53701, (608)
267-2776.

Wyoming

FBI conducts NICS checks

Prohibited persons  Wyoming law prohibits knowing possession
of a firearm by a person who has previously pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of committing or attempting to commit a
violent felony or a felony of causing bodily injury to a
peace officer and has not been pardoned.

Restoration of rights  A person convicted of a violent felony
may regain the right to possess a firearm through a
Governor's pardon. A person convicted of a misdemeanor may
seek a record expungement solely for the purpose of
restoration of federal firearm rights if 1 year has passed
since expiration of the sentence, the petitioner has not been
previously convicted of a misdemeanor that caused loss of
firearm rights, and the offense for which expungement is
sought did not involve the use of a firearm.

Prohibited firearms  None.

Regulated sales  State law does not require background checks
on firearms purchasers.

Permits  A permit is not required to purchase firearms. A
license is required to carry a concealed dangerous weapon.

Background checks  The State is not a point of contact for
the NICS. Licensed firearms dealers in Wyoming contact the
FBI for all checks required by the Brady Act. The Wyoming
Attorney General's Division of Criminal Investigation
conducts background checks on applicants for concealed weapon
licenses, after receiving applications from county sheriffs.
ATF allows a holder of a valid concealed weapon license to
purchase a firearm without a new NICS check.

Waiting period  No State requirements.

Purchaser fees  No State requirements.

State data  A statewide network maintains fully automated
records of criminal histories and fugitives who are wanted 
in felony or misdemeanor warrants. Misdemeanor convictions 
for domestic violence offenses are flagged within criminal
history records. Domestic violence restraining orders are
entered into State and NCIC protection order files.

Check processing time  Not applicable.

Retention of records  Information on persons who are denied 
a concealed weapon license is retained indefinitely.

Registration  No State requirements.

Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm by the
FBI may appeal pursuant to Federal law. A person who is
denied a concealed weapon license may submit additional
documents and request reconsideration by the Attorney
General.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  A new statute allows a person
convicted of a misdemeanor to seek expungement of the
conviction record solely for the purpose of restoration of
federal firearm rights, provided that 1 year has passed 
since expiration of the sentence, the petitioner has not been
previously convicted of a misdemeanor that caused loss of
firearm rights, and the offense for which expungement is
sought did not involve the use of a firearm.

Relevant laws  Wyoming Statutes 6-8-101 et seq; 7-13-1501.

Source of information  Wyoming Attorney General, Division of
Criminal Investigation.

Contact  James M. Wilson, Division of Criminal Investigation,
316 West 22nd Street, Cheyenne, WY 82002, (307) 777-7181.

American Samoa

Territory requests NICS checks and conducts separate 
checks

Prohibited persons  The Territory of American Samoa does not
allow handguns on the island. Police officers are not
required to carry firearms in the performance of their normal
duties. However, police officers are authorized by statute to
carry firearms, providing they have completed firearms
training and are certified by a competent authority. A
person's baggage is checked for firearms upon arrival.
Shotguns of various gauges and .22-caliber rifles are
allowed. It is unlawful to transfer a firearm to a person who
is prohibited from possession, less than 18 years old (except
in limited circumstances) or intoxicated. A firearm cannot be
possessed by a person who has been convicted of or confined
for a dangerous felony in the territory or elsewhere during
the preceding 5 years, or who is a fugitive from justice, an
habitual drunkard, a drug addict, or currently adjudged
mentally incompetent.

Restoration of rights  Restoration of firearm rights may be
given at the discretion of the attorney general or the
Department of Public Safety, upon review of an application.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful to knowingly possess,
manufacture, transport, repair, or sell a machine gun, a
short barreled rifle or shotgun, or any other firearm for
which a valid license from the commissioner of public safety
has not been obtained. (Exceptions to these prohibitions are
stated in the prohibited weapons statute.)

Regulated sales  Territorial licensing requirements apply to
all transfers of legal firearms.

Permits  A license is required to possess, import, or sell
firearms. Each license issued shall specify the number,
quantity, and description of the arms which may be possessed,
imported, or sold, or otherwise transferred. A license to
possess must be renewed every year and must be in the
licensee's possession when carrying such arms.

Background checks  The background checks required by American
Samoa law on purchasers of shotguns and .22-caliber rifles
are performed by the territorial police, after the owner
brings in the sales receipt and the weapon. The police
conduct the checks and issue licenses. The process includes
checking NCIC through the American Samoa Office of
Territorial and International Criminal Intelligence and Drug
Enforcement (OTICIDE), as well as checking with police
departments on neighboring islands. OTICIDE conducts NICS
checks for the territory.

Waiting period  No requirements.

Purchaser fees  A fee of $2 is charged by the police for
first time license applicants, and $2 is charged for renewal
of a license. The late registration fee is $2.

State data  Information is maintained manually.
Check processing time  No information is available.

Retention of records  License records are retained in
accordance with territorial statutes of limitation or as long
as a licensee is in possession of firearms.

Registration  Legal firearms are marked with such letters as
may be designated by the commissioner of public safety and
also marked with a number indicating the order of the license
and registration as specified in the license, unless the arm
has a plainly visible and distinctive serial number stamped
on it.

Appeals of denials  An appeal of a license denial may be
addressed to the attorney general.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  No information is available.

Relevant laws. American Samoa Code Annotated 46.4201 et seq.

Source of information  American Samoa Office of Territorial
and International Criminal Intelligence and Drug Enforcement
(OTICIDE).

Contact  Jacinta Brown, O.T.I.C.I.D.E., P.O. Box 4567, Pago
Pago, AS 96799, (684) 633-2827.

Guam

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  Guam law prohibits issuing a firearms
identification card to a person who is a convicted felon, not
a resident of the territory, adjudicated incompetent, subject
to a physical or mental disease which would adversely affect
the safe use of the firearm, under the age of 18 years old,
convicted of a drug offense, knowingly subject to a
restraining order from a current or former intimate partner,
under an indictment or information for any felony offense,
arrested for or convicted of a family violence offense,
arrested or convicted in any case where personal injury
resulted from the offense, or arrested for or convicted of
offenses where a firearm was an element or factor of the
offense.

Restoration of rights  A convicted felon's right to receive a
firearms identification card cannot be restored. A person
convicted of a misdemeanor where a firearm was an element or
factor of the offense or where personal injury resulted from
the offense may have rights restored 10 years from the
judgment date.

Prohibited firearms  The manufacture, possession, sale,
barter, trade, gift, transfer, or acquisition of any machine
guns, submachine guns, automatic guns, pre-banned and
post-banned weapons, or certain short firearms is prohibited.

Regulated sales  All transfers of lawful firearms, except for
temporary transfers at shooting galleries, require that the
person transferring or receiving the firearm holds a current
identification card. All weapons must have a safety
inspection by the Guam Police Department's Armory Section.
Both parties to a transfer must appear at the Armory and
Record and ID Sections to conduct a transfer.

Permits  A valid identification card is required to own,
possess, use, carry, acquire, or transfer any lawful firearm.
The permit is renewed tri-annually on the holder's birthday.

Background checks  The Guam Police Department (GPD)
fingerprints all applicants for a firearm identification
background check and submits the prints to the Superior Court
of Guam, which conducts the State Identifications Bureau
checks for the Territory. NICS checks for the Territory are
conducted by the FBI. Military personnel with top secret or
secret clearance have the option to waive fees by providing a
copy of their clearance. First-time applications and renewals
past 10 years require a check.

Waiting period  New applicants must wait until check results
are received by GPD (about 30 days). The waiting period is
waived for military personnel with a top secret or secret
clearance. Renewal applicants have no waiting period if they
do not have a criminal case or restraining order that
prevents renewal.

Purchaser fees  First-time applicants are charged $24 by the
Superior Court for the FBI background information fee. GPD
charges $10 for fingerprinting in order to obtain the
background information. When the application is approved, the
applicant is charged $15 for the identification card
(renewable every 3 years). There is a $20 fee for permanent
registration of each firearm.

State data  Guam agencies maintain fugitive, criminal
history, and mental health data.

Check processing time  For first time applicants, the
processing time is approximately 4 to 6 weeks.

Retention of records  GPD retains all identifications
indefinitely and all applications received since 1998 are
maintained indefinitely.

Registration  All weapons must be accompanied by either an
authorized gun dealer receipt, shipped household goods
declaration or a customs declaration sheet and an inspection
sheet from the GPD armorer prior to registering a weapon at
the GPD Records and ID Section. All transfers require a new
registration.

Appeals of denials  Territorial law does not provide a
procedure for appealing an identification denial. Judgments
from Superior Court or U.S. District Court of Guam may
reinstate the privilege to own a weapon.

Arrests of denied persons  A person in possession of a weapon
without a valid firearms identification card is in violation
of Guam law and may be arrested.

2004/2005 legislation  No information is available.

Relevant laws  10 G.C.A.,Chapter 60: Firearms.

Source of information  Guam Police Department.

Contact  John P. Rabon, Police Department Armory Section,
P.O. Box 23909, GMF, Bamgada, GU 96921, (671) 475-8497.

Puerto Rico

FBI conducts NICS checks
Commonwealth conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  The Superintendent of Police of Puerto
Rico shall not issue a license to have or possess firearms to
any person who has been convicted of any of the following
offenses or of the attempt to commit the same, in or outside
Puerto Rico: murder in any degree, manslaughter, kidnapping,
rape, mayhem, intent to commit any felony, aggravated assault
and battery with a weapon, robbery, burglary, misappropriation, 
aggravated misappropriation, arson, aggravated arson, or 
incest. In addition, a license cannot be issued to any person 
who is mentally unbalanced, an habitual drunkard, addicted to 
a controlled substance, or an alien, or who has been a citizen 
of the United States and renounced such citizenship, adjudicated 
as a mental defective by a court, or discharged from the armed 
forces under dishonorable conditions, or is under a court order 
prohibiting stalking, spying, threatening, or approaching an 
intimate partner or children of an intimate partner, or has a 
history of violence or aggravated mistreatment.

Restoration of rights  No regulations cover restoration of
rights.

Prohibited firearms  It is unlawful to sell or keep for sale,
or offer, give, lease or otherwise dispose of or transport
any automatic firearm, or to possess a machine gun, carbine,
rifle, sawed-off shotgun or any other modification of these,
or any other firearm that may be fired automatically.

Regulated sales  The Weapons Law establishes that no dealer
in firearms or ammunition shall deliver a firearm or issue
the corresponding delivery permit to a purchaser without the
latter producing a license to have and possess a firearm. No
weapon is sold to the holder of a license from which the
sales permit has been removed.

Permits  A license is required to purchase or carry a
firearm.

Background checks  License applications require background
checks conducted by the Police of Puerto Rico. Applications
are received by certified mail or in person. The commonwealth
is not a point of contact for the NICS. Federally-licensed
dealers contact the FBI for all checks required by the Brady
Act.

Waiting period  The waiting period for the license evaluation
process may be from 5 to 120 days.

Purchaser fees  Commonwealth law requires that every
application shall be accompanied by an internal voucher for
$100.

State data  The police department maintains an electronic
registry according to Art.2.01, Law 89 of August 26, 2005.
The Commonwealth has an automated criminal history
repository.

Check processing time  The background check process may take
from 4 months to more than 6 months.

Retention of records  Approved applications are retained by
the police for a maximum period of 130 days.

Registration  Every firearm sold is registered with the
Superintendent of Police.

Appeals of denials  A license denial may be appealed under
the uniform administrative procedures of the Commonwealth,
Art. 6.09, supra.

Arrests of denied persons  ATF is notified of persons who
submit false information on an application.

2004/2005 legislation  Laws amended: Art.2.15, Law 125 of May
31, 2004; Law 137 of June 3, 2004; Law 89 amended Art. 2.02.

Relevant laws  Laws of Puerto Rico 25-411 et seq; Law No. 54
of August 15, 1989; Law No. 284 of August 21, 1999; Law No.
404 of March 1, 2001; Law No. 177 of August 1, 2003.

Source of information  Puerto Rico Department of Justice.

Contact  Julio L. Rosa, Department of Justice, Criminal
Justice Information System, Statistical Analysis Center, P.O.
Box 9020192, San Juan, PR 00902-0192, (787) 457-9830, (787)
729-2121.

Virgin Islands

FBI conducts NICS checks
Territory conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  Virgin Islands law provides that a
license to have and possess a firearm cannot be issued to a
person who has been convicted in or outside the territory of
a crime of violence, a drug law violation, or a firearms law
violation, or is mentally incompetent, an habitual drunkard,
a drug addict, or deemed to be an improper person by the
police. A firearm cannot be sold or furnished to a minor
except in limited circumstances.

Restoration of rights  No information is available.

Prohibited firearms  It is an offense, unless otherwise
authorized by law, to have, possess, bear, transport, or
carry any machine gun or sawed-off shotgun.

Regulated sales  Licensing requirements apply to all firearm
sales.

Permits  A license is required to possess, transport, or
carry a firearm. A purchase coupon is issued to a license
applicant when the application is approved. The weapon
purchased is brought in to the firearms unit of the Virgin
Islands Police Department. Information about the weapon is
recorded and listed on the license issued to the applicant.

Background checks  License applications require a background
check by the Virgin Islands Police Department. The applicant
completes and returns a notarized application. If no problems
are found during the check, the information is forwarded to
the Police Commissioner, who approves or disapproves the
application. The territory is not a point of contact for the
NICS. Firearms dealers contact the FBI for sales checks
required by the Brady Act.

Waiting period  Firearm transfers require a 48-hour waiting
period, regardless of when a background check is completed.

Purchaser fees  The Virgin Islands charges a $5 application
fee, a $50 registration fee per weapon, and a $15 late
registration fee. The renewal fee is $30 per weapon. New
photographs are required with each renewal.

State data  The territory maintains manual criminal history
information.

Check processing time  No information is available.

Retention of records  No information is available.

Registration  After purchase, the bill of sale and the weapon
are brought to the police, who record all pertinent
information.
Appeals of denials  A person who is denied a firearm license
may appeal to territorial court.

Arrests of denied persons  No information is available.

2004/2005 legislation  No information is available.

Relevant laws  Virgin Islands Code 14-2253; 23-451 et seq.

Source of information  Virgin Islands Police Department.

Contact  Anthenia Brown, Police Department, Alexander
Farrelly Justice Complex, Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas, VI
00802, (340) 774-2211.

Washington, DC

FBI conducts NICS checks
District conducts separate checks

Prohibited persons  A registration certificate for a legal
firearm cannot be issued to a person who is under 18 years 
of age (those between the ages of 18 and 21 need a notarized
statement from a parent or guardian), convicted of or under
indictment for a crime of violence or a weapons offense,
convicted of an offense involving drugs, assaults, or
threats, acquitted by reason of insanity, adjudicated a
chronic alcoholic, committed to a mental hospital, suffering
from a physical defect and unable to use a firearm safely,
adjudicated negligent in a firearm mishap causing death or
serious injury, or otherwise ineligible under District law.
Registration applicants are required to demonstrate adequate
vision and pass a written test evidencing satisfactory
knowledge of district firearm laws.

Restoration of rights  Persons convicted of misdemeanor
offenses involving drugs, certain assaults, or threats, and
certain other prohibited persons may be allowed to register 
a firearm after a 5-year disqualification.

Prohibited firearms  A registration certificate shall not be
issued for a sawed-off shotgun, machine gun, short-barreled
rifle; or for a handgun not validly registered prior to
September 24, 1976. Handguns cannot be purchased, except by
law enforcement officers, retired District police officers,
military personnel, licensed dealers, and organizations
employing at least one commissioned special police officer.

Regulated sales  Private individuals may only sell or
transfer registered firearms and ammunition to a licensed
dealer in the District, and may only purchase long guns in
person from a licensed dealer. Delivery of a firearm to a
District resident will be withheld until a registration
certificate is issued by the Metropolitan Police Department.

Permits  A valid registration certificate is required for
possession or transfer of any firearm.

Background checks  The Chief of Police conducts background
checks and issues registration certificates. The District is
not a point of contact for the NICS. Licensed firearms
dealers contact the FBI for all checks required by the Brady
Act.

Waiting period  No requirements.

Purchaser fees  The fingerprint fee is $35 and the firearms
registration fee is $13.

State data  Criminal history records are partially automated
and include domestic violence misdemeanor convictions and
restraining order data. Mental health records are checked if
a registration applicant indicates a commitment.

Check processing time  A background check is processed in
approximately 6 to 8 weeks.

Retention of records  Indefinite.

Registration  All handguns owned prior to September 24, 1976,
were required to be registered on or before November 22,
1976. Long guns acquired after September 24, 1976, must also
be registered.

Appeals of denials  Registration denials and revocations may
be appealed to the Police Department. Evidence supporting
reconsideration must be submitted otherwise the denial or
revocation will be upheld. A police decision may be appealed
to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals. In the event of
a final unfavorable decision, the applicant or registrant
must lawfully dispose of the firearm.

Arrests of denied persons  A violation of the District's
firearms control act may result in a $1,000 fine or 1 year in
jail, or both.

2004/2005 legislation  No information is available.

Relevant laws  District of Columbia Code 2001, Title 7,
Chapter 25; Firearms Control Act of 1975.

Source of information  District of Columbia Metropolitan
Police Department; United States Attorney's Office.

Contact  Lt. Jon Shelton, Metropolitan Police Department
Registration Unit, P.O. Box 1606, Washington, D.C. 20013,
(202) 671-3159.

End of file
11/29/06 ih



























































                                   




