U.S. Department of Justice
Office Of justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. The full report in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sssor01.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may 
be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#statesors
----------------------------------------------------------

Devon Adams
BJS Program Manager

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: 
Alabama Responsible Agencies: Alabama 
Department of Public Safety (DPS) and Alabama 
Criminal Justice Information Center (ACJIC) 
(DPS maintains official record and photo 
and operates the notification program. ACJIC 
maintains all automated files--including 
criminal history files--and submits data to 
the FBI.)

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include:  rape (13A-6-61 
and 13A-6-62 - provided that a sentencing 
court may exempt from this article a juvenile 
or youthful offender criminal sex offender 
for a criminal sex offense as defined in
Section 13A-6-62(a)(1)); sodomy (13A-6-63 
and 13A-6-64); sexual torture (13A-6-65.1); 
sexual abuse in the first and second degree 
(13A-6-66 or 13A-6-67); enticing a child to 
enter a vehicle, room, house, office, or other 
place for immoral purposes (13A6-69); promoting 
prostitution in the first or second degree
(13A-12-111 and 13A-12-112); violation of the 
Alabama Child Pornography Act (13A-12-191, 13A-
12-192, 13A-12-196, or 13A-12-197); kidnaping 
of a minor, except by a parent, in the first 
or second degree (13A-6-43 or 13A-6-44); incest 
when the offender is an adult and the victim 
is a minor (13A-13-3); soliciting a child by 
computer for the purposes of committing a sexual
act and transmitting obscene material to a 
child by computer (13A-6-110 or 13A-6-111); any 
solicitation, attempt, or conspiracy to commit 
any of the above offenses listed and any crime 
committed in any State or a federal, military, 
Indian, or a foreign country jurisdiction, which, 
if it had been committed in Alabama would 
constitute an above covered offense.

Mandated Registrants:
Mandated registrants include all those convicted 
of a covered offense and released to the community 
on or after May 1996, plus those released earlier 
but moving to a new address after May 1996 (and 
thus being required to register for change of 
address).

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
3,338 in community notification registry

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries
     
Extent of database automation:     
Partial.  Operation of the database(s) is automated,
as is some transmission.  Most data entry, however, is
manual. The Alabama Department of Public Safety (DPS)
maintains the "official record" and photo of each sex
offender and operates the notification program at the
State level.  The Alabama Criminal Justice Information
Center (ACJIC) maintains the automated files used for
dissemination, submits data to the FBI, and maintains
the State's criminal history files.
     
Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.   ACJIC flags the criminal history files of
registered offenders and identifies sex offenders 
on routine ACJIC/NCIC "person inquiries."

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
No. 

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints: 
Yes. Alabama Department of Public Safety houses 
the State's AFIS, so it has electronic storage 
and transmission capability for fingerprints.    
     
SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots: 
No. As of 2/01, AJCIC could not store or transmit
mugshots through its automated system.  Polaroid
snapshots were maintained by the Department of 
Public Safety, and used for flyers or faxed for
identification purposes. 

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Sources of Initial Information on Offender:
For offenders who are being released from Alabama
prisons, the Department of Corrections (DOC) sends 
an electronic record on the offender and his intended
address to the Alabama Criminal Justice Information
Center (ACJIC).  The DOC also sends the offender's
photo to the Alabama Bureau of Investigation (ABI),
the responsible entity within DPS. ACJIC electronically 
notifies both the local law enforcement agency and 
the district attorney in the jurisdiction where the 
offender plans to reside of the offender's release 
date.  When the offender registers locally, the local 
law enforcement agency sends paper copies
(and fingerprint cards if the offender is moving in
from out-of-state) to ABI and ACJIC.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  Department of Public Safety (DPS) reports that 
a DNA sample is taken from registered sex offenders
"when they can get it."

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. DPS sends each offender an annual letter on his
birthday, saying he must go to the local sheriff's
office in person and validate his address or
reregister. Letters sent marked "Not to Be Forwarded"
and the offender's local sheriff also is notified.  If
an offender moves, he must notify the local sheriff at
both his old and new location 30 days in advance of
the move; the sheriff then notifies DPS.  Offenders
moving out-of-state must notify their local sheriff;
the sheriff then notifies DPS, and DPS notifies the
receiving State.

B.  SOR Notification is Automated:
No.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
All violations are a Class C felony, punishable by a 1
to 5 year prison sentence.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
All Alabama law enforcement or criminal justice
agencies with access to criminal history information
have access to sex offenders information through the
Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center (ACJIC). 
For sexual offenders qualifying for community
notification, the Alabama Department of Public Safety
(DPS) sends a "flier" containing a photo and detailed
information on the offender to the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides. The
local agency duplicates the flier and mails it to
everyone within a specified geographic area.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
As of 2/01, the Alabama SOR has no specified
procedures for affirmative notification to schools or
organizations other than the community notification
requirements outlined in the following section. 

Procedures for Public Access:
When an offender qualifies for community notification
(those convicted of rape, sodomy, sexual torture,
sexual abuse, child sexual abuse and incest, when
victim under 18 and offender over 20), fliers with the
offender's photo are mailed to everyone living within
1,000ft. of his home (in cities), 1,500ft. in towns,
and 2,000ft. in rural areas.  Citizens also may review
fliers at local law enforcement agencies.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable) An Internet website for
the sex offender registry can be found at:
http://www.gsiweb.net/index.html   

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Alaska
Responsible Agency: Alaska State Troopers

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The term "sex offense" was changed to include
solicitation, or conspiracy to commit a covered
offense. Covered offenses are sexual assault in the
first, second, or third degree; sexual abuse of a
minor in the first, second or third degree; incest;
unlawful exploitation of a minor; child pornography;
distribution of child pornography; promoting
prostitution in the first degree; kidnaping a victim
under the age of 18 (including attempt, solicitation,
or conspiracy); sexual abuse of a minor in the 4th
degree if: (1) the offender is 18 years of age or
older, (2) the offender engages in sexual contact with
the person, (3) the person is 16 or 17 years of age
and at least 3 years younger than the offender, (4)
the offender occupies a position of authority over the
person; promoting prostitution in the third degree if:
the person who was induced or caused to engage in
prostitution was 16 or 17 years of age at the time of
the offense; indecent exposure in the first degree;
indecent exposure in the second degree if the indecent
exposure is before a person under the age of 16 and
the offender has a previous conviction for that
offense; and the former Alaska law to assault with the
intent to commit rape under former Alaska Statute
11.51.160 (assault with the intent to commit murder,
rape or mayhem). 

Mandated Registrants:
A sex offender or child kidnaper, who is physically
present in the State, shall register.  The sex
offender or child kidnaper shall register (1) for 15
years annually during the term of duty to register and
ends 15 years following the sex offender's or child
kidnaper's unconditional discharge from a conviction
for a single sex offense that is not an aggravated sex
offense or for a single child kidnaping if the sex
offender or child kidnaper has supplied proof that is
acceptable to the department of the unconditional
discharge; (2) for life for those convicted of (a) one
aggravated sex offense; or (b) two or more sex
offenses, two or more child kidnapings, or one sex
offense and one child kidnaping.  Lifetime registrants
must report quarterly.

Duration of Registration:
Offenders convicted of one single conviction for
sexual abuse of a minor in the first degree or sexual
assault in the first degree are added to the list of
offenders required to register for life.  (Sexual
assault in the first and sexual abuse of a minor in
the first degree are classified as "aggravated sex
offenses".)

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,107 in total. Alaska maintains nine categories of
persons required registering.  The categories, and the
number of individuals in each as of 3/2001, are as
follows: (1) Registered sex offenders (formally and
properly registered sexual offenders) 2,256; (2)
Registered sex offenders not in compliance (those
formally registered, but not compliant with their
annual or quarterly verification requirements) 287;
(3) Never registered (offenders reported to be
required to register, but who have never done so)  
223; (4) In jail (a category of sex offenders who are
required to register, but who are in jail in Alaska,
although not necessarily for a sex offense) 724; (5)
Out of state (sex offenders who are required to
register, but who are reported to be out-of-state)  
509; (6) Unknown (sex offenders who are reported to be
required to register and an investigation has been
conducted to locate them with negative results; (7)
Interim (registered sex offenders who have registered
or provided annual or quarterly written verification
but the registration form has not been received by the
Sex Offender Central Registry Office); (8) Anticipated
(sex offenders registered in other States who are
reported to be coming to Alaska); and (9) Moving
(registered sex offenders who have reported they are
moving out of Alaska). In addition to sex offenders
being in these categories, the status of offenders who
have been identified as child kidnapers will be added.


Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial. The Sex Offender Registration Central
Registry (SORCR) is automatically updated from
Alaska's criminal history files, the offender's
registration period is automatically calculated, 
and some reports are automatically generated. 
Information from the sex offender registry is 
automatically downloaded from SORCR to Alaska's 
Internet website. However, manual entry is required 
to enter information from the registration to the 
mainframe.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. The entry of a conviction for a covered offense
into the criminal history system triggers the
offender's entry into SORCR.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
No The Sex Offender Registry software is expected to
be upgraded and will participate in the: (1) National
Sex Offender File; (2) Interstate exchange of Sex
Offender Registration information through NLETS. 

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
No, not at the registry where APSIN and SORCR are
maintained. Currently, fingerprints, taken on the FBI
fingerprint card, are mailed to the registry, which
then mails them to the Records and Identification
Bureau for entry into AFIS.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Partial capability exists, but the current system 
does not meet the requirements of the FBI. As of 2/01,
registration photos are mailed to the central registry
where they are scanned into a Polaroid system and
stored in a proprietary electronic file format that
does not comply with national mugshot standards.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Conviction information is received from the courts in
hard copy.  Corrections facilities "register"
offenders prior to their release and mail the signed
forms and photos (hard copy) to the central registry. 
Offenders under community supervision or under no
supervision register with local police or with State
Troopers who also mail hard copy to the central
repository and registry.

DNA Sample:
No

Validation and Reregistration Procedures: 
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
The Alaska procedure and requirements for
reregistration (written verification) is revised due
to the new statutes: All registrants will be put in a
group.  For the registrants who must provide quarterly
written verifications (lifetime registrants) there
will be three groups.  Group 1 is January, April, July
and October; Group 2 is February, May, August and
November; and Group 3 is March, June, September and
December.  The person must register sometime between
the first and last day of each month that he is
required to register.  Registration date (month) will
be based on the first date that the individual
registers.  Persons that are required to register
(provide written notification) annually (required to
register for 15 years) will register each year
sometime between the first and last day of the month
they originally registered.  (These procedures will do
away with the date of registration or written
verification being based on a registrant's birthday.) 
Offenders are required to register by the next working
day following their entry into Alaska or any change in
their residential address (including an anticipated
move into another State) or mailing address.   

SOR Notification is Automated:
No

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Failure to Register (FTR) has been classified 
into two crimes: (1) FTR 2nd degree (class A 
misdemeanor): (a.) if the person knowingly fails 
to register; file the written notice of change 
of address; file the annual or quarterly written 
verification; or supply all of the information 
required.  Conviction requires a mandatory minimum 
sentencing of 35 days in jail that cannot be 
suspended.  (2) FTR 1st degree (class C felony): 
(a) if the person violates FTR 2nd degree: 1.
and the person has been previously convicted of
failure to register in the second degree or a law 
or ordinance of this or another jurisdiction with
elements similar to a crime under this section or 
FTR 2nd degree;  2. with intent to escape detection 
or identification and, by escaping detection or
identification, to facilitate the person's commission
of a sex offense or child kidnaping. (The fact that
the defendant, for a period of at least one year,
failed to register as a sex offender or child
kidnaper, failed to file the annual or quarterly
written verification or changed the sex offender's or
child kidnaper's address and did not file the required
notice of change of address, is prima facie evidence
that the defendant intended to escape detection or
identification and move out of the State.)

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Copies of the lists for 1) registered sex offenders,
2) unregistered sex offenders and 3) noncompliant
registered sex offenders are sent to local police
departments every 2-3 months through the regular mail. 
Procedures are being set up to use e-mail for these
lists.  Dissemination to criminal justice agencies
also occurs through the Alaska Public Safety
Information Network (APSIN). Almost all Alaska
criminal justice agencies have on-line access to
APSIN, and sex offender data/status will be provided
for any "person query."  Agencies with access to
Internet can query and sort SORCR data by geographic
location and view mugshots.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
As of 2/01, no special or affirmative notification of
schools or other organizations is reported. (See
Procedures for Public Access, below.)

Procedures for Public Access:
The public has access to information on registrants
through Alaska's Internet site.  All offenders
required to register, whether they are registered,
have never registered, registered but are out of
compliance, or in jail, will be on the Internet.  The
public may also obtain information from the local
police station, and they may receive hard copy reports
on individual sex offenders through the SORCR office
in response to individual requests.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes, began June, 1997; now averaging over 1,200
queries per day.
http://www.dps.state.ak.us/nsorcr/asp

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Arizona
Responsible Agency: Department of Public Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
A person who has been convicted of a violation or
attempted violation of any of the following offenses
or who has been convicted of an offense committed in
another jurisdiction which if committed in Arizona
would be a violation or attempted violation of any of
the following offenses: unlawful imprisonment pursuant
to section 13-1304 if the victim is under eighteen
years of age and the unlawful imprisonment was not
committed by the child's parent; kidnaping pursuant to
section 13-1304 if the victim is under eighteen;
sexual abuse if the victim is under eighteen pursuant
to section 13-1304; sexual conduct with a minor
pursuant to section 13-1305; sexual assault pursuant
to section 13-1306; sexual assault of a spouse
pursuant to section 13-1306.01; molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410; continuous sexual abuse
of a child pursuant to section 13-1417; taking a child
for the purpose of prostitution pursuant to section
13-3206; child prostitution pursuant to section 13-
3212; commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
pursuant to section 13-3552; sexual exploitation of a
minor pursuant to section 13-3553; a second or
subsequent violation of public sexual indecency or
indecent exposure to a minor under the age of fifteen
years pursuant to sections 13-1402, 1403 subsection B;
a third or subsequent violation of indecent exposure
pursuant to section 13-1402; a third or subsequent
violation of public sexual indecency pursuant to
section 13-1403; and a violation of section 13-3822 
or 13-3824.

Mandated Registrants:
All Arizona residents convicted of a covered offense
must register. The local law enforcement agency is
responsible for evaluating the out-of-state offense 
to determine if Arizona registration is required.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime for adult offenders. The registration
requirement for juvenile sexual offenders ends 
when they become 25.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
11,500

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial. The SOR database itself is automated, but
most data must be entered manually.  At present, data
collection is done manually, with most forms filled
out by hand, and transmitted to the SOR in hard copy.
The Sex Offender Profiling and Notification Database,
maintained in another section of the Department of
Public Safety (DPS), is similar. 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  The Sex Offender Registry is part of the Arizona
Criminal Justice Information System (ACJIS), but is
maintained in a separate database. A  response to a
criminal history query, however, will include any
information on that individual in the SOR database.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes. As new records are entered into Arizona's SOR,
they are automatically forwarded electronically to the
FBI NSOR system.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
The capability of transmitting and storing digital
fingerprints in the Arizona Automated Fingerprint
Identification System (AZAFIS) has existed since June
1995.  The electronic capability is available in all
the sheriff's offices and various Department of
Correction facilities.  Upon completion of the
identification process the sex offender registration
fingerprint card is printed and is mailed to the SOR
with the offender's registration form.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
The AZAFIS Mug Photo Interface Subsystem was
implemented June 1998.  All sheriffs' offices and
various Department of Correction facilities have the
capability to capture and transmit digital mug photos.
These photos are stored in the AZAFIS Mug Photo Server
at the Department of Public Safety and is accessible
by authorized users statewide.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
For Sex Offender Registry, information comes from the
local sheriff's office when an offender completes his
in-person registration. A copy of registration form is
faxed to the SOR; the signed original, a photo, and
fingerprint cards are then mailed to the SOR. For the
Sex Offender Profiling and Notification Unit, the
Arizona DOC, the jail, or the supervising probation
agency enters information on the offender, his/her
risk assessment, and the offense directly into the Sex
Offender Profiling System. The system then generates
messages to the Notification Coordinator and the
sheriff of the jurisdiction that will be receiving the
offender.

DNA Sample:
Yes. DNA samples are maintained by DPS Crime 
Lab.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Legislation requires registered offenders to obtain a
driver's license or an identification license annually
from the Motor Vehicle Division and the Department of
Public Safety is required to conduct annual address
verification on all sex offenders within the State
registry.

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable. 

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a Class 4 felony.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
Information on registered sexual offenders is
disseminated to criminal justice agencies through
Arizona Criminal Justice Information System (ACJIS) in
response to criminal history queries. Detailed
information on the offender, his risk assessment, and
the offense summary is maintained by the Sex Offender
Compliance Unit for use by and with local law
enforcement agencies in the community notification
program.


To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
The Arizona community notification program focuses 
on "neighborhoods" at risk, rather than specific
organizations or victim types. There is a State-level
Community Notification Coordinator, but the local law
enforcement agency determines the level of
notification, and the geographic "neighborhood," to be
notified, based on a review of the individual's risk
assessment. Level 1 (low risk) requires minimal
notification, level 2 (medium risk) gives the local
agency wide discretion on the extent of notification,
while level 3 (high risk) requires extensive
notification within the "neighborhood" at risk. 

Procedures for Public Access:
There is no automatic public access to SOR
information.  Each law enforcement agency keeps a
notebook on registered offenders residing in the
jurisdiction that receives community notification.
Citizens may ask to see the file and usually have to
demonstrate a need to know.  Access is at the
discretion of the law enforcement agency, with a log
kept of who views the file. 

Internet Website (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
The Department of Public Safety maintains an 
Internet website with information on all level 2 and 3
offenders. http://www.azsexoffender.com

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Arkansas
Responsible Agency: Arkansas Crime Information Center

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are:  rape; carnal abuse in first,
second, or third degree; sexual misconduct; sexual
abuse in first or second degree; sexual solicitation
of a child; violation of a minor in first or second
degree; incest; sexual exploitation of children;
promoting prostitution in the first degree; stalking;
transportation of minors for prohibited sexual
conduct; employing, or consenting to the use of a
child in sexual performance; producing, directing or
promoting sexual performance; an attempt, solicitation
or conspiracy to commit any of the enumerated
offenses; and adjudication of guilt for equivalent
offenses in another State, federal, or military court.

Mandated Registrants:
All convicted sexual offenders released to the
community on or after the effective date of the
legislation, August 1, 1997, are required to register,
as well as all persons who were required to be
registered under the former "Habitual Child Sex
Offender Registration Act."  The Arkansas Attorney
General has ruled that the registration requirement
covers all offenders who had been convicted and were,
as a result, under some form of criminal justice
supervision on August 1, 1997, regardless of date of
conviction.

Duration of Registration:
For "sexual offenders," registration is a minimum of
15 years. For those classified as "sexual predators",
the registration requirement is a minimum of 20 years. 
Offenders may petition the court for removal of the
registration requirement after expiration of the
minimum time requirement.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01
As of 2/15/01 Arkansas has 2,935 registered sex
offenders.

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:     
Partial. The SOR database itself is automated, but
data entry is manual, and information submission is
paper-based.  As of February, 2001 an Imaging System
was installed, now all sex offender documents are
stored electronically.
     
Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. Registered offenders' records are flagged in the
criminal history file. The SOR file is not
fingerprint- based, but the SOR record is tied to the
offender's fingerprints in the criminal history
system.   
     
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes.      
     
SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints: 
Yes, the capability exists, but through the criminal
history system. While the current SOR database does
not have fingerprints, the SOR records are tied to
fingerprints in the criminal history system, which has
the storage capacity.    
     
SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots: 
No. There is no current capacity for automated mugshot
transmission or storage.  The Registry anticipates the
availability of images in 2001.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Department of Corrections, Department of Community
Punishment and local law enforcement provide the SOR
with information (in hard copy) on qualifying
offenders when they are convicted, and the offenders
are entered into the Registry at that time.  When a
sexual offender is released to the community and
registers locally, the Sex Offender Registration form
is forwarded (in hard copy) to the 

Arkansas Crime Information Center (ACIC) by the
releasing agency, and the record is updated.

DNA Sample:
No, but legislation is currently pending.  

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  ACIC mails out non-forwardable letters informing
offenders of the requirement to verify their
addresses.  Letters are sent every six months to
sexual offenders, and every three months to those
classified as " sexually violent offenders."

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a Class D felony, punishable by up to 6
years in prison and/or a fine.
     
Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
Through the statewide Arkansas Crime Information
Center (ACIC) network, all data provided on the Sex
Offender Registration form and entered into the SOR is
available to all law enforcement agencies within the
State.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies in accordance with guidelines
developed by the Sex Offender Assessment Committee. 
Notification to organizations, schools and
institutions is made for offenders determined to be
medium (level 2) or high (level 3) risk.

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 2/01, there are no procedures for general public
access to information from the Arkansas Sex Offender
Registry system.  As noted, community notification is
conducted by local law enforcement; in some cases
schools may notify parents of information received
from a law enforcement agency.

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month)
The ACIC website provided information on the Arkansas
law, the offenses requiring registration, and a
numerical listing of the number of registered
offenders in a given county, but did not post data on
individual offenders. http://www.acic.org/registration

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: California
Responsible Agency: California Department of Justice, 
Division of Criminal Justice Information Services 

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Almost all sexual offenses involving adult and child
victims require offender registration.  Covered
offenses include rape, sexual battery, child sexual
abuse, sodomy, oral copulation, child pornography,
kidnaping or assault with intent to commit a covered
offense, pimping or pandering involving a minor,  and
indecent exposure, as well as specified juvenile sex
offenses.  Some of the covered crimes are
misdemeanors.

Mandated Registrants:
Mandated Registrants include: all adults convicted in
a California court of a covered offense since 1944. 
Also, those convicted of comparable offenses in
federal, military, or other State courts if the
offender resides in or moves to California. Since
1986, juveniles convicted of specified offenses are
required to register.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime for all registrants, unless the offense is
decriminalized, the requirement is terminated, or if 
juvenile record is sealed.  

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
88,853.  The California Registry holds all those who
have registered or who have received notification they
should register.  The latter group includes both those
not yet released from incarceration and those who
received formal notification to register but have
absconded or otherwise evaded doing so.

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Fully automated database. The California Sex Offender
Registry is maintained as a separate file within
California's Violent Crime Information Network (VCIN).

Database is linked to criminal history files:
All sex offender registration history prior to April
1996 is on the automated criminal history system or on
manual folder rap sheets.  Since April 1996,
registration information is maintained in the Violent
Crime Information Network (VCIN). A flag is in the
relevant criminal history file stating, "For current
registration information inquire into VCIN".

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes. Currently there are about 52,000 records in the
National file.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
No.  The  SOR and VCIN do not have this capability. 
Electronic fingerprints are stored in the California
AFIS system. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes. The capability exists for those with access to
California VCIN.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Depending on the sentence, the initial information on
an offender comes from Department of Corrections (DOC)
if the sentence was to a prison term, from the courts
(if probation), from the State hospital (if sentence
is a commitment), or from the local jail administrator
or sheriff (if jail). Prisons and jails submit data
(records, photographs, fingerprints, etc.) when a
mandated registrant begins his sentence, and  it is
entered in the SOR as "pre-registration."  As of 2/01,
the initial data may be submitted electronically or as
hard copy.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  DNA samples are maintained at the State's DNA
laboratory in Berkeley, California.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures: 
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No. California does not send an address verification
notice or a reregistration reminder.  Annual address
verification is the registrant's responsibility and
must be done in the 5 working days preceding or
following his birthday. (Transients and sexually
violent predators must verify their addresses every 90
days).

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable

Penalties for Noncompliance:
If the underlying offense was a misdemeanor, failure-
to-comply is a misdemeanor.  If the underlying offense
was a felony, then any failure-to-comply is a felony
(it can and has been used as third strike in
California's three-strikes-and-out legislation).

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
SOR information is available to all California law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies through the
California Law Enforcement Telecommunications System
(CLETS) or to those with access to Violent Crime
Information Network (VCIN) workstations. Out-of-state
agencies access California sex offender registrant
information via NSOR.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
Notification is the responsibility of the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides.
Legislation specifies the conditions for limited
notification to organizations or to specific
individuals or for broader public advisories and
notification on serious and high-risk sex offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
Public access to SOR information is provided in two
ways. California has a CD-ROM and operates a 900 phone
number of serious and high risk registered sex
offenders.  Adults and children accompanied by a
parent or guardian living in California (other than
registered sex offenders) may view the CD-ROM at their
local enforcement agency at no fee (the names of those
viewing the CD-ROM are maintained for 5 years). 
Nationwide, adults may obtain sex offender information
via the California Sex Offender Information telephone
service at: 1-900-488-3000.  There is a $10 fee for up
to two names searches for this service.

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
No.  California does not have sex offender registrants
on a website.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Colorado
Responsible Agency: Colorado Department of Public
Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Sexual assault in the first, second, or third degree;
sexual assault on a child; sexual assault on a child
by one in a position of trust; sexual assault on a
client by a psychotherapist; incest and aggravated
incest;  enticement, trafficking, or sexual
exploitation of children; procurement of a child for
sexual exploitation; solicitation for child
prostitution; procurement, pandering, or pimping
involving children; patronizing a prostituted child;
inducement of or solicitation for child prostitution;
keeping a place of child prostitution; patronizing a
prostituted child; and criminal attempt, conspiracy,
or solicitation to commit any covered offense; and
deferred judgement and sentence for any covered
offense.

Mandated Registrants:
Any person convicted of a covered offense in Colorado
on or after July 1, 1991 is required to register;
also, persons convicted of comparable offenses in
another State on or after July 1, 1991, and moving to
Colorado; and persons convicted of covered offenses
and released from the Colorado  Department of
Corrections (DOC) to the community on or after July 1,
1991.

Duration of Registration:
Duration of the registration requirement depends upon
the seriousness of the offense.  Offenders may
petition the court for an order to discontinue the
requirement to register after a specified number of
offense-free years following the person's final
release from the jurisdiction of the court.  For
example, offenders may petition after 20 years if
convicted of a class 1, 2, or 3 covered felony; after
10 years if convicted of a class 4, 5, or 6 covered
felony; after 5 years if convicted of a covered
misdemeanor; or after the successful completion of a
deferred judgment; or after successful discharge of a
sentence if the offender was less than 16 years of age
at the time of the offense. 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
8,804 (does not include those to be released within
the month)

Automation of Sex Offender Registry 
Information

Extent of database automation:
Fully automated database. The electronic SOR files are
maintained by the Colorado Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) through its Colorado Crime Information Center
(CCIC) program, but CBI is not the custodian of the
official records.  The official records remain at the
local level where the offender registers.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Yes.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Information comes from the courts if the sentence is
probation, from the Department of Corrections (DOC) if
it is prison sentence. DOC places a "subject to
registration" notice in the SOR when the offender is
released, and the local law enforcement agency may
(discretionary, not mandatory) enter information when
the offender registers at his jurisdiction of
residence.  All send information electronically to
Colorado Crime Information Center (CCIC).

DNA Sample:
Yes. However, it is not part of the SOR program. DNA
and blood samples are now collected for all offenders
in the Colorado State prison system.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A. State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No. Colorado has no address checks or verifications
except as these may occur through parole activities. 
A registered offender moving within the State is
required to register at his new location, and the
local agency enters the new registration into the SOR
system, but neither the local agency nor the State SOR
program has any responsibility to verify the address.

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a Class 2 misdemeanor, punishable
by 3 to 12 months in jail and/or a fine of $250 -
$1,000.  Subsequent offenses are a Class 6 felony
punishable by a minimum of one year in a State
Department of Corrections facility. (Pending
legislation would make the first violation a Class 6
felony and subsequent violations a Class 5 felony.)

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
Information from the State's electronic SOR is
available to all Colorado law enforcement and criminal
justice agencies on-line through the Colorado Crime
Information Center (CCIC).  Out-of-state agencies may
send an NLETS AM message for a search of the registry. 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Notification is the responsibility of local law
enforcement agencies which may notify organizations or
individuals "for reasons of public protection."  As of
February 2001, legislation does not mandate
affirmative notification to specific organizations or
institutions.

Procedures for Public Access:
The public has access to information on registered
sexual offenders only through the local law
enforcement agency where the offender is currently
registered.  In Colorado, the SOR information is
considered a public record.

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
A website is currently was under construction as of
2/01. The website was available as of 7/30/01. 
http://sor.state.co.us

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Connecticut
Responsible Agency: Connecticut Department of Public
Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
On October 1, 1998, Connecticut's Sex Offender
Registration Law (C.G.S. Sec. 54-250, et. seq.)
established centralized sex offender registration
procedures.  With the legislation, the sex offender
registry went into operation on an Internet site,
effective January 1, 1999. The sex offender
registration law covers first through fourth degree
sexual assault, aggravated first degree sexual
assault, risk of injury involving sexual contact with
a child, kidnaping, promoting prostitution with a
minor, promoting a minor in obscene performance,
public indecency when the victim is under 18, and
conspiring, attempting, or directing the commission of
a covered offense, and any felony the court finds was
committed for a sexual purpose. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for any person who has been
convicted or found not guilty by reason of mental
disease or defect of a sexually violent crime and
released on or after October 1, 1998.  Registration is
also mandatory for any person who has been convicted
or found not guilty by reason of mental disease or
defect of a criminal offense against a victim who is a
minor or a nonviolent sexual offense and is released
on or after October 1, 1998.  Juvenile offenders who
have been convicted in an adult court for the
indicated sexual offenses and released are mandated to
register.  In specified, limited situations (defined
in statute), the court may exercise discretion in
granting exemptions or making restrictions in a
registration. In Connecticut, the classification
"sexually violent offender" includes both offenders
meeting the federal definition of sexually violent
predators and offenders meeting the federal definition
of sexually violent offenders.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime registration is mandated for those convicted
of sexually violent offenses.  A ten (10) year period
applies for those offenders convicted of crimes
against victims who are minors.  For an offender from
out-of-state, the ten (10) year registration period,
if applicable, is presumed to have started when the
offender is first released to the community. 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
As of April 2001, sex offenders registered and listed
on the Internet site total 2,030.  Additional sex
offenders with convictions requiring registration
remain incarcerated, a sex offender does not register
until released.  Also, qualified sex offenders from
Connecticut who have declared residences in other
States are registered in accordance with the other
State of residence procedures. 


Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
On October 1, 1998, Connecticut's Sex Offender
Registration requirements became effective.  The
Internet based sex offender registry went into
operation on January 1, 1999.  The statewide SOR, 
initially utilized an interim database  A more
extensive, automated database has been established
with the use federal funds.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Preliminary work for the SOR perspective has been
completed to receive criminal history information from
the computerized criminal history system.  The
Offender Based Tracking System (OBTS) being developed
will provide both criminal history and programmed
inmate release date information for use in the sex
offender registration process.  

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes.  The Connecticut SOR has initiated electronic
transmission of sex offender registration data to the
NSOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
Yes. An AFIS is operational within the Department of
Public Safety and is the repository of all fingerprint
data.  While fingerprints are stored in the AFIS,
procedures for electronic transmittal to the FBI will
be addressed with the acquisition of an AFIS with
store and forward capability.  

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
No. A statewide system for the receipt and management
of offender photo images is being developed to handle
all photo images (mugshots), in accordance with EFTS
standards for digital mugshot images.  Federal funds,
in part, are being utilized to implement photo image
capture, management, and transmission capability
meeting FBI standards.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
With the new system effective on October 1, 1998, the
central sex offender registry in Department of Public
Safety (DPS), Division of State Police receives
conviction information from the courts and completed
registrations from the releasing correction
institution or the court.  Offenders must complete
registration as a condition of release from
incarceration or from the custody of the court when no
incarceration occurs.  All registration information is
transmitted electronically to DPS.  DPS notifies the
municipal law enforcement agency or the chief elected
official (in a situation of no municipal law
enforcement agency) of the municipality where the
offender resides with both electronic and hard copy
registration information.  The hard copy information
is made available for public inspection.  (In
Connecticut, there is no county government.)  Prior to
October 1, 1998, sex offender registration was a
responsibility of municipal law enforcement agencies;
records remained with the municipal law enforcement
agency without address verification and reregistration
procedures.

DNA Sample:
Yes. Effective October 1, 1998, DNA samples are taken
from all sexual offenders upon registration and prior
to the sex offender's release into the community.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A. State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Under the new, centralized sex offender registration
procedures effective October 1, 1998, non-forwardable
address verification forms are sent to all registered
sex offenders.  Sexually violent offenders are
required to verify the address of record every 90
days; sex offenders guilty of criminal sexual offenses
against a victim who is a minor or guilty of a non
violent sexual offense are required to verify the
address of record annually.  If the offender does not
respond within 10 days, the DPS notifies the municipal
law enforcement agency, which is required to issue an
arrest warrant.  The DPS is required to issue arrest
warrants for geographic areas not served by municipal
law enforcement agencies.  The notification procedures
are managed by the Sex Offender Registration Unit in
the DPS; this Unit is available to municipal and State
police with enforcement procedures.  

SOR Notification Automated:
The verification process is automated with machine
generated forms and mailing procedures.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Under the new, centralized registration procedures
effective October 1, 1998, noncompliance with the
sexual offender registration requirements and
procedures is a Class D felony, punishable by one to
five years in prison and/or a fine of up to $5,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
Sex offender registry information from the statewide
sex offender registry is provided to municipal and
State law enforcement agencies, in as much as these
agencies are required to maintain copies of sex
offender registrations for their jurisdictions
respectively and make them available to the public. 
The statewide registry is centrally maintained by the
Department of Public Safety, with information
dissemination to the law enforcement agency for the
municipality of residence of the sex offender.  In
addition, criminal history information is available to
law enforcement and criminal justice agencies only by
query via the Connecticut On Line Law Enforcement
Communications Teleprocessing (COLLECT) system.  Sex
offender registration information is transmitted to
the FBI for inclusion in the National Sex Offender
Registry (NSOR).  Effective January 1, 1999, the
public was provided access to the sex offender
registry via an Internet site.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
Any law enforcement agency, including the Department
of Public Safety, Division of State Police and
municipal law enforcement agency, is authorized to
notify any governmental agency, private organization,
or individual of registration information when it is
believed that the notification is necessary to protect
the public or an individual from a sex offender.  This
wording became effective October 1, 1998.  In January
1999, a statutorily established Sex Offender
Registration Committee recommended guidelines for use
by law enforcement agencies in considering and
establishing community notification procedures. 
Effective January 1, 1999, all organizations and
persons were provided access to the sex offender
registry via an Internet site. [On May 18, 2001, the
United States District Court, District of Connecticut
issued a permanent injunction prohibiting all public
access to the sex offender registry.  Please refer to
the section titled Current Status, following at the
end of this summary, for an additional explanation.]

Procedures for Public Access:
Under the new, centralized sex offender registration
procedures effective October 1, 1998, two procedures
for public access are established:  (1) a copy of the
sex offender registrations became available for public
inspection in law enforcement agencies serving the sex
offender's municipality of residence and (2) the
statewide sex offender registry on the Internet was
established, effective January 1, 1999.  Law
enforcement agencies must make copies of the
registration information available during business
hours; most are available 24 hours a day via
dispatcher/clerk offices.  The Internet site is
available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. [On May 18,
2001, the United States District Court, District of
Connecticut issued a permanent injunction prohibiting
all public access to the sex offender registry. 
Please refer to the section titled Current Status,
following at the end of this summary, for an
additional explanation.]

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
The Internet site is located on the State of
Connecticut, Department of Public Safety homepage. The
site became operational January 1, 1999.  The site
address is: http://www.state.ct.us/dps/  The number
of queries made against the Internet sex offender
registry database average about 120,000 per month. 
(In the initial month, 1.9 million inquires were
logged.)  Studies indicate a person will generally
make between 4 and 10 queries per session.   
 
*Current Status- as of May 22, 2001
On March 31, 2001, the United State District Court,
District of Connecticut in a summary judgment
determined that public disclosure and dissemination of
inclusion in the sex offender registry maintained by
the State of Connecticut pursuant to the Connecticut
Sex Offender Registry Act violated the rights under
the Due Process of the Fourteenth Amendment.  The
class action plaintiff was found to be included in the
registry, not because he has been determined to pose a
threat to public safety, but solely because he has
been convicted of one of numerous offenses enumerated
in the Act.  The Court found that the liberty interest
of the class action plaintiff was deprived without
providing notice and an opportunity to be heard on the
question as to whether the plaintiff is dangerous. 
The Connecticut Sex Offender Registry Act provides for
the due process to occur during and as part of trials
on the statutorily identified sexual offenses.  The
summary judgment has been appealed to the United
States Second Circuit Court of Appeals.  

On May 18, 2001, the United States District Court,
District of Connecticut issued a permanent injunction,
prohibiting public access to the sex offender
registry.  The injunction prohibits the State of
Connecticut from disclosing or disseminating the
Registry or Registry information to the public in
printed or electronic form and identifying any person
as being included in the Registry.  The District judge
ordered the Registry website be taken down
immediately.  The Registry may be used by law
enforcement personnel in providing for public safety
as long as the names of sex offenders are not
disclosed as being included in the Registry.  The
District judge, in response to a request by the State
of Connecticut, denied a stay of the injunction.  Also
on May, 18, 2001, the State of Connecticut requested
of the United States Second Circuit Court of Appeals a
stay of the injunction on an emergency basis; this
appeal is pending before the United States Second
Circuit Court of Appeals.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Delaware
Responsible Agency: Delaware State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The Delaware sex offender registry legislation
essentially covers "all sexual offenses" as specified
in Sections 764 through 779 and Sections 1108 through
1111 of Title 11 of Delaware Crimes and Criminal
Procedure.

Mandated Registrants: 
Individuals in any of the following categories are
required to register: All persons convicted of a
covered offense on or after the statutes' effective
date in 1994; anyone adjudged, after statute's
effective date, guilty but mentally ill or not guilty
by reason of insanity for committing a covered
offense; those convicted out-of-state and moving to
Delaware.

Duration of Registration: 
Lifetime registration if the sex offender is
designated to Risk Assessment Tier III, or if the
person is designated to Risk Assessment Tier I or II,
and has previously been convicted of any of the
offenses specified in subparagraphs (a)(4)a., c., or
d. of this section, and the victim of both the
previous offense and the instant offense had not yet
reached his or her eighteenth birthday at the time of
the crime. For further provisions, consult Title 11
Section 4121 of the Delaware Code.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,688

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Fully automated SOR text database. The database is
housed on the Delaware Criminal Justice Information
System (CJIS). 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. The Delaware SOR is part of the State's criminal
history system which is also on CJIS.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  Delaware has the capability for electronic
storage and transmission of fingerprints through its
AFIS system, but, as of 2/01, AFIS was not fully
integrated with the SOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Yes.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
In Delaware, offenders are registered by the courts if
they are sentenced to probation or given a fine. If
offenders have been incarcerated, then the agency
managing the facility--the Department of Corrections,
Youth Rehabilitation Services, or the State Hospital--
registers them 45 to 90 days prior to their release.
Out-of-state offenders must register personally with
the State Bureau of Identification (SBI), Delaware
State Police, within 7 days of arrival.  All
registering agencies use the Delaware Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS) computer system to register
offenders electronically, so that all text information
is entered directly into the SOR database.

DNA Sample:
No, not as part of the SOR but some sex offenders have
DNA samples on file with the medical examiner's
office.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. Reregistration is done annually for medium and
low risk offenders, and each quarter for high risk
offenders.  The offender is responsible for notifying
the State Police of any change of residence after the
initial registration, but probation officers also
actively maintain contact with these offenders as part
of their offender management responsibilities and help
ensure that the SOR is notified of any change in the
offender's address.

B. SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.

C. Penalties for Noncompliance:
Class G felony, requiring a prison term.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information from the SOR is available through
Delaware Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS),
accessible to all criminal justice agencies in
Delaware.  Fingerprints are maintained in State's
central AFIS and interfaced to CJIS.  There is a
central mugshot system. CJIS has mugshot capability. 
Also, a law, signed 4/21/98, requires that SOR
registrants be identified by a "Y" on their driver's
licenses, with the designation explained on back of
license.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Notification of organizations is the responsibility of
the local law enforcement agency where the offender
resides.  Notification measures are based on the
offender's assigned risk level which is determined by
a risk assessment performed by the State Attorney
General's Office or the Sentencing Court.  For Tier II
(moderate risk) offenders, notification is at the
discretion of the local law enforcement agency.  Tier
III (high risk) offenders, the law requires mandatory
community notification. The State Police may be
involved only when no local agency has jurisdiction. 

Procedures for Public Access:
Public access to SOR information is through the
notification program conducted by the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides, and
through the website. For Tier II offenders,
notification is at the discretion of the local law
enforcement.  Community notification is required for
Tier III offenders.  Notification is conducted in a
variety of ways such as; door-to-door, mailings, local
media, etc.  The public may also view both Tier II and
III offenders on the Internet.  Local law enforcement
agencies also have the discretion to notify any
citizen about a specific offender who, they believe,
poses a risk to that individual. (See also the
driver's license designation noted above.)

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.state.de.us/dsp/sexoff/index.htm
The site has photo posted for medium and high risk
offenders only.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: District 
of Columbia
Responsible Agency: Court Services and Offender
Supervision Agency

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
In 1999, the District of Columbia's two year old
offender based Sex Offender Registration Act was
repealed and replaced by an offense based Act. Under
the new law the Federal Court Services and Offender
Supervision Agency (CSOSA) is charged with maintaining
the DC Sex Offender Registry and the Metropolitan
Police Department is responsible for community
notification.  Covered offenses under the new law
include any offense committed in the District of
Columbia or any other jurisdiction, whether
misdemeanor or felony, if an element of the offense is
an unlawful sexual act or sexual contact and the
victim of the offense is a child.  Covered offenses
also include felony sex offenses committed against
adults.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all adults who live,
work or matriculate in the District of Columbia and
have been convicted, found not guilty by reason of
insanity or adjudicated a sexual psychopath on a
covered offense. Registration is required for such
persons if the disposition of the sex offense occurs
after the 1999 Act or if the disposition predates the
effective date of the Act and the sex offender was
subject to registration under the earlier DC law, or
was on parole, probation, or supervised release when
the new law took effect.  A sex offender from outside
the District of Columbia who at any time, resides,
obtains employment or attends school in DC must
register.

Duration of Registration:
The registration period depends on the seriousness of
the sex offense.  Violent offenders or offenders whose
victims are young children must register for life.
Offenders convicted or found not guilty by reason of
insanity of less serious offenses must register for 10
years.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
As of April 24, 2001, the DC Sex Offender Registry
includes 303 active registrants who live, work or
attend school in the District of Columbia.  Of those 
active registrants 136 are lifetime registrants and
167 must register for 10 years.

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
The District of Columbia Sex Offender Registry is
maintained in a Microsoft SQL Server 7.0.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
The sex offender database is not linked to criminal
history files.  Criminal history information is
scanned into the individual registry information on
each sex offender.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Under the DC Sex Offender Registration Act, CSOSA must
transmit registry information to the FBI for inclusion
in the National Sex Offender Registry.  A link has
been established through NCIC for the transmittal and
registry information has been formatted to meet FBI
requirements.  Testing is in progress, and inclusion
of DC sex offenders in the National Registry is
imminent. 

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
The Registry has the capability for electronic
transmission and storage of fingerprints, but
fingerprints are not entered into the database. CSOSA
has been advised by the FBI that they have no need for
prints to be included in information transmitted to
the National Registry.  

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Current photographs are included in the electronic
database and transmitted to the Police Department for
publication on the MPD website.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The source of initial information on sex offenders 
is received by CSOSA from the Superior Court, the
releasing authority (either DC Department of
Corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons), self
reported by the offender, or from other sources. Once
initial notification of a sex offender is received by
CSOSA, additional information is obtained to perfect
registration.

DNA Sample:
DNA samples are not included in sex offender
registration information. Independent of sex offender
registration, however, the DNA Analysis Backlog
Elimination Act of 2000 requires that by June 19, 2001
DNA collection must begin from DC Code offenders. 
Samples will be collected by CSOSA and the Bureau of
Prisons.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. Lifetime registrants are required to provide
verification of current registration information at 
3-month intervals. 10-year registrants must provide
verification annually.  CSOSA posts a registered, 
non-forwardable letter 14 days prior to the date
verification is required. Failure to comply is
reported for investigation and possible prosecution.

B. SOR Notification Automated:
Yes, the verification forms are computer generated 
for each sex offender on his/her anniversary date.  

C. Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by not
more than 180 days in jail and/or a fine of up to
$1,000.  A second or subsequent offense is a felony,
punishable by up to five years in prison and/or a fine
of up to $5,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
CSOSA transmits electronically to the MPD, and will
transmit to the FBI, in real time, additions and
modifications to the Sex Offender Registry.  
Information will be transmitted to other
jurisdictions' registrars as their computer capability
allows.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The Metropolitan Police Department has no formal
procedures in place for notification to organizations
serving children, the elderly and mentally ill
separate from procedures for notification to the
community at large.

Procedures for Public Access:
Public access to registry information is available by
viewing hard copies of the registry at the various
police districts.  Information on lifetime registrants
is also available over the Internet at the MPD
website.  (MPD is presently restrained by a Federal
Court order from notifying the community of any sex
offender sentenced under youth sentencing provisions
or notifying the community via the Internet of 10-year
registrants.)

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Currently only lifetime registrants are listed on the
website. The website is maintained by the Metropolitan
Police Department and the address is: 
http://mpdc.dc.gov/serv/sor/sor.shtm

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Florida
Responsible Agency: Florida Department of Law
Enforcement

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include committing, attempting,
soliciting, or conspiring to commit:  s.787.01
kidnaping (where the victim is a minor and the
defendant is not the victim's parent); s.787.02 false
imprisonment (where the victim is a minor and the
defendant is not the victim's parent); s.787.025
luring or enticing a child (where the victim is a
minor and the defendant is not the victim's parent);
s.794 sexual battery; s.796.03 procuring a person
under 18 for prostitution; s.800.04 lewd, lascivious
offenses committed upon or in the presence of persons
less than 16 years of age; s.825.1025 lewd or
lascivious offenses committed upon or in the presence
of an elderly person or disabled adult; s.827.071
sexual performance by a child: s.847.0133 protection
of minors; prohibition of certain acts in connection
with obscenity; s.847.0135 computer pornography;
s.847.0145 selling or buying of minors for portrayal
in a visual depiction engaging in sexually explicit
conduct.

Mandated Registrants:
There are two categories of mandated registrants,
sexual predators and sexual offenders.  Sexual
predators, a classification involving a written court
order, are (1) those convicted of (or found to have
committed) a capital, life or first degree felony
violation or any attempt thereof Chapter 794, s.787.01
(where the victim is a minor and the defendant is not
the victim's parent), s.787.02 (where the victim is a
minor and the defendant is not the victim's parent),
s.847.0145 or another violation of a similar law of
another jurisdiction on or after 10/1/1993 or (2)
those convicted of (or found to have committed) any
felony violation on or after 10/1/1993: s.787.01
(where the victim is a minor and the offender not the
victim's parent); s.787.02 (where the victim is minor
and the offender not the victim's parent); s.787.025
(where the victim is minor and the offender not the
victim's parent); s.794: s.796.03; s.800.04;
s.825.1025; s.827.071; s.847.0145; or a violation of a
similar law of another jurisdiction, and the offender
had previously, within a 10 year period, been
convicted of (or found to have committed) any
violation of: 787.01 (where the victim is a minor and
the offender is not the victim's parent); 787.02
(where the victim is a minor and the offender is not
the victim's parent); 787.025 (where the victim is a
minor and the offender is not the victim's parent)
794.011(2) sexual battery with injury child under 12
years of age; 794.011(3) sexual battery upon a person
12 years old or older with threats of deadly weapon or
physical force; 794.011(4) sexual battery upon a 12
year old or older (various circumstances); 794.011(5)
sexual battery upon a 12 year old or older without
physical force or violence; 794.011(8) solicit or
engage in sexual battery by person in familial or
custodial authority on a person under 18; 794.05
unlawful sexual activity with certain minors; 796.03
procuring person under 18 for prostitution; 800.04
lewd, lascivious offenses committed upon or in the
presence of persons less than 16 years of age;
825.1025 lewd , lascivious, offenses committed upon or
in the presence of an elderly person or disabled
adult; 827.071 sexual performance by a child; 847.0133
protection of minor - prohibition of certain acts in
connection with obscenity; 847.0135 computer
pornography; 847.0145 selling or buying of minors for
portrayal in a visual depiction engaging in sexually
explicit conduct; or a violation of a similar law of
another jurisdiction.  The sexual offender category
includes all other persons convicted of (or found to
have committed) any of the covered sexual offenses and
who were serving sanction for that offense on or after
10/1/1997 or anyone who established a permanent or
temporary residence in Florida and who has been
designated a sexual predator, a sexually violent
predator, or other sexual offender designation in
another State or jurisdiction and was subjected to
registration, or community notification, or would have
been if the person was a resident of that State or
jurisdiction.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime for both sexual predators and for sexual
offenders.  Both types of offenders can apply to be
removed from the Registry after 20 offense-free years
following their release from criminal justice
supervision.  The court may grant or deny such relief
if the petitioner demonstrates to the court that he or
she has not been arrested for any crime since release,
the requested relief complies with federal standards
applicable to the removal of the designation and the
court is otherwise satisfied that the petitioner is
not a current or potential threat to public safety. 
Sexual predators who were designated before October 1,
1998 may apply to be removed from the registry within
the same restrictions and provisions as stated above,
after 10 offense-free years.  All offenders seeking
removal from the registry must apply to the court
through an attorney and pay all costs.  The decision
once the petitioner demonstrates compliance with the
federal guidelines is at the discretion of the court.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
20,000

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Florida SOR has a fully automated database for
both text and fingerprints, operated by the Florida
Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE).

Database is linked to criminal history files
Yes. The Florida SOR is part of the State's "Offender
Database." When an entry is made into the SOR, the SOR
automatically updates the FDLE Internet website and
sends some information to the criminal history files.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  The capability already exists and meets FBI
standards.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Yes.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
If the court classifies the offender as a "sexual
predator," the Clerk of Courts sends a hard copy of
the court order to the Florida Department of Law
Enforcement (FDLE) and to the Florida Department of
Corrections (FDC).  For incarcerated offenders, the
FDC electronically transmits registration information
to FDLE for any sexual offender or sexual predator
being released to the community or placed under
community supervision.  Local law enforcement agencies
send the FDLE registration data (in hard copy) on out-
of-state offenders or on those not under criminal
justice supervision. Additionally, the Clerks of the
Court submit fingerprint cards and any special
restrictions imposed by the court on offenders who are
not sentenced to incarceration for their qualifying
offense(s). 

DNA Sample:
Yes. The Florida DNA database is maintained by the
State Crime Lab.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Address verification for all offenders and predators
under the supervision or custody of the Florida
Department of Corrections (FDC) is conducted by the
FDC.  All other offender and predators are verified by
FDLE and local law enforcement.  FDLE conducts
quarterly mailouts to all predators and offenders
whose date of birth falls within that quarter. The
letters contain a signed response form that the
offender/predator must complete, sign and return to
FDLE within a specified timeframe.  Results from these
mailouts are recorded in the automated database.  This
information is made available to local law enforcement
through a closed intranet and by request.  Lists of
all offenders and predators who failed to respond to
the mailouts are available to and distributed to local
law enforcement to follow up with on-site
verification.  Likewise local law enforcement can
report their own address verification activities and
results directly to the offender's/ predator's record
in the registry.

SOR Notification Automated:
See above.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a third degree felony.  A sexual predator
or offender who reports his or her intent to reside in
another State or jurisdiction, but who remains in this
State without reporting to the sheriff or the SOR in
the manner required commits a felony of the second
degree. 

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
The Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE),
which operates the SOR, enters sexual offender and
sexual predator data into Florida Crime Information
Center (FCIC) "hot files," which are accessible to
all State law enforcement personnel. When an offender
is released from incarceration, a teletype notice is
sent to all law enforcement agencies in the county
where the offender plans to reside. When the FDLE is
notified by the Florida Departments of Corrections
(FDC) or Highway Safety & Motor Vehicles (DHSMV) of
the change of address of a registered offender, the
FDLE transmits it to law enforcement agencies in the
county of residence and updates the FCIC hot file and
the NCIC SOR record.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
Organizational notification is a local responsibility. 
For those offenders classified as "sexual predators"
(determined by a court finding, based on type and/or
number of offenses), the Sheriff or Chief Law
Enforcement Officer of the jurisdiction where the
predator will reside is required to notify the public
(and organizations) "in a manner deemed appropriate"
in addition to the mandatory notification to all
schools and day cares within a one-mile radius of a
sexual predator's residence within 48 hours of law
enforcement's notification from the SOR.  For other
registered sexual offenders, notification is at the
discretion of the local law enforcement agency.

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SOR information
through the FDLE Internet Website, through a toll-free
phone line (1-888-357-7332), and through fliers and
leaflets produced for community notification on sexual
predators.

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  http://www.fdle.state.fl.us Average 5 million
hits to the SOR site per month.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Georgia
Responsible Agency: Georgia Bureau of Investigation

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Page 2 of OCGA 42-1-12(7)  Sexually violent offenses
and criminal offenses against a minor or an offense
that has as its element engaging in physical contact
with another person with intent to commit such an
offense. Criminal offenses against a victim who is a
minor include kidnaping, false imprisonment, or
criminal sexual conduct toward a minor; solicitation
of a minor to engage in sexual conduct or practice
prostitution; or any conduct that is a sexual offense
if committed against a minor.

Mandated Registrants:
On or after July 1, 1996, a person who is convicted of
a criminal offense against a victim who is a minor or
who is convicted of a sexually violent offense shall
register within 10 days after his or her release from
prison or placement on parole, supervised release, or
probation his or her name and current address; place
of employment, if any; the crime of which convicted;
and the date released from prison or placed on parole,
supervised release, or probation with the sheriff's
office in the county where such person will reside. 

Duration of Registration:
10 years for sexual offenders.  Lifetime for Sexually
Violent Predators.  Individuals classified as Sexually
Violent Predators may apply to the Review Board after
three years on unsupervised release to have their
status changed to sexual offender.  The Review Board
submits a report and a recommendation to the
sentencing court which makes the final decision.  As
of  July 1, 1999, lifetime for individuals who have
one or more prior convictions for any of the covered
offenses And, lifetime for individuals who have been
convicted of an aggravated offense such as aggravated
child molestation or aggravated sexual battery.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,564

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Georgia text database is fully automated.    
The Department of Corrections Division and State Board
of Pardons and Paroles electronically enter records to
the Georgia Sex Offender Registry on sex offenders who
are released from prisons and placed on probation,
parole or supervised release after July 1, 1996.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  While the Georgia SOR is a separate database, it
is linked to the State's criminal history file. A
query to the SOR will not get the full criminal
history in response, but any criminal history check
will get the SOR information.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes. The entry of an offender registration into the
Georgia Sexually Violent Offender Registry (SVOR)
automatically triggers an electronic message to the
FBI (and also to the sheriff of the offender's county
of residence).

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
Yes. The capability now exists to store all necessary
fingerprint information concerning the SVOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
Yes. The Department of Corrections Division and State
Board of Pardons and Paroles are automated. A mugshot
is submitted with each entry and mugshots are being
added to the existing sex offender registry files.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Information on offenders comes from the Department of
Corrections (through individual prisons in the Prison
Division and from the Probation Division), and State
Board of Pardons and Paroles and is submitted
electronically via the CJIS network.  This entry
automatically triggers an electronic message to the
FBI NSOR and also to the sheriff of the offender's
county of residence.

DNA Sample:
Yes. The Division of Forensic Science is responsible
for the DNA samples and database.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The  SVOR unit sends out certified notification
letters (annually for sexual offenders, every 90 days
for sexual predators), and the offender must respond
confirming his address.  If a letter is returned as
undeliverable, the SVOR unit notifies the local
sheriff, who conducts a physical check.  If the
offender is not located, the sheriff issues a warrant
for his arrest.

B. SOR Notification Automated:
Yes. 

C. Penalties for Noncompliance:
First time the offender fails to comply, he/she is
guilty of a misdemeanor.  Failure to report a second
and any subsequent times will result in a felony and
shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than
one nor more than three years.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
Dissemination to law enforcement and criminal justice
agencies takes place in two ways.  When the Georgia
Crime Information Center (GCIC) enters or updates
information in the Sexually Violent Offender Registry
(SVOR), that action automatically triggers a notice to
the sheriff of the offender's county of residence as
well as a notice to FBI.  The information is available
to other law enforcement and criminal justice agencies
through a criminal history query.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
The sheriff may prepare a list of all sexual offenders
by to specifically include sexual predators, providing
each person's name, address, and photograph.  The
sheriff shall update the list periodically and may
post such list in a prominent and visible location in
the sheriff's office and each city hall or primary
administrative building of every incorporated
municipality within the county.  Such list shall also
be made available upon request to any public or
private elementary, secondary, or post-secondary
school or educational institution located in the
county.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Georgia Bureau of Investigation or any sheriff
maintaining records required under this Code section
shall release relevant information collected under
this Code section that is necessary to protect the
public concerning those persons required to register
under this Code section, except that the identity of a
victim of an offense that requires registration under
this Code section shall not be released.  In addition
to any other notice that may be necessary to protect
the public, nothing in this Code section shall prevent
any sheriff from posting this information in any
public building in addition to those locations
enumerated in subparagraph (b)(1)(B) of the Code
section. 

Internet Website: (include web address and 
number of hits per month if applicable) 
The public may utilize the Internet website to view
all sex offenders listed in Georgia.  The web address
is: http://www.ganet.org/gbi/disclaim.html The site
receives approximately 250,000 hits per month.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Hawaii
Responsible Agency: Hawaii Criminal Justice Data
Center

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Sexually violent offenses and criminal offenses
against a victim who is a minor are covered in the
Hawaii legislation. 

Mandated Registrants:
Any offender who has been convicted of a covered
offense is required to register.  The law applies
retroactively to any offender who has ever been
convicted of a covered crime in the State of Hawaii,
independent of the date of conviction.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime.  

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
There are over 1,500 individuals in the Registry, as
of 2/01.  Estimates of additional persons convicted of
qualifying offenses but who have not registered range
from 500 to 3,000.

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial.  The SOR text database is fully automated and
is managed by the Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center
(HCJDC). Submissions from outlying criminal justice
agencies, however, may be in hard copy. The capability
for out-of-state transmission is limited, and the
capability to capture, store, and transmit
fingerprints or mugshots electronically is limited.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  A query to either the criminal history files or
to the Sex Offender Registry also triggers a check of
the alternate database and release of relevant
information.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
No, not as of February 1, 2001.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
As of 2/01, partial capability exists.  Hawaii's AFIS
is undergoing a major upgrade to incorporate livescan
and digital transmission from the HCJDC to the FBI and
its national databases, but local Hawaiian
jurisdictions still have to take fingerprints manually
and submit hard copy cards to HCJDC.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
As of 2/01 the HCJDC has installed a mugshot system to
capture and display photos of registered sex offenders
and other arrested offenders, and is able to display
those photos to criminal justice agencies throughout
the State. 

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
County police and sheriff departments and other
agencies of jurisdiction provide registration data 
to the Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center (HCJDC) 
when the offender is released to the community or 
appears at his local law enforcement agency to register. 
Local agencies can use direct, online entry if they
have computer connections to the HCJDC registry. 
Local police departments also take the offender's
fingerprints and mugshot and send hard copy of those
items to HCJDC.

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No, as of 2/01.  Address validation was not conducted
at that time.  (A requirement for address verification
every 90 days for all sex offenders became effective
July 1, 1998.  Under this program, HCJDC sends mailers
to all registered offenders every 90 days, and
monitors responses for accuracy, for updating
information and for potential arrests and prosecution
by appropriate agencies in instances of noncompliance.

SOR Notification Automated:
As of 2/01, not applicable. (Under the address
validation program initiated 7/1/98, the process is
partially automated. Offender data required for
notification is extracted every 90 days from the
registry, and letters are generated for the mailing.)

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Misdemeanor or a felony Class C.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Law enforcement and criminal justice agencies can
access SOR data through searches of the criminal
history files maintained by Hawaii Criminal Justice
Data Center (HCJDC).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Public information on registered sex offenders is
available to schools, and organizations serving
children, the elderly, the mentally ill, or other
vulnerable populations at the HCJDC office, at main
county police stations and on the Internet.

Procedures for Public Access:
Hawaii's legislation specifies the specific items of
SOR data that are to be accessible to the public.
Public record registration data is currently available
at the main county police departments, at the Hawaii
Criminal Justice Data Center (HCJDC), and on the
Internet.  This information is also integrated into
the Criminal History Public Access facility, which can
be used by the general public for background checks
via various search options.

Internet Website: (include web address and number 
of hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.ehawaiigov.org/HI_SOR/

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Idaho
Responsible Agency: Idaho State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Sex offender registration applies to person convicted
of the crime or an attempt, a solicitation, or a
conspiracy to commit one or more of the following
felony offenses enumerated in Idaho Code .18-8304:
assault with attempt to commit rape, infamous crime
against nature, or lewd and lascivious conduct with a
minor, but excluding mayhem, murder or robbery;
battery with attempt to commit rape, infamous crime
against nature, or lewd and lascivious conduct with a
minor, but excluding mayhem, murder or robbery; sexual
abuse of a child under sixteen years of age;
ritualized abuse of a child; sexual exploitation of a
child; possession of sexually exploitative material
for other than commercial purposes; lewd conduct with
a minor child; sexual battery of a minor child sixteen
or seventeen years of age; murder committed in
perpetration of rape or in perpetration of lewd
conduct with a child less than twelve years of age;
indecent exposure, but excluding a misdemeanor
conviction; first degree kidnaping committed for the
purpose of rape, committing the infamous crime against
nature or for committing any lewd and lascivious act
upon any child under the age of  sixteen, or for
purposes of sexual gratification or arousal; second
degree kidnaping where the victim is an unrelated
minor child; rape, but excluding where the female and
defendant are eighteen years of age or younger; male
rape; incest; crime against nature; and forcible
sexual penetration by use of a foreign object.

Mandated Registrants:
Any person who, (1) on or after July 1, 1993, is 
convicted of a crime, or an attempt, a solicitation,
or conspiracy to commit a crime provided for above,
(2) enters the State on or after July 1, 1993 and who
has been convicted of any crime, an attempt, a
solicitation or a conspiracy to commit a crime in
another State, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, including tribal
courts and military courts, that is substantially
equivalent to the offenses listed in the section
above, (3) pleads guilty to or has been found guilty
of a crime covered in this chapter prior to July 1,
1993, and the person, as a result of the offense, is
incarcerated in a county jail facility or a penal
facility or is under probation or parole supervision,
on or after July 1, 1993, (4) is a nonresident
regularly employed or working in Idaho or is a student
in the State and was convicted, found guilty or
pleaded guilty to a crime covered by this chapter and,
as a result of such conviction, finding or plea, is
required to register in his State of residence. 

Duration of Registration:
Registration is for the life of the offender. 
However, a registered sex offender other than a
recidivist or an offender designated as violent sexual
predator, may petition the court for exemption from
the duty to maintain registration after a period of 10
years from the date of release from incarceration or
of placement on parole or probation, whichever is
greater.  Idaho Code .18-8310 of the registration law
lists the conditions for the petition.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,778

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries    

Extent of database automation: 
The Central Sex Offender database is automated and
available to law enforcement electronically.  The
Department of Corrections, courts and local law
enforcement agencies submit registration documents to
the Central registry in hard copy form.
 
Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.  The SOR is maintained separately from the
criminal history files to avoid any confusion in the
access requirements because of the different laws
governing each.  However, the SOR can be accessed
through the Idaho Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System (ILETS) and is automated as a "hot file"--that
is, it comes up on routine traffic stop inquiries,
etc.             
 
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
Yes.
 
SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:  
As of 2/01, partial capability exists.  The capacity
for electronic storage and transmission of
fingerprints exists through the State's AFIS, which is
also housed in the Bureau of Criminal Identification,
Idaho State Police (ISP), but fingerprint submissions
to the SOR from other agencies are in hard copy and
require scanning.    
 
SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:  
No. The photo systems are in at both ISP and DOC,
however the networking issues have not permitted the
electronic exchange as yet.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
"Initial" registration data is forwarded from courts,
Department of Corrections and sheriff's departments in
hard copy form to the Central Registry.  (1) Within 10
days of coming into a county to establish residence or
temporary domicile, the sex offender must register in
person with the sheriff.  (2) Within 10 days of
commencement of employment or enrollment in an
educational institution, the nonresident sex offender
must register in person with the sheriff of the county
where employed or enrolled.  (3) Prior to commencement
of employment in counseling, coaching, teaching,
supervising, or working with minors in any way
regardless of the period of employment, the
nonresident sex offender must register in person with
the sheriff of the county where employed.  (This
information is also forwarded to the central registry
in hard copy form.) 

DNA Sample:
Yes, but blood and/or DNA samples are collected under
a separate law.  That process is administered by
Bureau of Forensic Services

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A. State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. At the time of conviction or release from
incarceration, a sex offender subject to registration
is provided notice of the requirements of
registration.  Notification is achieved by completion
of the Notification and Initial Registration Form SOR-
1.  On the first of the month containing the
anniversary of a sex offender's last local
registration, the central registry mails a non-
forwardable notice of annual registration to the
offender's last reported address. Within 10 days of
the mailing date of the notice, the offender must
reregister in person with the sheriff. 

B. SOR Notification Automated:
No.

C. Penalties for Noncompliance:
Yes, a sex offender subject to registration who fails
to register or provide required notice is guilty of a
felony and may be sentenced by the court to
imprisonment for a period of 5 years and fined $5,000. 
If the offender is on probation or supervised release
at the time of the violation, the probation or release
shall be revoked and the penalty for violating the
registration law shall be served consecutively to the
offender's original sentence.  In addition, a sex
offender subject to registration who willfully
provides false or misleading information in the
registration is guilty of a felony and may be
sentenced by the court to imprisonment for a period of
5 years and fined $5,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
The text content of the SOR is available online to all
criminal justice agencies with access to the Idaho Law
Enforcement Telecommunications System (ILETS). When a
law enforcement officer makes a driver's license
inquiry or a wanted person inquiry (State or
national), ILETS will cross-check the automated SOR
database.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Schools and nonprofit organizations working with
youth, women or other vulnerable populations are
exempt from payment of the fees to access registry
information.  Schools and such nonprofit organizations
may request statewide lists from the central registry. 
They may make inquiries or specified individuals or
requests for lists by county or zip code to either the
central registry or county sheriff.  Schools and
nonprofit organizations may also request Internet
access through a password protected database on the
department's website.

Procedures for Public Access:
Any person may inquire on a named individual or
request a list of registered sex offenders by zip code
or county.  This is accomplished through a written
public information request submitted to the central
registry or a local sheriff.  Information provided in
response to a public request is limited to the
offender's name, address, aliases, date of birth,
crime(s) of conviction, place(s) of conviction, and
status as a violent sexual predator.  All responses to
individual inquiries or requests for lists will
include a cautionary statement concerning misuse of
the information.  Further distribution of registry
information or lists must include this cautionary
statement.  The central registry and sheriffs are
authorized to charge $5 for each inquiry on a named
individual and each request for a list of offenders. 
Any person may also request a photograph of a
registered sex offender from the central registry. 
ISP charges $5 for each individual photograph.  (A
bill known under consideration in the Idaho 2001
Legislative session would allow the Idaho State Police
to provide free web access to all public information
in the database.)

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
http://www.isp.state.id.us/

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Illinois
Responsible Agency: Illinois State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Convictions and attempts of criteria felony sex
offenses were registerable as of July 16, 1986.  Other
violent offenses were added in 1996; the murder of a
child, kidnaping, unlawful restraint and misdemeanor
sex offenses or attempts were added July 24, 1997.  As
of July 1, 1999, other offenses added to the registry
were forcible detention, if the victim is under 18
years of age, indecent solicitation of an adult,
soliciting for a prostitute, if the victim is under 18
years of age, pandering if the victim is under 18
years of age, and convictions of comparable crimes in
another State, country or in Federal court are covered
in the Illinois law.

Mandated Registrants:
Individuals convicted of a covered offense or found
not guilty by reason of insanity on or after July 16,
1986, are required to register. As of July 1, 1999,
adjudicated juvenile sex offenders were required to
register.  Adjudicated sex offenders classified as
sexually dangerous and sexually violent are required
to register.  Since July 1, 1999, all sex offenders
fitting the definition of a predator are also required
to register.  Sex offenders living in another State
but working in Illinois or attending school are also
mandated to register.

Duration of Registration:
Persons classified as sexual offenders must register
for 10 years from the date of their conviction if
sentenced to probation or for 10 years from the date
of their release, discharge, or parole if they were
confined.  A 10-year extension to a sex offender's
registration requirement can be administratively added
by the Illinois State Police for violations of the
Registration Act.  For individuals classified as
sexually dangerous persons, sexually violent persons,
or sexual predators lifetime registration is required.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01
There are 16,551 total number of sex offenders in the
Registry, 13,930 of whom have registered.          

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Illinois SOR has a fully automated text database.
The "initial notification" is done at the time of
conviction if the offender receives a probation
sentence, or prior to release, discharge, or parole if
he is confined. The LEADS system can serve as a
"tickler" system if a law enforcement agency queries
their jurisdiction for the sex offenders.  Running
individual LEADS numbers can provide the agency with
the status of the sex offender, those who have failed
to register, the last day the sex offender is required
to register, date of conviction, county of conviction,
LEADS add-ons showing any stops made by any law
enforcement agency, place of employment, and so on 
While the text database it self is automated, much of
the data entry is manual.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Partially--it is linked for law enforcement purposes. 
Any routine law enforcement query of LEADS elicits SOR
information together with the criminal history record. 
However, background checks for employment normally
check only criminal history records. 

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.  As of October 1999, Illinois provides SOR data
to the FBI system electronically through NCIC 2000.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
Yes. This capability is available through the
Illinois AFIS system.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
No.  Photos are part of the sex offender registry, 
but as of February 2001, they are not digitized.  
NSOR grant money is presently being used to work 
on this project.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Initial information is derived from the sentencing
court (if the offender receives probation) or from 
the county jail or the Department of Corrections,
hospital, or mental health facility (if the offender
is confined).  Subsequent information comes from the
local law enforcement agency when the offender
registers in person.  

DNA Sample:
Yes, but not as part of the SOR.  DNA sampling is part
of a separate CODIS system within the Illinois State
Police.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Annual notification notices for sexual
offenders--and quarterly notices for those classified
as high risk offenders--are sent as non-forwardable
letters by the Intelligence Bureau of the Illinois
State Police.  Registering law enforcement agencies
are also required to verify addresses annually.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a Class 4 felony, punishable by one
to three years in prison. A $500 fine that is to be
shared with the local law enforcement agency and a
mandatory 7 days in jail is also required of sex
offenders that are convicted for a compliance
violation.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR information is available online, 24 hours per day,
to every Illinois law enforcement agency through the
Illinois Law Enforcement Agencies Data System (LEADS). 
The status of a specific offender (registered, not
registered, conditions of parole/probation, etc.) is
immediately available to any agency conducting a
routine query, including a traffic stop.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and 
the Mentally Ill:
The Illinois State Police (ISP) provide quarterly
lists of sex offenders to all schools, child care
facilities, and to the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services.  Local law enforcement agencies
developed lists of local organizations that serve
children and make sex offender information available
to them.  By administrative rule, each law enforcement
agency must designate a liaison to assist schools,
child care facilities, youth groups, and the public
regarding access and use of SOR information.  Lists of
adjudicated juvenile sex offenders are provided to
schools and licensed day cares throughout Illinois.
Secondary dissemination of juvenile information is
prohibited.

Procedures for Public Access:
The local law enforcement "liaison" (see above)
assists the public in access and use of the SOR
information when an offender is identified as working
or residing in circumstances that might compromise
public safety. The Illinois State Police (ISP) also
operates a victim notification program (at the
victim's request, he/she is notified of the offender's
release, address changes, death of offender, etc.)
Local law enforcement agencies also have discretion to
provide SOR information to any person or entity likely
to encounter the offender.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes, the Illinois sex offender website has been online
since November 15, 1999.  The public can search by
city, county, zip code, name, and multiple searches. 
Adjudicated juvenile sex offenders are not on the
website by law.  An e-mail address is provided for any
questions or tips the public may have regarding sex
offenders on the website. 
http://samnet.isp.state.il.us/ispso2/sex_offenders/
index.asp 

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Indiana
Responsible Agency: Indiana Criminal Justice Institute

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Rape, criminal deviate conduct, child molesting, child
exploitation, vicarious sexual gratification, child
solicitation, child seduction, sexual battery, sexual
misconduct with a minor as a Class A or B felony,
incest, also kidnaping if the victim is under 18 years
of age, and criminal confinement if the victim is
under 18 years.

Mandated Registrants:
The following persons are required to register: 
anyone convicted in Indiana of the first 10 crimes
after June 30, 1994; anyone convicted of last two
crimes after June 30, 1998; persons residing in
Indiana but convicted of substantially equivalent
offenses in other States after the effective dates;
juveniles 14 or over, who are adjudicated delinquent
in Indiana after June 30, 1996, for an act that would
be a covered offense if committed by an adult and
found by a court to be likely to repeat such an act.

Duration of Registration:
Local registration is required for 10 years following 
the sexual offender's  release to the community for
everyone except those determined to be sexually
violent predators.  For sexually violent predators,
the registration requirement is for an "indefinite"
period.  Persons identified as sexually violent
predators may petition the court, at least 10 years
after sentencing, to have the determination of
sexually violent predator removed from their name on
the Registry.  While local registration is required
for 10 years, an offender's name appears in the
State's Sex and Violent Offender Registry (SVOR) for
his lifetime.  Currently, there is no provision for
petitioning for the removal of a name from the central
registry once it is listed.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
Approximately 11,656

Automation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial. The SVOR text database itself is automated,
but it is not linked to other automated systems or to
local law enforcement agencies. The Indiana State 
SVOR consists of 4 separate databases of qualifying
offenders: one section prospectively covers the period
since 1994 when the SVOR was established by statute,
and three sections retrospectively cover periods
before the legislation was enacted--a Department of
Corrections database, a prosecuting attorneys'
database, and a State Police database.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No. Indiana criminal history files are maintained by
the State Police.  The SVOR database is maintained by
the Indiana Criminal Justice Institute (ICJI). 
Indiana data for the National Sex Offender Registry
(NSOR) will be transmitted to the FBI by the State
Police criminal records repository, not via the SVOR
maintained by ICJI.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR 
system:
No. As of 2/01, this capacity does not exist within
the ICJI.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
As of 2/01, with the support of BJS NCHIP funds, the
required livescan equipment has been placed in 31 of
Indiana's 92 counties representing the largest
population areas in the State.  Final testing of local
equipment and work on the hardware required at the
State level is underway.  1998 legislation directs
that correctional facilities releasing a qualifying
offender provide his fingerprints (and other
identifiers including a photo) to the State Police,
and that the State Police send the fingerprints to the
FBI.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
No, not as of 2/01. (see preceding section for
information on the installation of equipment required
for this technology.)

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Current information is submitted to the Indiana
Criminal Justice Institute (ICJI), by the State
courts, the State Department of Corrections, local
jails, local law enforcement agencies, county
prosecutors and other State criminal justice agencies. 
All information is submitted in hard copy.

DNA Sample:
No.
 
Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Legislation effective 7/1/98 institutes annual
verification (quarterly for predators), but makes
local law enforcement agencies responsible for the
notification letters to offenders, conducting
verification, and conducting follow-up.  The local law
enforcement agency notifies the State SVOR if the
offender fails to return a signed verification form.

B. SOR Notification Automated:
Effective 7/1/98, local law enforcement agencies
implemented the notification procedures.  The degree
of automation within local agencies is not known, but
larger departments may automate the notification
process.  

C. Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a D felony.  Subsequent offenses
are C felonies.  The penalty for a D felony is 1-1/2
years in prison with not more than 1-1/2 years added
for aggravating circumstances or 1 year subtracted for
mitigating circumstances.  The penalty for a C felony
is 4 years in prison with not more than 4 years added
for aggravating circumstances and not more than 2
years subtracted for mitigating circumstances.  Both C
and D felony penalties also can include a $10,000
fine.  

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice 
Agencies:
The SVOR data is available to State law enforcement
and criminal justice agencies in response to queries,
but it is not on a computerized network directly
accessible to law enforcement agencies.  Agencies also
may obtain copies of the updates sent to schools and
youth organizations.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The SVOR data and all updates are sent (in hard copy)
to all public and private schools, the Indiana Family
and Social Services Administration and their licensees
(such as group homes), the State personnel department,
and to agencies that work with children and have
requested copies.  The SVOR unit also places copies in
all public county libraries.  This information
contains all four databases. The Indiana Criminal
Justice Institute (ICJI) has also made SVOR
information available on a computer diskette.  

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SOR data in hard copy
in public libraries throughout the State and on the
State of Indiana website on the Internet.  It also has
been made available on computer diskette.  The SVOR
data available to the public does not include street
addresses, but does reflect all four databases.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  The Indiana SOR is on the Internet at
http://www.state.in.us/serv/cji_sor

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Iowa
Responsible Agency: Iowa Department of Public Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include convictions or adjudications 
for criminal offenses against a minor, aggravated
offenses, sexual exploitation, and sexually violent
offenses, in the State or in another State, or in any
federal, military, tribal or foreign court.

Mandated Registrants:
Individuals convicted or adjudicated of a covered
offense on or after July 1, 1995, or who were on
probation, parole or work release status, or who were
incarcerated on or after July 1, 1995 must register. 
Requirement includes individuals who have received a
deferred sentence or deferred judgment.  As of 7/1/98,
individuals moving into Iowa who were required to
register in the State they are moving from must
register with the State of Iowa.  Non-resident full-
time or part-time students and/or workers must also
register.

Duration of Registration:
Sexual offenders must register for 10 years from the
date of their release to the community.  Sexually
violent predators (those convicted of a qualifying
offense as specified in the federal Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Public Law
No. 103-322) must register for life. Any offender who
is convicted of a second or subsequent offense that
requires registration must register for life.  Any
offender who is convicted of an aggravated offense
must register for life.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
3,921

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The SOR text database itself is automated, with manual
entry of the text from hard copy submissions. The Iowa
SOR is maintained as a totally separate database in
the "Iowa On-line Warrants and Articles System" (IOWA
System), the IOWA equivalent to NCIC.  The Iowa System
can interface directly with the FBI NSOR and that link
is expected to be complete by the Fall of 2001.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No. The process is in development with completion
expected in the Fall of  2001.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal & storage of fingerprints:
No. A hard copy of the fingerprint card is maintained
in a file folder together with the original
registration documents. The only way to access the SOR
fingerprints is to contact DCI staff and make a
specific request.

SOR system has capability for electronic 
transmittal and storage of mugshots:
No. A hard copy of the photo is maintained in a file
folder together with the original registration
documents and the fingerprint card. The only way to
access the photo is to contact DCI staff and make a
specific request.  The photo is then copied and sent
by U.S. mail, fax, or e-mail attachment.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The SOR receives registration information when an
offender is released to the community. It comes from
the Department of Corrections or county jail if
offender was confined, from the Iowa Department of
Correctional Services if the offender received a
probation sentence, from the court if the sentence was
a fine only, and from the Department of Human Services
if offender is an adjudicated juvenile. All agencies
submit information in hard copy for manual data entry.

DNA Sample:
No

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A. State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. Under both the original and amended legislation,
notification of the address verification requirement
is conducted by the Division of Criminal
Investigation, Department of Public Safety.  Mail
verification is required annually during the
anniversary month of initial registration. 
Verification is required every 90 days for offenders
classified as "sexually violent predators" (based on
conviction offenses specified in federal Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994.)

SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is an aggravated misdemeanor,
punishable by up to two years incarceration.  A second
or subsequent offense is a class D felony, punishable
by up to five years imprisonment. If a registrant is
noncompliant and commits another sex crime he/she
faces a class C felony punishable up to 10 years.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR data from the Department of Public Safety
(DPS) is directly accessible to all law enforcement
and criminal justice agencies in the State having
access to "Iowa On-line Warrants and Articles System"
(IOWA System). 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Legislation effective 7/1/98 states that for
registrant classified "at risk", affirmative public
notification may include "notification of agencies or
organizations in the community in which the registrant
lives, is employed or attends school." Under both
original and amended legislation, the offender
receives prior notice of any public notification plans
and may appeal.

Procedures for Public Access:
Current legislation (effective 7/1/98) allows for
registry information to be disseminated from sheriffs'
offices and police departments provided that the
requester provides the name of the person on which the
inquiry is being made; and one additional identifier:
date of birth or address.  A requester may also ask
for a list of all registrants in that county who have
been determined to be "at risk" to re-offend.  No
identifiers are needed.  Affirmative public
notification may be made on "at risk" offenders by any
local law enforcement agency based on information
provided by DPS.  Affirmative public notification may
include the offender's name, address, photograph,
locations frequented by the offender, and relevant
criminal history.  Registry information on "at risk"
offenders may be distributed to the public by printed
materials, visual or audio press releases, and by the
criminal or juvenile justice agency's web page. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Since March 17, 2000, information on "at risk"
offenders has been available on the DPS web site:
http://www.iowasexoffenders.com   Currently,
information on over 800 "at risk" offenders is
available.  The web site generates an average of
approximately 9000 hits per month.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Kansas
Responsible Agency: Kansas Office of the Attorney
General

Who is in the Registry?
          
Covered Offenses:
The following offenses are covered: (A): rape,
indecent liberties with a child, aggravated indecent
liberties with a child, criminal sodomy, aggravated
criminal sodomy, indecent solicitation of a child,
aggravated indecent solicitation of a child, sexual
exploitation of a child, sexual battery, aggravated
sexual battery, and aggravated incest.  (B): capital
murder, murder in the first and second degree,
voluntary and involuntary manslaughter (C): kidnaping
or criminal restraint (except by parent) when victim
is under 18, adultery, criminal sodomy, promoting
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, lewd  and
lascivious behavior, and unlawful sexual relations;
when one party is under 18.  Also covered is any
attempt, conspiracy or criminal solicitation to commit
any of the above listed offenses.                      
                   
Mandated Registrants:
Anyone convicted of the offenses in List (A) on or
after April 14, 1994, must register, if the offense
itself occurred on or after April 14, 1994 the
registration is public record.  Anyone convicted of
offenses in List (B)  or List (C) on or after July 1,
1997, must register, if the offense itself occurred on
or after July 1, 1997, then the registration is public
record.

Duration of Registration:
The duration of the registration requirement is 10
years.  Lifetime registration is required if the
offender has a second conviction for any covered
offense.  Lifetime registration is also required for
anyone convicted for a first offense of rape or
aggravated criminal sodomy (or attempt, conspiracy, or
criminal solicitation) involving penetration of the
victim of any age through use of force or threat of
serious violence or penetration of a victim less than
14 years of age.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,794

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Kansas SOR has a fully automated text database.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
The Kansas Offender Registry (OR) is not linked to the
State's criminal history database.  However, data
available to criminal justice agencies is replicated
daily to a "hot file." The Kansas Offender Registry
Hot File can be accessed through the State's criminal
justice information system and NLETS.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
The KBI attempted to manually support the FBI's NCIC
Sex Offender Registry file.  However, the task was too
burdensome and time consuming.  Information entered is
maintained but no new offenders are being added. 
Fields must be added to the current Kansas OR database
before an electronic interface to NCIC can be
implemented.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Limited.  Court service officers and parole officers
have primary responsibility for the initial sex
offender registration.  Many such offices do not have
fingerprint equipment.  While the State has an AFIS
with livescan capabilities, this is not practical for
smaller jurisdictions. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Limited. As of 2/01, digital photography is being used
by the State's eight court services offices.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The initial information on an offender is submitted to
the Kansas Bureau of Investigation (KBI) by the
institution releasing the offender to the community
(the Department of Corrections, a jail, or the court). 
The offender then registers with the local sheriff in
his county of residence.  If the offender is no longer
under criminal justice supervision, he registers with
the local sheriff's office, which also forwards the
registration to KBI.  All information is received at
KBI in hard copy for manual data entry.

DNA Sample:
Yes. DNA is required for all offenders convicted of
offenses requiring registration.  If it is not
obtained during incarceration, a sample is taken at
the time of registration.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Address verification letters are sent out by
Kansas Bureau of Investigation (KBI) which administers
the SOR program.  Legislative amendments include
requirement to verify addresses of all registrants
every 90 days.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.  The SOR database is designed to automatically
generate address verification letters and to allow
tracking of responses and of the dispositions on
actions taken.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation of any portion of the Kansas Offender
Registration Act is a Level 10 Non Person Felony.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The KBI notifies county prosecutors and law
enforcement agencies of any offender noncompliance of
the Act such as failure to report address changes or
return quarterly address verification forms.  Criminal
justice agencies have access to the OR data through
the Kansas Criminal Justice Information System (KCJIS)
and the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System (NLETS).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 2/01, the State does not mandate any action for
affirmative notification.  

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SOR information 
through an Internet website.  Members of the public
may also inspect registration records at a local
sheriff's office or at the Kansas Bureau of
Investigation.  (The date of commission of specific
offenses determine whether an offender's registration
information is a public record. See "Mandated
Registrants")

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  The Kansas SOR website is operated by the Kansas
Bureau of Investigation (KBI).  The website averages
6,800 hits per month.
http://www.ink.org/public/kbi/kbiregoffpage.html

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Kentucky 
Responsible Agency: Kentucky State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
All felony sex crimes: Rape 1, 2, & 3, Sodomy 1, 2, &
3, Incest; Sexual Abuse 1, Unlawful Transaction with a
Minor 1, Use of a minor in a sexual performance. 
Specified crimes against victims that are minors:
Promoting a sexual performance of a minor, Promoting
prostitution 1, 2, & 3, Kidnaping and Unlawful
Confinement (non-parental), Sexual Abuse 2 & 3 (only
misdemeanors covered).  Any conviction for attempt or
solicitation of above offenses.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all adults convicted in
Kentucky of the above listed crimes, and juvenile
offenders convicted of those same crimes, if treated
as "Youthful Offenders" in adult circuit court.  Also
applies to offenders moving into Kentucky, who are
required to register by the laws of another State or
by federal/military law.  Or for offenders convicted
of an offense, which if committed in Kentucky, would
require registration.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime registration is required for all offenders
released from custody after April 11, 2000 who have
convictions for: Rape 1st, Sodomy 1st, two or more
convictions for a sex crime or crime against a victim
who is a minor; Kidnaping and Unlawful Confinement (of
a minor, non-parental); or who move in from another
State and are required to register; or are designated
as Sexually Violent Predators.  Also applies to
offenders formerly classified as "high" risk, under a
previous version of the law.  Ten years is required
for all other offenses.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
Approximately 2000.

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial.  The Kentucky SOR has a text database that is
automated and can be searched through the KY LINK
system (Law Information Network of Kentucky) at
LINK/NCIC terminals.  Data is currently stored in an
IBM mainframe, in an IMS DB/DC database with attendant
COBOL programs.  This SOR database is in the process
of being converted to a more modern and user friendly
system, which will be NCIC 2000 compliant, and include
submission to the FBI NSOR file.  The website database
is completely automated, running on a SQL platform. 
It is a separate system, information is entered into
both databases at this time.  This will be eliminated
once the transfer of data from the older system is
complete.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. The SOR is one of Kentucky's state-level "hot
files," and accessible to all criminal justice
agencies that are members of the Law Information
Network of Kentucky (LINK).

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Not at this time.  Electronic transmissions will occur
once the database conversion is complete.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Still in development, as described above.  Storage of
fingerprints is already being done through the
statewide AFIS system.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Still in development, as described above.  Hardware is
in place but waiting on the interface to new database
system.

Operation of Sex Offender 
Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The SOR unit receives offender registration documents
from the Department of Corrections on offenders being
released from prison who are required to register, and
from the Division of Probation and Parole for all non-
incarcerated offenders required to register (including
move-in offenders from out-of-state).  All
modifications of address information on offenders are
completed with and submitted to KSP by the Division of
Probation and Parole field offices, as offenders
change addresses.  Information received is manually
entered in the SOR database and the SOR web database.

DNA Sample:
Yes, a linking mechanism is planned.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes, since 4/1/2000.  Kentucky began validating
registrant addresses for lifetime offenders in June
2000, and has continued to do so on a quarterly
schedule.  Address validation procedures began for 10-
year registrants in January 2001, and will continue to
be done each month, on an annual basis for each
offender.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes, through a public access website.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance with registration requirements is a
Class D felony, punishable by 1-5 years in prison, a
fine, or both. 

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR information is available to all criminal justice
agencies that are members of the LINK system, which 
provides access to State "hot" files, NCIC, NLETS, and
NOAA.  The Department of Corrections also notifies all
law enforcement agencies by mail when any offender is
released into their area.  A public access website is
also available, providing on-line registration
information.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Offender registration information is available on-line
at the KSP Sex Offender Registry website.  Free
Internet access is available at all public libraries.

Procedures for Public Access:
Offender registration information is available on-line
at the KSP Sex Offender Registry website.  Free
Internet access is available at all public libraries.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
http://kspsor.state.ky.us.  The website has been
functional since April 11, 2000, and as received over
170,000 hits in that time for an average of 15,454
hits per month.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Louisiana
Responsible Agency: Louisiana State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include felony sex offenses, first
offense prostitution (a misdemeanor), and the
following non-sex offenses if committed against a
victim who is a minor: simple kidnaping, aggravated
kidnaping, interfering with the custody of a child,
and false imprisonment or aggravated false
imprisonment of a minor.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandated for all persons convicted of
a covered sex offense, committed or attempted, on or
after June 18, 1992, or committed prior to June 18,
1992 if the person is under the custody of the
Department of Public Safety and Corrections on or
after June 18, 1992, and all persons convicted after
July 1, 1997 of a covered offense against a victim who
is a minor.

Duration of Registration:
10 years for sexual offenders.  For offenders
determined to be sexually violent predators, the
registration requirement is for life.  Those convicted
prior to July 1, 1997 may petition the court for
relief from the registration requirement. (Act 594 of
the 1999 Regular Legislative Session which became
effective on August 15, 1999 repealed the provision
allowing the court to relieve the person of the duty
to register).

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
5,708

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Louisiana SOR has a new computer program with the
electronic capability of generating notices to law
enforcement as offender information is added or
updated.  The information is then transmitted to the
public and law enforcement websites.  Preparations
have been made in the registry to accept offender
modus operandi information which will be accessible to
local law enforcement.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of February 2001, but it is close to the
testing phase.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of February 2001.  Electronic transmission
is pending installation and implementation of NCIC
2000.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Louisiana AFIS provides Livescan capability at
sheriffs' offices and jail booking sites, at major
municipal police departments, and at major Probation
and Parole offices. Livescan stations were purchased
in conjunction with the new registry program and
placed at various prison facilities within the State. 
With the AFIS upgrade in the near future, the registry
will have the capability of electronically retrieving
mugshots and fingerprints on the offenders in the
registry, then electronically submit the fingerprints
to the FBI SOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Partial.  Livescan capability is available for most
local law enforcement agencies, major Probation and
Parole Offices, and some prisons.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Louisiana Department of Corrections and  prisons
submit registration information when sex offenders are
released from incarceration. Local law enforcement
agencies send information when an offender registers
locally, and Probation and Parole offices also submit
data to SOR.  Some information is received
electronically from the prisons and Probation and
Parole via the SOR.  Other information is submitted in
hard copy from the relevant agency.

DNA Sample:
No. Legislation was passed September 1, 1999 for DNA
samples to be taken from persons arrested for felony
sex offenses, however the State does not have the
capability available to catalog the information for
the SOR at this time.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.  Programming is in place to automatically
generate verification letters to offenders and notices
to local law enforcement agencies advising them of
cases of noncompliance.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first violation is punishable by a fine of  $1,000
and/or 1 year imprisonment. The second and subsequent
violations are punishable by not more than 3 years
imprisonment without parole, probation or suspension
of sentence.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Office of State Police notifies other law
enforcement agencies of SOR data by mail and/or fax. 
Law enforcement officers, statewide, can obtain access
to the SOR Law Enforcement Website by applying for
clearance through the Bureau of Identification, Sex
Offender Registry.  Also, probation and parole
officers can be granted clearance and obtain query
access to the State Police Registry directly.  (The
link to provide query access of the Registry to law
enforcement or the Louisiana Supreme Court, has yet to
be established.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Affirmative notification of schools and organizations
is at the discretion of the local law enforcement
agency where the registrant resides.  In addition,
community notification provisions require the offender
to give notice of the crime for which he was
convicted, his name, and his address to the
superintendent of the school district where he will
reside who, in turn, informs the principal of every
school within a one mile radius of the offender's
address and the principals of other schools as the
superintendent deems appropriate.  Other organizations
serving children or vulnerable populations may receive
notice directly from the offender as he fulfills the
community notification requirements described in the
next section.  

Procedures for Public Access:
Citizens may make a public records inquiry to the
local law enforcement agencies or to the Registry.  In
addition, individual citizens may be informed directly
through community notification provisions that require
the offender to give notice of the crime for which he
was convicted, his name, and his address to at least
one person in every residence or business within a one
mile radius of his residence in a rural area and a
three square block area in an urban or suburban area;
as well as to give notice to the school
superintendent; to the landlord, lessor, or owner of
the residence or property where he will reside; to
publish notice twice in the official journal of the
governing authority of the parish where he will
reside; and to give any other notice deemed
appropriate by the court or the Parole Board.  The
public also has access through the SOR website for
queries.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes, as of March 24, 2000.  The website averages about
176,678 hits per month.  The web address is: 
http://www.lasocpr.lsp.org/socpr/

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Maine
Responsible Agency: Maine State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Prior to September 18, 1999, Maine's law covered gross
sexual assault of a victim less than 16 years of age. 
The 119th Maine Legislature passed a law, effective
9/18/99, that brings the State into compliance with
Megan's Law, the Wetterling Act, and the Pam Lychner
Act.  The new law applies if someone is sentenced on
or after September 18, 1999 of any of the following
offenses: Sexual Exploitation of a Minor 17 MRSA Sec.
2922; Gross Sexual Assault 17-A MRSA Sec. 253; Sexual
Abuse of Minors 17-A MRSA Sec. 254; Unlawful Sexual
Contact 17-A MRSA Sec. 255; Visual Sexual Aggression
Against a Child 17-A MRSA Sec. 256; Sexual Misconduct
with a child under 14 years of age 17-A MRSA Sec. 258;
Kidnaping (Unless actor is parent of victim) 17-A MRSA
Sec. 301; Criminal Restraint 17-A MRSA Sec. 302;
Violation of Privacy 17-A MRSA Sec. 511(1)(D); Incest
17-A MRSA Sec. 556; Aggravated Promotion of
Prostitution 17-A MRSA 852(1)(B); Patronizing
Prostitution of a Minor 17-A MRSA Sec. 855.

Mandated Registrants:
Persons convicted of gross sexual assault on a victim
under 16 years of age and sentenced on or after June
30, 1992, and prior to September 18, 1999.  Also
persons sentenced on or after September 18, 1999 of
the following offenses:  Sexual Exploitation of a
Minor 17 MRSA Sec. 2922; Gross Sexual Assault 17-A
MRSA Sec. 253; Sexual Abuse of Minors 17-A MRSA Sec.
254; Unlawful Sexual Contact 17-A MRSA Sec. 255;
Visual Sexual Aggression Against a Child 17-A MRSA
Sec. 256; Sexual Misconduct with a child under 14
years of age 17-A MRSA Sec. 258; Kidnaping (Unless
actor is parent of victim) 17-A MRSA Sec. 301;
Criminal Restraint 17-A MRSA Sec. 302; Violation of
Privacy 17-A MRSA Sec. 511(1)(D); Incest 17-A MRSA
Sec. 556; Aggravated Promotion of Prostitution 17-A
MRSA 852(1)(B); Patronizing Prostitution of a Minor
17-A MRSA Sec. 855. (A bill has been submitted to the
120th Maine Legislature to revise the most recent sex
offender registration and notification law (Sept.
1999) to apply to all sex offenders and sexually
violent predators who were sentenced on or after June
30, 1992).

Duration of Registration:
If convicted prior to September 18, 1999, registration
is required for 15 years following the offender's
release to the community on probation or post-
incarceration/parole.  Registered offenders may
petition for a waiver of the registration requirement
after 5 years.  For offenders who were sentenced on or
after 6/30/92 through 8/31/96, the expiration date of
their 15 year registration requirement does not change
if they are re-incarcerated for violations of
probation, release conditions, or registration
provisions. Offenders sentenced on or after 9/1/96
also must register for 15 years following their
release to the community, but if they are re-
incarcerated, the 15 year registration requirement
begins anew following their new release. If sentenced
on or after September 18, 1999, a "sex offender" must
register for 10 years following release, or if no
incarceration, from date of sentence, along with
annual address verification.  A 'sexual violent
predator," must register for life, with 90-day address
verification.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
473

Automation of Sex Offender Registries
     
Extent of database automation:     
Automated database system is completed and is being
populated at this time.  Currently, it is not being
used for public access.  Complete automation is
expected by Fall of 2002.
     
Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.  Linkage of database to CCH is anticipated by Fall
of 2002.  
     
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system
Yes. 
     
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints: 
Partial capability exists.  The capability for digital
transmission and storage of fingerprints exists in the
State AFIS, but the AFIS is not currently linked to
Maine's SOR.   

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots: 
This capability is planned for the future as part of
the full automation of the database anticipated to be
completed by Fall of 2002.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The offender submits his registration information in
hard copy to the State Bureau of Identification, Maine
State Police when he is released to the community or
when he moves.  The Bureau then notifies (via mail)
State, County, and local law enforcement agencies, and
the DA's Office with jurisdiction over offender's
residence, sending both demographic data and the DOC's
risk assessment when it is provided. 

DNA Sample:
Yes.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes, if sentenced on or after September 18, 1999.

B.  SOR Notification Automated
Not at this time, however, Maine is currently under
design for a new automated Criminal History project,
which will include and expand the Sex Offender
Registration capabilities in the Fall of 2002.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
For those offenders sentenced on or after 6/30/92
through 8/31/96, the crime is a class E misdemeanor,
punishable by up to six months in jail and/or a fine
of up to $1,000.  For those offenders sentenced on or
after 9/1/96, the crime is a class D misdemeanor,
punishable by up to 364 days in jail and/or a fine of
up to $2,000.  For those offender sentenced on or
after 6/30/92 to 9/18/99, two or more prior
convictions within 10 years of a third charge for
noncompliance cause the third charge to be a class C
felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to five
years and/or a fine of up to $5,000.  If sentenced on
or after September 18, 1999, a sex offender or
sexually violent predator who fails to register or
update the information required under this law commits
a Class D misdemeanor crime.  They may be sentenced to
a definite period of less than one year imprisonment,
fine up to $2,000 and probation for not more than 1
year.  A violation when the sex offender or sexually
violent predator has 2 or more prior convictions in
this State for violation of this is a Class C felony
crime.  The sentence shall not exceed 5 years, fine up
to $5,000 and probation not to exceed more than 4
years.     

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information
 
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Local law enforcement agencies are notified of SOR
information by U.S. mail. Any name check inquiry
through NCIC also checks the SOR.  There is
anticipated future "web-enabled" direct access over
the existing Bureau of State Police network to State
and local criminal justice agencies, including those
of Penobscot Nation and Passaomquoddy Tribe.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Affirmative notification of schools and organizations
is the responsibility of  the local law enforcement
agency where the offender resides.

Procedures for Public Access:
The information in the Maine Registry is based on
conviction data and is therefore considered a public
record, available to citizens through a request to a
State or local law enforcement agency. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Not available at this time.  There is anticipated
future "web-enabled" direct access to SOR information
for law enforcement agencies and personnel and  
separately   direct public access to information on
offenders designated as a predator or high risk.  

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Maryland
Responsible Agency: Maryland Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Sexual offenses against both children and adults are
covered in the Maryland law.

Mandated Registrants:
Adults convicted of sexual offenses against children
on or after October 1, 1995, and adults convicted of
sexual offenses against other adults on or after July
1, 1997, are required to register.

Duration of Registration:
10 years.  Lifetime registration for those convicted
of a second offense.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
Approximately 1400.

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
Automated text database is in implementation stage.
The SOR is partially automated through a PC using
EXCEL software to maintain the list of registrants.
The automation of the Sex Offender Registry is
currently in the design and development stage.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. 

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.  Maryland submits records online.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  Capability exists through the Maryland AFIS
(MAFIS).  The system has capability for electronic
transmittal.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes. The Central Repository has the capability in
conjunction with MAFIS.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The relevant "supervising authority" (State or local
corrections agencies, the courts, Division of Parole
and Probation) registers all qualifying offenders
before release, and sends a copy of the registration
statement (with photo and fingerprints) to the
designated local law enforcement agency (DLLEA) for
the offender's county of residence and to the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
for the SOR.  When the offender then registers locally
with DLLEA, a copy of that registration is also sent
to the SOR. 

DNA Sample:
No. 

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. Maryland has four categories of offenders subject
to registration: Child Sexual Offenders, (sexual)
Offenders, Sexually Violent Offenders, and Sexually
Violent Predators.  The Sex Offender Registry Unit
mails manually produced and processed address
verification forms annually to registrants in the
(Sexual) Offender and the Sexually Violent Offender
categories.  The DLLEA mails manually produced and
processed address verification forms to registrants in
the Sexually Violent Predator category every 90 days. 
Registered Child Sexual Offenders are required to
reregister in person annually with the DLLEA.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance;
A registrant who knowingly fails to register or
knowingly provides false information of a material
fact is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is
subject to imprisonment in the penitentiary for not
more than three years or a fine of not more than
$5,000 or both.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Information is made available to State criminal
justice agencies through a notation that the
individual is a sex offender placed in the
Identification Index (IDENT/INDEX) of the Maryland
Criminal Justice Information Systems (CJIS). Changes
of residency are received from Parole and Probation,
local law enforcement agencies, and the registrants. 
The changes are forwarded to the Sex Offender Registry
Unit to update the registry and notify the previous
and the current registering agency of the new
residency.  

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
When a child sexual offender registers with a local
law enforcement agency, the agency is required to
notify the county school superintendent who then
notifies school principals.  The local law enforcement
agency may also notify--as necessary to protect the
public interest--community organizations, religious
organizations, or any organization that relates to
children or youth.

Procedures for Public Access:
Written requests for the registry are mailed, e-mailed
or  faxed to the Sex Offender Registry Unit and
responded to by the Sex Offender Registry Unit. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month if applicable) 
Yes, but for information only. The Maryland Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services website
includes information on the sex offender registration
program, procedures for requesting registrant
information, and links to the legislation and other
relevant programs, but it does not include any
offender-specific information.
http://www.dpscs.state.md.us 

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries:
Massachusetts Responsible Agency: Massachusetts 
Sex Offender Registry Board

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include: indecent assault and battery
on a child under 14; indecent assault and battery on a
person age 14 or over; rape of a child under 16 with
force; rape and abuse of a child; assault of a child
with intent to commit rape; assault with intent to
commit rape; kidnaping of a child under the age of 16;
inducing a minor into prostitution; living off or
sharing the earning of a minor prostitute; posing or
exhibiting a child in a state of nudity; dissemination
of visual material of a child in a state of nudity or
sexual conduct; disseminating to a minor matter
harmful to a minor; possession of child pornography;
unnatural and lascivious acts with a child under 16;
aggravated rape; rape; indecent assault and battery on
a mentally retarded person; drugging persons for
sexual intercourse; incestuous marriage or
intercourse;  unnatural and lascivious acts with a
child under 16; open and gross lewdness and lascivious
behavior but excluding a first or single adjudication
as a delinquent juvenile before August 1, 1992; and
any attempt to commit a violation of covered crimes,
or a like violation of the laws of another State, the
United States or military, territorial or Indian
tribal authority.

Mandated Registrants:
A person who resides or works in Massachusetts and who
on or after August 1, 1981 has been convicted of a sex
offense or who has been adjudicated as a youthful
offender or as a delinquent juvenile by reason of a
sex offense or released from incarceration or parole
or probation supervision or custody with the
Department of Youth Services for a conviction or
adjudication of a sex offense or has been adjudicated
a sexually dangerous person or released from civil
commitment.

Duration of Registration:
Duty to register ends 20 years after the sex offender
has been convicted or adjudicated or released from all
custody or supervision, whichever occurs last.  The
duty to register may also be terminated by the SORB. 
The following offenses result in lifetime
registration: convictions for two or more Wetterling
Act sex offenses committed on different occasions;
conviction for a sexually violent offense defined by
Massachusetts law, determined by sentencing court to
be a sexually violent predator.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
In September 1999, a new Sex Offender Registry Law
(SOR law) was enacted in an attempt to comply with
court decisions issued under the previous law. 
Shortly after the new law was enacted, the mail in
registration provision was challenged.   In November
of 1999, a superior court judge issued an injunction
against the SORB that prohibits registration without
first offering the sex offender a hearing.  As of
February 2001, there are approximately 17,000
offenders identified as qualifying for registration. 
While awaiting the Court's decision, the SORB is in
the early stages of offering offenders the opportunity
for a pre-registration hearing. On September 11, 2000
and March 8, 2001, oral arguments were heard by the
State's highest court, the Supreme Judicial Court
(SJC). [On June 28, 2001, the SJC concluded that the
SORB can require an offender to provide his home and
work address prior to providing the offender a hearing
to determine whether or not the offender had to
register.  The Court also concluded that the SORB can
transmit this data, and other data regarding the
offender, to police departments.  The offender
information cannot be disseminated to the public until
the Board classifies the offender and the offender has
an opportunity to challenge the recommended
classification at an administrative hearing.]   

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Massachusetts SOR has a fully automated text
database.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  The SOR will be housed on the Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS) of the Massachusetts
Criminal History Systems Board (CHSB).

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, as of 2/01.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No, as of 2/01.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, as of 2/01.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The SOR law requires sex offenders to initially
register by mail with the SORB.  Upon classification,
Level II (moderate risk) and Level III (high risk)
offenders are required to register in person at the
local police department.  At that time, additional
registration information is provided by the offender
and photographs and fingerprints will be updated.  The
SOR law additionally requires other registration
information be provided to the SORB by agencies that
have custody of the offender, including correctional
agencies, not less than 90 days prior to the release
from custody; by agencies that have supervision of the
offender, including probation or parole, within 5 days
of assuming supervision of the sex offender; by the
sentencing court, within 5 days of sentencing when the
sex offender is sentenced to less than 90 days
committed.   

DNA Sample:
No, not as part of the SOR law.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:           
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes, under the SOR law.  Annual verification forms are
to be mailed to each sex offender at the last reported
address.  Level I offenders (low risk) will be
required to annually verify information by mail to the
SORB.  Level II and Level III offenders will be
required to appear in person at the local police
department to annually verify information.  At that
time, an updated photo and fingerprints will be taken. 
A sex offender who has been determined to be a
sexually violent predator or who lists a homeless
shelter as his residence shall also appear in person
at the police department every ninety days to verify
registration information.  Whether a low, moderate, or
high risk offender, the sex offender shall provide
Independent Written Verification of the address at
which he is registered. 

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first conviction shall be punished by imprisonment
for not less than six months and not more than two and
one-half years in a house of correction nor more than
5 years in a State prison or a fine of not more than
$1,000 or by both such fine and imprisonment.  The
second and subsequent conviction shall be punished by
imprisonment in the State prison for not less than
five years.  Any offender who lists a homeless shelter
as his residence and who violates the Act shall, for a
first conviction, be punished by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days in a house of correction; for a
second conviction, be punished by imprisonment for not
more than two and one-half years in a house of
correction nor more than five years in a State prison
or by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; and for a third and subsequent
conviction, be punished by imprisonment in a State
prison for not less than five years; provided,
however, that the sentence imposed for such third or
subsequent conviction shall not be reduced to less
than five years, nor suspended, nor shall any person
sentenced herein be eligible for probation, parole,
work release or furlough, or receive any deduction
from his sentence for good conduct until he shall have
served five years.  Prosecutions shall neither be
continued without a finding nor placed on file.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR information is available statewide to law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies through the
Criminal Justice Information Systems (CJIS), which
reaches more than 600 agencies throughout the
Commonwealth.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies in accordance with guidelines
from the State Sex Offender Registry Board (which also
classifies offenders).  In general, affirmative
notification to schools or youth serving organizations
may be conducted for Level II (moderate risk)
offenders and must be conducted for Level III (high
risk) offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
There are three procedures by which the general public
can access SOR data:  1) by a written request to the
Sex Offender Registry Board for information on a
specific individual, 2) through Community Notification
(reserved for high risk offenders only), and 3)
through an in-person request at the local police
department.  For in-person requests, if the inquirer
is 18 years of age or older and gives a reason for the
query, information can be obtained on (a) whether a
specific individual is a sex offender, (b) whether any
sex offenders live or work within the same city and/or
town of a specific address, (c) whether any sex
offenders live or work on a specific street, or (d) if
the police department is located in a city or town
with more than one zip code area, inquire whether any
sex offenders live or work within a specified zip code
area.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  http://www.state.ma.us/sorb/  There are
approximately 900 hits per month.  The website does
not contain offender-specific information.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Michigan
Responsible Agency: Michigan State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The following offenses are covered: 750.145a -
accosting, enticing or soliciting a child for immoral
purposes; 750.145b - accosting, enticing or soliciting
a child for immoral purposes; second offense,
750.145c(2),(3) - definitions; child sexually abusive
activity or material; expert testimony; acts of
commercial film or photographic print processor;
applicability and uniformity of section; enactment or
enforcement of ordinances, rules, or regulations
prohibited. 750.158 - crime against nature or sodomy;
750.167(1)f - "disorderly person" defined: subsequent
violations by person convicted of refusing or
neglecting to support family; 750.335a - indecent
exposure; 750.338 - gross indecency: between male
persons*; 750.338a - gross indecency: between female
persons*; 750.338b - gross indecency: between male and
female persons* (*not registerable if the offense
ended in a juvenile adjudication/disposition); 750.349
- kidnaping; 750.350 - leading, taking, carrying away,
decoying, or enticing away child under 14; intent;
violation as felony; penalty; adoptive or natural
parent.  750.448 - soliciting and accosting to commit
prostitution or immoral act; 750.455 - pandering;
750.520b - criminal sexual conduct in the first
degree; 750.520c - criminal sexual conduct in the
second degree; 750.520d - criminal sexual conduct in
the third degree; 750.520e - criminal sexual conduct
in the fourth degree; 750.520g - assault with intent
to commit criminal sexual conduct.  Registration
requires three convictions of 750.167(1)f, three
convictions of 750.335a, or a combination of both. 
Registration is required if the victim is less than 18
years of age.  Any attempt or conspiracy to commit any
of the above offenses and any person convicted of a
similar offense as those listed above under federal
law, or the law of any State or any country, must also
register.

Mandated Registrants:
Individuals convicted of covered offenses on or after
October 1, 1995, and those convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for covered offenses earlier but under
criminal justice or juvenile services supervision on
or after October 1, 1995, and those transferred to
Michigan while on probation or parole for a covered
offense committed elsewhere.  Also mandated to
register is any offender registered in Michigan moving
to Michigan for any offense.  

Duration of Registration:
Automatic lifetime registration for the following
offenses: 750.520b: criminal sexual conduct in the
first degree; felony, 750.520c(1)a: criminal sexual
conduct in the second degree; felony, 750.349:
kidnaping (if the victim is less than 18 years of
age.)  750.350: leading, taking, carrying away,
decoying, or enticing away a child under 14; intent;
violation as felony; penalty; adoptive or natural
parent (child kidnaping).  750.145c(2) & (3):
definitions; child sexually abusive activity or
material; expert testimony; acts of commercial film or
photographic print processor; applicability and
uniformity of section; enactment or enforcement of
ordinances, rules, or regulations prohibited.  25
years for all other offenses not listed above; unless
it is a second offense which requires lifetime
registration.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
26,850

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Michigan SOR has a fully automated text database.
It uses the Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN)
system as the computerized database for record keeping
of the SOR, creating a "paperless" system.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI SOR system:
Yes. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of fingerprints:
Partial.  The capability exists at the central
registry through the State AFIS, but most State police
posts, local police departments, prisons, and intake
and reception centers do not have livescan equipment
for fingerprint submission. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Initial registration information is submitted through
the Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN) by the
probation officer attached to the court (or the
juvenile division of probate court) who registers the
offender following conviction but prior to sentencing. 
Additional information comes from the Department of
Corrections (DOC) and local law enforcement agencies
via LEIN.

DNA Sample:
No. But registration data include information on
whether a DNA profile of the offender is available.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  As of September 1, 1999, felony offenders are
required to verify their address quarterly in person
on the 1st-15th of January, April, July and October. 
Offenders must present digitized photograph on their
Michigan ID card or license to local police agencies. 
Misdemeanor offenders must report annually January
1st-15th.   

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a felony offense, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 4 years and/or a fine
of not more than $2,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR data is accessible through the Law Enforcement
Information Network (LEIN) which is available to
criminal justice agencies statewide. The Central
Registry can notify specific agencies through LEIN,
and, through LEIN, a patrol officer initiating a query
receives automatic warning that subject is a
registered sex offender.  The central SOR also
provides all local agencies with listings by zip code
of registered offenders in their jurisdictions.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
No affirmative notification is made to organizations. 

Procedures for Public Access:
Listings by zip code of the registered offenders
within a jurisdiction are available for inspection by
the general public during normal business hours at
State police posts, local law enforcement agencies,
and sheriff's departments. Agencies may make the
listing available through computerized, electronic, or
other means. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.mipsor.state.mi.us and
http://www.msp.state.mi.us A search by alias/name of
offender and search by estimated age  5 years was
added to the website.

Summary of State Predatory Offender Registries:
Minnesota Responsible Agency: Minnesota Department 
of Public Safety, Bureau of Criminal Apprehension

Who is in the Registry?
  
Covered Offenses:
Pursuant to M.S. .243.166, Subd. 1, any person charged
with, petitioned for, or Court Martialed for a felony
violation of, or attempt to violate any of the
following crimes and convicted of, or adjudicated
delinquent for that offense or for an offense arising
out of the same set of circumstances is required to
register. First degree murder and attempted first
degree murder 609.185 (clause 2 only); kidnaping and
attempted kidnaping (609.25); criminal sexual conduct
in the first degree and attempted criminal sexual
conduct in the first degree (609.342); criminal sexual
conduct in the second degree and attempted criminal
sexual conduct in the second degree (609.343);
criminal sexual conduct in the third degree and
attempted criminal sexual conduct in the third degree
(609.344); criminal sexual conduct in the fourth
degree and attempted criminal sexual conduct in the
fourth degree (609.345); criminal sexual conduct in
the fifth degree and attempted criminal sexual conduct
in the fifth degree (609.3451, Subd. 3 only); indecent
exposure and attempted indecent exposure (617.23,
Subd. 3 only); false imprisonment of a minor 609.255,
Subd. 2 only); soliciting a minor to engage in
prostitution (609.322 or 609.324); soliciting a minor
to engage in sexual conduct (609.352); using a minor
in a sexual performance (627.246); possession of
pictorial representations of minor (627.247);
predatory crime and sentencing as a patterned sex
offender (609.108); comparable violations of the
Uniform Code of Military Justice; comparable Federal
offenses; comparable offenses from other States and
registered offenders from other States who enter
Minnesota to work or attend school.  Covered offenses
also include those included pursuant to M.S. .243.167. 
 
Mandated Registrants:
Anyone who was charged with, or petitioned for,  a
felony violation of any of the covered crimes or an
attempt to commit a covered crime, and who was then
convicted of, or adjudicated delinquent for, that
offense or another offense arising out of the same
circumstances is required to register.  Also, persons
committed as Sexual Psychopath or Sexual Dangerous
Persons are mandated to register whether or not they
have been convicted of a crime.

Duration of Registration:
10 years from the time the individual initially
registered in connection with the offense, or until
the probation, supervised release, or conditional
release period expires, whichever occurs later.  For
registrants committed under section 253B.185, the 10-
year period does not include the period of commitment. 
As of August 1, 2000, lifetime registration applies to
offenders who fit the following criteria: (1) the
offender was previously convicted of or adjudicated
delinquent for committing an offense which required
registration and commits another offense after
8/01/2000 which also requires registration or (2) the
offender was convicted of or adjudicated delinquent
for committing any of the following offenses after
8/01/2000: 609.185, Subd. 2; or 609.342, Subd. 1 a, c,
d, e, f or h; or, 609.343, Subd 1 a, c, d, e, f or h;
or 609.344, Subd. 1 a, c, or g; or 609.345, Subd. 1 a,
c or g; or (3) the offender was committed pursuant to
a court commitment under 253B.185; or a similar law of
any other State or the United States for an offense
committed on or after 8/01/2000.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
10,610

Automation of Predatory Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
On January 16, 2001, consultants began working on a
new database.  The expected date of completion is June
30, 2001.  Once the new system is complete, law
enforcement and probation officials will be able to
access Predatory Offender Registry (POR) data via the
Internet.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.  The criminal history records of registered sexual
offenders are flagged through a manual download.  The
process is not automated and there is no link between
the systems.  As part of the development of 
the new database, this process will be automated.  The
expected completion date is Fall 2001.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No. As part of the development of the new database,
the BCA will implement electronic transmission of this
information.  Expected completion date Fall 2001.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No.  As part of the development of the new database,
the BCA will be able to send and receive photographs
via electronic transmission.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No.  

Operation of Predatory Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The court informs the offender of his/her duty to
register at sentencing, and sends the original and a
copy of the signed Notification of Duty to Register
form to the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA) of
the Department of Public Safety (DPS).  The
supervising corrections agent conducts the
registration itself and sends BCA the original and a
copy of the Registration form.  Offenders no longer
under supervision or moving to Minnesota from out- of-
state register with the local law enforcement agency
where they live which sends the registration data to
BCA. All forms are in hard copy for manual data entry
at the SOR.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  DNA is required of offenders under DNA Statute
609.117, which also includes offenders from other
States by Interstate compact.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State POR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Bureau of  Criminal Apprehension (BCA)  mails an
annual address verification letter to each registrant.
The letter includes a response form and pre-addressed
postage-paid envelope for the offender's response.

POR Notification Automated:
Yes. Verification letters are computer generated on
the anniversary date of the offender's registration. 
The POR staff handles the actual mailing (folding and
stuffing envelopes) manually.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
As of August 1, 2000, the initial violation is a
felony which carries a mandatory 1 year prison
sentence. An offender who fails to provide change of
address information may also be subject to an
additional five year registration period.

Dissemination of Predatory Offender Registry
Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Offenders are registered through community corrections
probation officers in Minnesota's 87 counties or
through Department of Corrections (DOC) staff when the
offender serves a prison term. All registering
officials send the forms to the Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension (BCA) of DPS which manages the POR.  The
BCA notifies a local law enforcement agency when an
offender is moving to their jurisdiction and asks that
they verify the offender's address.  DOC sends results
of pre-release risk assessment to BCA and to the local
law enforcement agency.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Any notification is conducted by local law enforcement
agency based on offender's risk level.  (Offender's
risk level--on offenders being released from prison
only--is assessed prior to release by expert panel
convened by DOC. Assessments are not conducted for
offenders who are sentenced to probation, juvenile
offenders, or other offenders with non-prison
sentences.) Affirmative notification to schools,
youth-serving organizations, etc., is normally done
for Level II (moderate risk) or Level III (high risk)
offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Minnesota Peace Officers Standards and Training
Board (POST) developed a model policy on community
notification procedures.  All law enforcement agencies
in the State are required to have a formal policy on
community notification.  In general, for Level I (low
risk) offenders, information shared only with law
enforcement, victims and witnesses.  For Level II
(moderate risk) offenders, schools, day care centers,
or other organizations are notified.  For Level III
(high risk) offenders, thorough community
notification, including community meetings, is
conducted.  The DOC provides an offender fact-sheet
with photo. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes, but not with information on offenders. Minnesota
Department of Public Safety website has the
legislation, forms, and information on the Registry
program, but does not mount information on individual
offenders: http://www.dps.state.mn.us/bca  The DOC
currently has a secured website for law enforcement
and corrections with detainer information. Agents and
police may contact the BCA Registry via E-mail:
mnregistry@state.mn.us

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Mississippi
Responsible Agency: Mississippi Department of Public
Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Under Mississippi statutes, the central registry
covers offenders who have been convicted of one of the
following sexual offenses: kidnaping a victim below
age 18 (97-3-53); statutory rape (97-3-65); rape and
assault with intent to ravish; (97-3-71); sexual
battery (97-3-95); touching a child for lustful
purposes (97-5-23); dissemination of sexually oriented
material to children (97-5-27); exploitation of
children (97-5-33 (1) or (2)); carnal knowledge of a
stepchild, adopted child or child of a cohabiting
partner (97-5-41); unnatural intercourse (97-29-59);
any other offense committed in another jurisdiction
which would be deemed such a crime in the State; and,
any offense committed in another State for which
registration is required in that State. Effective July
1, 2001 three (3) additional statutes will be added to
this list, including Enticing a Child for Concealment,
Prostitution or Marriage (97-5-5); Adultery or
Fornication Between Teacher and Pupil (97-29-3); &
Attempt to Commit Offense (97-1-7).

Mandated Registrants:
Any person residing in Mississippi who has been
convicted, acquitted by reason of insanity or twice
adjudicated delinquent for any covered sex offense or
attempted sex offense is required to register.  The
law became effective in 1995, but applies
retroactively.  Registration is required for all those
convicted of a covered offense independent of the date
of conviction.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime registration is required of all offenders. 
Certain offenders may be eligible to petition the
court to be relieved of the duty to register after ten
years of maintaining registration in Mississippi.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,512

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Mississippi Sex Offender Registry (MSOR) is
maintained in an Access-based database. 
Reregistration letters and notifications are generated
from the system.   

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Sex offender information is submitted manually to NSOR
as each offender is added to the MSOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No, not at the present time.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, not at the present time.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The SOR unit receives information from the courts, the
Department of Corrections (DOC), mental institutions,
youthful offender facilities and county sheriffs'
offices.  DPS provides offender registration
information to the local law enforcement agency where
the offender is residing.  The offender must also
register in person at the sheriff's office in his
resident county.  

DNA Sample:
Yes. DNA samples are required from each registrant. 
The material is maintained by the Mississippi Crime
Laboratory.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. All registrants must reregister every 90 days. 
DPS mails a nonforwardable verification form to the
last reported address of each offender every 90 days.
The offender must complete and return the form to DPS
within 10 days of receipt. 

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes, letters are generated from the database. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The failure of an offender to provide any registration
or other information, including, but not limited to,
initial registration, reregistration or change of
address information is a violation of the law. 
Additionally, forgery of information or submission of
information under false pretenses is also a violation. 
A violation is considered a felony and is punishable
by a fine or not more than $5,000 or imprisonment in
the State Penitentiary for not more than 5 years, or
both fine and imprisonment.  

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information
  
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
All SOR information is open to law enforcement
agencies, and is made available by mail, fax, phone,
or through electronic means.    

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
There is no affirmative notification required to these
organizations.  The Department of Education, the
Mississippi Private School Association and the
Department of Health are required to notify all
schools and licensed day care centers annually
regarding the availability upon request of the
information.     
  
Procedures for Public Access:   
Members of the general public can access the name,
address, photograph (if available), place of
employment, crime for which convicted, date and place
of conviction of any registrant on the MSOR website. 
The information can also be requested by mail from
DPS.  Sheriffs are required to keep records for
offenders in their jurisdiction and make this
information available to the public upon request.  DPS
and law enforcement agencies are also authorized to
release any other information deemed necessary for the
protection of the public.

Internet Website:  (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
http://www.sor.mdps.state.ms.us   The MSOR receives
approximately 9,000 inquiries a month..Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Missouri
Responsible Agency: Missouri State Highway Patrol

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Any offense in violation of Chapter 566 (sex offenses)
of the Missouri State Code or in violation of
comparable offenses if committed in another State or
jurisdiction of the United States.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for individuals who were
convicted of, or received suspended imposition of
sentences for, the covered felonies and misdemeanors
on or after July 1, 1979.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
7,500

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
As of 2/01, the text database of the SOR is automated,
and the SOR data is available to criminal justice
agencies statewide through the Missouri Uniform Law
Enforcement System (MULES) telecommunications network,
but all data entry is manual.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.  The SOR data can be linked to the criminal
history files by the offender's State Identification
Number (SID), but the databases are not linked
electronically.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, as of 2/01.  Capability to meet all NCIC 2000 and
permanent NSOR transmission requirements is near
completion.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No not as of 2/01, but the integration of the AFIS and
the Criminal History Record System (now underway) will
provide this capability.  The Department of
Corrections (DOC) has livescans and are able to submit
fingerprints electronically.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No not as of 2/01, but the integration of the AFIS and
the Criminal History Records System (underway) will
provide the capability.  The DOC has livescans to
submit mugshots electronically but have not completed
the integration.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The courts, the Department of Corrections (DOC), and
Mental Health Services all send  "Notification of Duty
to Register" forms signed by the offender to the SOR. 
Local law enforcement agencies also send offender
registration cards (special fingerprint cards) and
change of address notices to the SOR in hard copy for
manual entry.

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Missouri requires all offenders to register annually
on the month of their birth.  If the victim is under
the age of 18, then registration is also required
every 90 days. 

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable as of 2/01.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation of SOR registration requirements is a Class
A misdemeanor. 

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR offender list is available through the
Missouri Uniform Law Enforcement System (MULES) which
also contains the "hot files" for the State and has a
direct connection to the Criminal History Records
System.  All criminal justice agencies in the State
have access to the SOR lists through the MULES
telecommunication network.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Affirmative notification to schools or other youth
serving organizations is a local law enforcement
responsibility.

Procedures for Public Access:
Upon request, a local law enforcement agency will
provide a complete list of the sexual offenders
registered within that agency's jurisdiction to any
member of the public.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
No.  As of 2/01, Missouri does not have any SOR
registrants listed on a State website.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Montana
Responsible Agency: Montana Department of Justice

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include both sexual and violent
offenses covered in Montana law. The sexual offenses
are: violation or attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy
to commit violation of 45-5-502(3), 45-5-503, 45-5-
504(1), 45-5-504(2)(c), 45-5-507 or 45-5-625 (or
equivalent statute of another State or federal
government). The violent offenses are: violation of,
or attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit
violation of 45-5-102, 45-5-103, 45-5-202, 45-5-206
(third or subsequent offense), 45-5-301 (by other than
parent, victim less than 16) , 45-5-302, 45-5-303, 45-
5-401, 45-5-603 (1)(b), 45-6-103, 45-5-210, 45-5-212,
and 45-5-213.

Mandated Registrants:
All sexual offenders who were sentenced, in custody,
or under supervision on or after July 1, 1989, and all
violent offenders who were sentenced, in custody, or
under  supervision on or after October 1, 1995, are
required to register.

Duration of Registration:
Sexual offenders are required to register for life.
Violent offenders must register for 10 years. 
Offenders in either category may petition the court
for relief from the requirement after 10 years with no
offenses.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
2,088 registered offenders; 1,027 sex offenders; 1,043
violent offenders; and 18 offenders with both a sex
and violent offense.

Automation of Sex Offender Registries
  
Extent of database automation:  
The database is fully automated as of January 2000.
  
Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes, as of January 2000. 
  
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No. Montana is currently working toward this goal.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:   
Yes, using Montana AFIS.   
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:   
Yes.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The initial registration information comes to the SOR
in hard copy from Probation and Parole (if the
offender received a probation sentence), from the
Department of Corrections as part of offender's pre-
release process (if he was confined), or from the
relevant local law enforcement agency for offenders
moving into Montana from out-of-state. The planned
redesign of SOR, together with the upgrades planned
for the criminal history records (CHRS) and the State
telecommunications network (CJIN) will automate most
of the registration process when completed. 

DNA Sample:
Yes.  DNA sample is a requirement of the program, and
the registration form asks if the DNA analysis is
available.  This information is available on a Montana
criminal record.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The notification to registrants of the need to
verify their current addresses is conducted by
Department of Justice, which manages the SOR. The
Department of Justice then notifies local law
enforcement agencies of address changes as
appropriate.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes, as of January 2000.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance with SOR requirements is a felony,
punishable by up to five years in prison and/or a fine
of up to $10,000.


Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The agency taking the offender's initial registration
sends the information to the State Department of
Justice (DOJ) and to the local law enforcement agency
for the jurisdiction where the offender resides. The
DOJ notifies the local law enforcement agency of any
subsequent address changes.  The new SOR system will
be available statewide through the enhanced Criminal
Justice Information Network (CJIN).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
All names and addresses on the Montana Sex Offender
Registry are public criminal justice information.
Affirmative organizational and community notification
is a local law enforcement responsibility. For Level 2
(moderate risk) offenders, law enforcement agencies
may notify the public, the victim, and "any agency,
organization, or group servicing persons who have
characteristics similar to those of a previous victim.
"For Level 3 (high risk) offenders, the notification
is mandatory.

Procedures for Public Access:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies.  It is discretionary for Level 2
offenders and mandatory for Level 3 offenders.  The
State Department of Justice (DOJ) is currently
developing policies for public access to SOR data in
conjunction with new policies for public access to
criminal history records.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.svor.doj.state.mt.us

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Nebraska
Responsible Agency: Nebraska State Patrol

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are kidnaping of a minor, false
imprisonment of a minor, sexual assault in the 1st,
2nd, or 3rd degree, sexual assault of a child, sexual
assault of a vulnerable adult, incest of a minor,
pandering of a minor, child pornography, or attempt to
commit or conspiracy to commit any of the listed
offenses.

Mandated Registrants:
Any person convicted of a covered crime on or after
effective date of the 1997 legislation, any person
serving a parole, probation, or corrections jail
sentence for a covered crime, and any person released
from custody on or after January 1, 1997 who was
incarcerated for a covered offense on or after January
1, 1997, is required to register.  Any person who
moves to Nebraska on or after January 1, 1997, and has
been convicted for an equivalent offense for a covered
crime or has been released from incarceration or
supervision in another State or jurisdiction as of
January 1, 1987 is required to register. 

Duration of Registration:
10 years from the date the offender is released from
confinement, or from the date the offender is
discharged from probation or parole, whichever is
later.  Offenders may petition the court for relief
from the requirement to register.  Sexually violent
offenders (determined by the court with a
recommendation from an evaluation board) must register
until the sentencing court determines that
registration is no longer necessary.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,120

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Nebraska SOR collects sex offender registration
information from local sheriff's offices where
registration is completed.  This information is
entered into a State Patrol computer system where
verification letters are generated.  Registered sex
offender information and a photo is made available to
law enforcement through a secured web site where
searches can be made for different criteria.  Law
enforcement officers are given a user name and
password to access the SOR.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Registered sex offender information is queried from
the Nebraska Criminal Information System (NCIS).

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.  Nebraska is purchasing a new
switcher to help with the automation of transmitting
registered sex offender data to the FBI NSOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partial.  The capability exists at the State Patrol
headquarters unit through the Nebraska AFIS, but not
in the field throughout the State. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Partial.  Photos are submitted to the State Patrol and
are scanned into the Patrol's registry database. 
These digitized photos can then be sent electronically
to other law enforcement agencies or registered sex
offender photos can be obtained from the State
Patrol's secured law enforcement website.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Local sheriffs departments, working with their county
and district court systems, and State corrections,
conduct registrations of convicted offenders and then
mail the registration data, fingerprints, and photos
to the State Registry.  Probation and Parole Services
and State Regional Centers are involved in monitoring
the offenders in the community.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  A DNA sample is taken from all persons convicted
of felony crimes in Nebraska, but the DNA sampling is
not related to/mandated by the Sex Offender Registry
Program.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  An annual address verification is completed by
the Nebraska State Patrol for each registrant, and
quarterly address verifications are completed on
sexually violent offenders.  Reregistration is
required if the offender moves to a new county. 
Notification letters informing registrants of their
duty to verify their addresses are distributed by mail
from the Nebraska State Patrol.  

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.  Notification letters informing registrants of
their duty to verify their addresses are distributed
by mail from the Nebraska State Patrol.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Registrants who violate the Nebraska Act are guilty of
a Class IV felony, punishable by up to 5 years
imprisonment, a $10,000 fine or both, if the crime
requiring registration was a felony. If the underlying
crime was a misdemeanor, the violation is a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year
imprisonment, a $1,000 fine, or both.  Violation of
SOR rules and regulation is an infraction, punishable
by a fine of $100 for the first offense and up to $500
for subsequent offenses.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Nebraska law enforcement agencies can request user
accounts to have instant online access to registered
sex offender information through a secured website
location.  They can also contact the SOR by phone.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Nebraska law requires a three tiered notification. 
Active notification for schools, day care centers,
religious and youth organizations for moderate and
high risk sex offenders is anticipated to start June
2001 via a phone and/or fax system.  A secured website
has been developed to accommodate the moderate risk
sex offender information.  Each organization has been
given a user account and password to obtain moderate
and high risk sex offender information, including a
picture, in their county of residence.  Governmental
agencies conducting confidential name checks, for
employment purposes, are also entitled to registered
sex offender information.

Procedures for Public Access:
Nebraska law requires a three tiered notification. 
Active notification is conducted for the public for
registered sex offenders who have been assessed as a
high risk to re-offend.  These notifications are
conducted by the State Patrol by faxing information to
law enforcement agencies on new high risk offenders
and high risk offenders who have changed addresses. 
Media releases of high risk sex offenders are also
faxed to media groups.  The notifications are expected
to be automated, through a phone and/or fax system,
and fully operational by June 2001.  Further
notification can be done by local law enforcement
through direct contact public meetings, or further
media releases.  A public website has been created to
store the past sex offender press releases.  From the
website, the public can receive high risk sex offender
information including photos, frequently asked
questions, and a document section that contains the
Nebraska Sex Offender Act, Rule and Regulations, and
the risk assessment instrument.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
http://www.nsp.state.ne.us/sor/index.cfm 
 
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Nevada
Responsible Agency: Nevada Department of Motor
Vehicles and Public Safety
Nevada Highway Patrol Division and Nevada Parole and
Probation Division

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Two categories of offenses are covered: sexual
offenses and crimes against a child where the victim
is less than 18.  Covered sexual offenses are murder
in perpetration of sexual abuse of a child, sexual
assault, statutory sexual seduction, battery to commit
sexual assault, sexual abuse or exploitation of a
child, pornography involving minor, incest,
solicitation of a minor for indecent acts, gross
lewdness, indecent or obscene exposure, sexual
penetration of a dead human body, and attempts to
commit any of the covered offenses. Covered crimes
against a child (where the victim is less than 18) are
kidnaping or false imprisonment,  pandering or
prostitution, or attempts to commit these crimes. 

Mandated Registrants:
All offenders convicted of a covered offense on or
after July 1, 1956 are required to register. 

Duration of Registration:
Registration is required for as long as offender
resides in or is present within the State.  After 15
consecutive years as a registrant with no additional
offenses, a registered sexual offender may petition
the court to terminate his duty to register.  If
turned down, he must wait five years before
reapplying.  However, registrants convicted of
sexually violent offenses or declared sexually violent
predators may not apply for relief from the
registration requirement.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
2,519 offenders are in the Registry.  Approximately
5,000 qualifying offenders are estimated to be living
in Nevada.

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
Partial.  There is partial automation of the data
collection.  When an offender registers with the
Division of Parole and Probation, the collected data
is entered into a database which is shared with the
State Registry.  Completion of the database and its
associated functions is expected during 2001. 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01. 

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.  (However, the planned automated
system will be able to do so through the redesigned
NCJIS.)

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partial.  While  not part of the current SOR, the
capability exists through the State's AFIS.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, not as of 2/01.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Staff of the Parole and Probation Division of the
Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles and Public Safety
interview the offenders, fill out the registration
forms, take fingerprints and Polaroid photos and then
mail the information to the Criminal Records
Repository, which is also in the Department of Motor
Vehicles and Public Safety.  Following a fingerprint
search to confirm the offender's identity and the
existence of a current Nevada or NCIC III record, the
hard copy folder containing all of the registration
material is filed by the offender's name. The SOR unit
is responsible for notifying the local law enforcement
agency where the offender will reside

DNA Sample:
Yes, a DNA sample is taken for offenders under
criminal justice supervision or in prison. 

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Effective January 1, 1998, notices informing the
registrant of address validation requirements are sent
out annually to registered sexual offenders and every
90 days to high risk offenders by the State SOR unit. 

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No, not as of 2/01.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a Class D felony punishable by one to
four years imprisonment and/or a fine of not more than
$5,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
When the central registry receives a registration
notice, it notifies the local law enforcement agency
where the offender will reside. When the central
registry receives a notice of change of address, it
notifies the local law enforcement agencies at both
the new location and the jurisdiction the registrant
is leaving. As of 2/01, the SOR dissemination to local
agencies is provided primarily through the TRAK
System, but on occasion by mail or fax. 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The local law enforcement agency where the registrant
resides conducts the notification to schools and to
religious and youth organizations likely to encounter
the offender for both Tier 2 (moderate risk) and Tier
3 (high risk) offenders. All community notification
proceeds under guidelines developed by the State
Attorney General with input from a State Advisory
Council.

Procedures for Public Access:
Citizens may submit by-name queries about individuals
to the Central SOR.  For Tier 3 (high risk) offenders,
the law enforcement agency where the offender resides
notifies not only other law enforcement agencies,
schools, and youth organizations, but also the general
public "through means designed to reach members of the
public likely to encounter the sex offender." 
Additional provisions apply for those who committed
sexual offenses against minors.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
No, not as of 2/01. 

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New
Hampshire
Responsible Agency: New Hampshire State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include violations or attempted
violations of specified sexual offenses (RSA 632-A:2,
632-A:3, 632-A:4, or 645:1,II) and violations or
attempted violations of any of the following listed
offenses where victim was under the age of 18 (RSA
633:1, 633:2, 633:3, 639:2, 645:2, 645:2,II, 649-B:3,
649-B:4 or RSA 169-B:41,II, 639:3, III, 649-A:3,I;
649-A:3,III or 650:2,II) or reasonably equivalent
offenses in laws of another State or the federal
government.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for any sex offender,
independent of the date of conviction, who is released
into the community on or after July 16, 1993, or who
has been released earlier, but has not completed his
sentence before July 16, 1993, or who has completed
his sentence not more than six years before January 1,
1994.  Registration is also mandatory for any offender
convicted of a covered crime against a child,
independent of the date of conviction, who is released
into the community on or after August 9, 1996, or who
has been released, but has not completed his sentence
before August 9, 1996.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime registration is required for offenders
committing violent sexual offenses or violent offenses
against children (offenses are specified within the
legislation). There is a 10 year registration
requirement for other covered sexual offenses or other
covered offenses against children.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
2,168

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The New Hampshire SOR has an automated text database
on a local network server.  It is accessible only to
authorized State Police personnel on that specific
LAN.  The program for NSOR is currently being
developed. 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01. 

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partially. The capability for digital storage and
transmission of fingerprints to the FBI exists through
the Tri-State AFIS of which New Hampshire is a part. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Partially. (See preceding section on storage and
transmittal of fingerprints)

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The official releasing the offender to the community
informs him of his duty to register, and transmits the
offender's signed acknowledgment, together with
information on the offender and the offense, to the
State Police SOR unit for entry into the Law
Enforcement Name Search (LENS) System. The offender
also must register with the local law enforcement
agency where he resides. A copy of that registration
is sent to the SOR unit as is any subsequent change of
address notice. All forms are submitted to the SOR in
hard copy.

DNA Sample:
No.  Swabbings of saliva are included.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Non-forwardable notification letters are sent
out annually to registered sexual offenders, and
quarterly for those sexual offenders released after
"extended terms of imprisonment."

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 and/or a jail sentence of not
more than one year.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information
  
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
  
The State SOR notifies local law enforcement agencies
when an offender has indicated he plans to move into
their jurisdiction or when an offender is in
noncompliant status.  
  
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
New Hampshire law permits a local law enforcement
agency to notify community organizations where an
offender plans to reside only if the offender has been
convicted of aggravated sexual assault against a child
under the age of 13.  Organizations that may be
notified include schools, day care centers, youth
groups, summer camps, libraries, and similar youth
serving groups. The New Hampshire legislature is, as
of Spring 1998,  considering modifications to its
statute to bring it into compliance with the Jacob
Wetterling Act, the Pam Lychner Act, and Megan's Law.

Procedures for Public Access:   
Access to SOR data is limited by statute to law
enforcement officials and their authorized designees,
with the limited organizational notification noted in
preceding section. As noted, the New Hampshire
legislature is considering modifications to bring the
statute into compliance with Megan's Law, Jacob
Wetterling Act, and Pam Lychner Act amendments. 
Exception - a public access list is published monthly
by SOR to local law enforcement agencies of those sex
offenders who have been convicted of the following
crimes where the victim is under the prescribed age:
RSA 632-A:2 (under 13); 632-A:3 (under 13); 645:1,II
(under 16); 639:3,III (under 16); 649-A:3 (under 16);
169-B:41,II (under 17); 633:1 (under 18); 633:2 (under
18); 633:3 (under 18; 645:2 (under 18); 650:2,II
(under 18).  The local law enforcement agency can
disseminate this list to any member of the public that
requests it. The information released is the
offender's name, address, crime committed, court of
conviction, and date of conviction.  
Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
No.  

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New Jersey
Responsible Agency: New Jersey State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include aggravated sexual assault,
sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual contact,
endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in
sexual contact that would harm child's morals, luring
or enticing and (if victim is a minor and offender not
a parent) kidnaping, criminal restraint, and false
imprisonment.

Mandated Registrants:
Sex offenders released from custody since the
effective date of the legislation, 10/31/94, as well
as offenders who were on parole or probation on the
effective date of the law are required to register. 
Offenders found to be repetitive and compulsive by
experts and by the courts, must register regardless of
the date of sentence.

Duration of Registration:
The registration requirement can range from 15 years
to life. A registered offender may apply to the State
Superior Court to terminate his duty to register after
15 offense-free years following release to the
community.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
7,495

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
A fully automated text database is in place on a
mainframe operated by State Bureau of Identification
(SBI), New Jersey State Police. The automated database
can be searched by any field.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. SOR database is completely separate from CCH
files.  When a sex offender is entered into the SOR,
the CCH record will state "Registered Sex Offender." 
(In 2001, the electronic mugshot files, maintained in
the central repository, will be linked to the SOR in
the same manner as CCH records.)

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.  The New Jersey SOR can electronically transmit
text data.  NJ SOR is electronically transmitting to
CSORF (NCIC 2000).  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
New Jersey has implemented a Fully Integrated
Fingerprint Identification System (FIFIS) in
conjunction with its AFIS. Fingerprint card scanner
workstations have been purchased and will enable the
SOR to scan traditionally inked sex offender print
cards into FIFIS, so they can be electronically
transmitted to the FBI.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
The New Jersey State Police has developed an
Electronic Mugshot file for the storage and retrieval
of photos of registered sex offenders, that can be
used for law enforcement searches, electronic lineups,
and similar purposes, as well as for transmission to
the FBI.  Digital mugshot capability, with links to
the State Police SOR, for both DOC and JJ facilities
has been established.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Municipal Police Agencies and Department of
Corrections (DOC) staff provide the initial
information on adult sex offenders--manually compiling
the registration data, fingerprint cards, photos, and
any other material, and submitting it all to the
respective county prosecutor's office.  In New Jersey,
the county prosecutors serve as conduits for all SOR
information, and they submit the sex offender
registration forms to State Police for the SOR.  The
Juvenile Justice Commission (JJC) follows similar
procedures for juvenile sex offenders.

DNA Sample:
Yes. DNA samples are maintained at the State Crime
Laboratory.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.   State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Registrants must verify their addresses annually. 
Those classified as repetitive and compulsive must
verify their addresses every 90 days.  The New Jersey
State Police report that address confirmation and
reregistration is the responsibility of the county
prosecutor for each county.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.  As of 2/01, there is no automated notification. 
It is handled manually in each county prosecutor's
office.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
A person who fails to register as required is guilty
of a crime of the fourth degree and may be sentenced
to imprisonment not to exceed 18 months and receive a
maximum fine of $7,500.

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information
  
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
  
Sex offender registry information is maintained by the
State Police State Bureau of Identification (SBI), and
is available to all criminal justice agencies that
have access to the New Jersey Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS) and/or the FBI Interstate
Identification Index (III) System. Registered
offenders' files in the Master Name Index (MNI) are
flagged, and an officer making a query can move from
the MNI to the SOR files.  
  
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
Since October 1994,  notification concerning offenders
assessed as low risk has been given only to victim(s)
and law enforcement agencies likely to encounter that
offender. For offenders assessed as moderate risk,
schools and religious and youth-serving organizations
are also notified.  For offenders determined to be
high risk, community notification (next section) is
required. (See following section on Risk Assessment
procedures.)     
     
Procedures for Public Access:   
Since October 1994, community notification has only
been conducted for Level 3 (high risk) sexual
offenders. Risk levels are determined through use of
the Registrant Risk Assessment Scale, developed by
mental health and legal experts, and supplemented by a
detailed manual explaining criteria and weighting and
giving examples.  For offenders assessed as high risk,
the local law enforcement agency conducts community
notification, tailoring it to those members of the
public likely to encounter offender.      
  
Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
Legislation is pending to develop an Internet website
for public access to sex offender data.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New Mexico
Responsible Agency: New Mexico Department of Public
Safety

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are sex offenses, defined as criminal
sexual penetration in the first, second, third, or
fourth degree; criminal sexual contact in the fourth
degree; criminal sexual contact of a minor in the
third or fourth degree; sexual exploitation of
children;  sexual exploitation of children by
prostitution; solicitation to commit criminal sexual
contact of a minor in the third or fourth degree; and
attempt to commit any of the covered offenses. 
            
Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all persons convicted in
New Mexico of a sexual offense on or after July 1,
1995, and are residing in New Mexico, attending school
in New Mexico, working in New Mexico or are in the
Military in New Mexico. Persons convicted of a sex
offense prior to July 1, 1995 will be registered if it
is a condition of their probation or parole or if it
is a requirement of the State that they were convicted
in. 

Duration of Registration:
Current legislation (Section 29-11A) mandates that
registration information be retained for a period of
20 years for certain covered offenses and for 10 years
for other offenses, but is silent on the deletion of
records after the specified time period.  The
Department of Public Safety (DPS) requires all
registrants in the registry to annually renew their
registration prior to December 31st following their
initial registration. 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
As of 2/01 there are 1,171 registered sex offenders in
the database.

Automation of Sex Offender Registries     
  
Extent of database automation:  
The New Mexico SOR has an automated text database,
fully searchable, and established as a part of New
Mexico's criminal history records.  The New Mexico SOR
is directly linked to the State's Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS), and is accessible to law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies throughout
the State.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  The SOR is part of computerized criminal history
files. 
  
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not electronically.  The State submits hard copy
offender information to the FBI.
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:   
Partially.  New Mexico has an AFIS which provides
electronic storage and transmission capability, but as
of 2/01, it is not linked with the SOR records and SOR
staff report no plans to do so. 
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:   
Partially.  As of 2/01, mugshots of registrants are
received by the SOR in hard copy from local law
enforcement agencies and then are scanned into the
criminal history files.  With the SOR part of the
criminal history files, they are available for
transmittal.     
  
Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The offender registers with the sheriff of his county
of residence. The sheriff enters the registration data
directly into the SOR database through the State's
Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS), and then
mails the signed original of the form, the fingerprint
card, and the offender's photo to SOR.  When a sex
offender is convicted, the offender is provided with
written notice of his duty to register as a sex
offender.  When the individual is released from
custody, probation or parole, the individual is
notified of his duty to register.  The sex offender is
required to register within 10 days of notification. 
Notification is also sent to the DPS for "flagging"
purposes should a sex offender not register within the
required time frame.

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Effective July 1, 2000, registered sex offenders that
are convicted of a sex offense that was committed on
or after July 1, 1995 are required to annually renew
their registration prior to December 31st of each
year.  There is currently no requirement for address
verification.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
It is anticipated that by December 31, 2001 the
renewal process will be automated. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
As of July 1, 2000, failure to comply with the
conditions of the Sex Offender Registration
requirements (which include failure to register) is a
fourth degree felony. 

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
All law enforcement and criminal justice agencies in
the State have access to SOR data through the State's
Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS), both in
response to a request for a specific individual's
criminal history record or in searches of the SOR
database.  If the central SOR unit receives notice
from an out-of-state agency that a qualifying offender
is moving to New Mexico, the unit staff notify the
appropriate local law enforcement agency.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Effective July 1, 2000, sex offender information for
persons convicted, incarcerated, or on probation or
parole will be available to the public through a
website.
 
Procedures for Public Access:
Effective July 1, 2000, sex offender information for
persons convicted, incarcerated, or on probation or
parole will be available to the public through a
website. 



Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  The DPS provides web access to the public at:
http://www.nmsexoffender.dps.state.nm.us 
 
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New York
Responsible Agency: New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are New York State offenses that
correlate with the Wetterling Act, including
convictions for attempts to commit the covered
offenses, and convictions of comparable offenses in
other jurisdictions. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for (1) persons convicted of
a covered offense on or after the effective date of
the legislation, 1/21/96; (2) persons on probation or
parole for a covered offense as of 1/21/96,
independent of date of conviction; and (3) persons
discharged, paroled, or released on or after 1/21/96,
following conviction for a covered offense, but
independent of the date of conviction.

Duration of Registration:
For Level 1 and Level 2 offenders (low and medium
risk) registration is required for 10 years from the
initial date of registration, with annual
reregistration.  A Level 3 offender (high risk) must
reregister annually but also must verify his address
quarterly for a minimum of 10 years unless  there is a
court determination that offender no longer suffers
from a mental abnormality that would make him likely
to re-offend.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
11,575


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The New York SOR is automated using an Oracle database
updated for Forte software.

Database is linked to criminal history files
As of 2/01, the database is not directly linked to the
criminal history event.  However, State identification
numbers are linked.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.  Participation is anticipated in
the coming year.  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes. The capability currently exists through the State
AFIS.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
The current system has the capability to store
mugshots and link them with the appropriate records,
but it cannot transmit electronically to the FBI at
this time. 

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Sentencing Court sends the Registry hard copy of
its final risk level determination. The Department of
Correctional Services (DOCS), the courts, or local
jails collect the initial registration data and photo
and send them to the Registry.  Probation, parole, and
local law enforcement agencies collect and forward
change of address information and supplemental data.
As of 2/01, all agencies submit hard copy.

DNA Sample:
No.  While New York State collects DNA from certain
offenders, it is not linked to the SOR.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. Verification letters are sent annually, based on
offender's registration date. The local law
enforcement agency of jurisdiction is notified if (1)
the verification form is not returned on time or (2)
the letter is returned as undeliverable.  (Offenders
determined to be Level 3--high risk--must also verify
their addresses in person with their local law
enforcement agency every 90 days.) 

SOR Notification Automated:
Yes. Verification notices are automatically generated
and the date is entered in the appropriate field of
the 

offender's file. Failure to Annually Verify
notifications also are generated by the system.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a Class A misdemeanor for the first
offense, a class D felony for a second or subsequent
offense. Noncompliance can also be the basis for
revocation of parole.

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) mails
the offender's registration data and photo to the
local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over
the offender's residence and also to the agency that
arrested the offender. The DCJS mails relevant
agencies notices of change of address or of any
noncompliance by an offender.  State and local police
agencies can phone queries to the SOR unit and receive
a phone response.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Community notification is at the discretion of the
relevant local law enforcement agency, based on the
offender's risk assessment level (RAL).  The RAL also
determines the amount and scope of information
released.  Schools and organizations may be notified
about level 2 (moderate risk) or 3 (high risk)
offenders.  Ongoing litigation and a temporary
restraining order (TRO) continues to stringently limit
dissemination when the offense occurred before January
21, 1996.

Procedures for Public Access:
The local law enforcement agency has discretion for
notification to any "entities with vulnerable
populations" concerning offenders at risk levels 2 and
3. The State provides public access, regardless of
risk level, through a 900 telephone line (with a fee
of $.50 per call/up to five searches per call) and
monthly  publishes a subdirectory of Level 3 (high
risk) offenders that is distributed to local law
enforcement agencies, and available to the public in
those local law enforcement agency offices. The 900
phone line and the published subdirectory both
continues to operate within constraints of the
temporary restraining order.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.criminaljustice.state.ny.us  This site
provides information on the SOR program and provides
access to the subdirectory of high-risk (level 3) sex
offenders.  The site averages around 950,000 hits per
month.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: North
Carolina
Responsible Agency: North Carolina Department of
Justice; State Bureau of Identification

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are kidnaping; abduction of children;
felonious restraint; 1st and 2nd degree rape; 1st and
2nd degree sexual offense; attempted rape or sexual
offense; intercourse and sexual offenses with certain
victims; incest between near relatives; employing or
permitting a minor to assist in offenses against
public morality or decency; 1st, 2nd, & 3rd degree
sexual exploitation of a minor; promoting prostitution
of a  minor; taking indecent liberties with children;
and attempts to commit any of the listed offenses.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for any persons convicted of
or released from prison for a covered offense (in 
North Carolina or in another State) on or after
January 1, 1996.  Also, persons convicted of, or
released from prison for, a federal offense comparable
to one of North Carolina's covered offenses, on or
after April 3, 1997, are required to register if they
move to North Carolina.

Duration of Registration:
10 years for sexual offenders.  Persons classified as
violent sexual predators are required to register
"indefinitely," but after 10 offense-free years they
may petition the court to review their classification.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
5,922

Automation of Sex Offender Registries     
  
Extent of database automation:  
The North Carolina SOR has a fully automated text
database.  North Carolina uses a "real-time
interface," so that as soon as a record is entered or
updated by a sheriff's office, it is immediately
available to law enforcement.  The public record
(website) is updated every hour, twenty-four hours a
day, seven days a week.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No.  There is no direct linkage between North
Carolina's Sex Offender Registry database and its
criminal history files.  However, both the State
Identification (SID) and FBI numbers are collected in
the Sex Offender Registry Record.    
  
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes. 
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:   
No, not as part of the SOR system.  A registered
offender's fingerprints are maintained at the local
Sheriff's Department where he registered and are not
submitted to the State Registry.  However, the State
has an AFIS system which can receive arrest
fingerprint submissions.   
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:   
Partially.  The North Carolina Division of Criminal
Identification (DCI) mounts digitalized photos on its
Internet site, but it needs to develop greater storage
capacity and transmittal capability and to meet the
FBI standards in order to participate in the photo
portion of NSOR.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
On release to the community, an offender must register
with the local sheriff for the jurisdiction where he
will reside.  The statewide Registry is compiled as
each sheriff electronically enters registration
information into an automated statewide sex offender
and sexual predator registration file. Address changes
and other data are also entered directly by sheriff's
office into the automated system.  The sheriff takes
photos of the offender, and submits one to the
Division of Criminal Information (DCI) where it is
entered on the Internet.  A "pending" record is
established in the State Registry when an offender is
released from prison.  Registration information is
submitted electronically on a daily basis from the
Department of Corrections (DOC) to the Sex Offender
Registry.  Once the offender registers with the
sheriff's office, the pending record is updated and
the official registration date is established.

DNA Sample:
Yes, but only for specific offenses specified in
statute (NCGS 15A-266.4).  However, the information is
not part of the SOR as of 2/01.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The address verification requirements became
effective in North Carolina on April 1, 1998.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.  An automated notification is sent to the
resident county sheriff's computer when a sex offender
is released from prison and whenever an offender
changes residence to a new county. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a Class I felony. 

Dissemination of Sex Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Sheriffs can enter and receive information through an
automated statewide sex offender and sexual predator
registration file.  Local law enforcement agencies can
also search the system by name or location.  An
automated notification is sent to the resident county
sheriff's computer when a sex offender is released
from prison and whenever an offender changes residence
to a new county.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Sex offender registration information and the registry
are "public record information" and open for public
inspection. A copy of the full registry can be
provided to anyone in response to a written request
and payment of fee.

Procedures for Public Access:
Free public access to SOR information is available on
the Internet. Citizens can also obtain a copy of the
statewide registry by making a written request to the
State's Division of Criminal Information (DCI) and
paying a fee, or obtain a copy of a county-wide
registry by making a written request to the
appropriate sheriff and paying a fee.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://sbi.jus.state.nc.us/sor  The site averages
approximately 61,703 hits per month.  

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: North Dakota
Responsible Agency: North Dakota Office of the
Attorney General


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses include sexual offenses against an
adult or child victim and specified non-sexual crimes
against a child when the perpetrator is an adult.
Covered crimes against a child are violations of
chapter 12.1-16, 12.1-17, 12.1-18, or 12.1-29;
subdivision a: of subsection 1, or subsection 2 of
section 14-09-22 of the North Dakota Century Code in
which the victim is a minor, or an attempt to commit
these offenses.  Covered sexual offenses are
violations of section 12.1-20-03, 12.1-20-03.1, 12.1-
20-04, 12.1-20-05, 12.1-20-06, 12.1-20-07, 12.1-20-11,
chapter 12.1-27.2, and subsection 2 of section 12.1-
22-03.1 of the North Dakota Century Code or an attempt
to commit these offenses.

Mandated Registrants:
Any person convicted of a covered sexual offense or
offense against a child on or after August 1, 1985, is
required to register.  Persons may petition the court
to be exempt from registration for an offense against
a child (the exception does not apply to kidnaping,
felonious restraint, or facilitating  prostitution) or
misdemeanor sexual offenses if: 1) the offender is no
more than three years older than the victim and the
victim is a minor; 2) the offender has not previously
been convicted as a sex offender or of a felony crime
against a child; and 3) the offender did not exhibit
mental abnormality or predatory conduct in the
commission of the offense.

Duration of Registration:
10 years, unless the offender  1) is a repeat
offender, 2) has committed an "aggravated offense," or
3) has ever been civilly committed as a sexually
dangerous individual.  An offender that fits any of
the above three criteria must register for life.  

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
766 offenders registered as of 2/01.   (North Dakota
also compiles a "non-registration" list, derived from
the criminal history record system and listing data
for all persons convicted of offenses requiring
registration.  As of 5/99, there were 1,259 persons on
this list: approximately 163 were incarcerated at that
time, 300 were known to be out-of-state, 766 were
registered, and 30 had not been located.)
Automation of Sex Offender Registries     

Extent of database automation:  
The North Dakota SOR has a partially automated text
database.  North Dakota manually maintains hard copy
files on all registered offenders and also maintains
automated files to generate hard copy lists for law
enforcement agencies throughout the State.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
A link is in place.  Registered sex offenders are
flagged in the criminal history files.    
  
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.  Electronic transmission is
anticipated for March 2001.     

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:   
The capability for electronic storage and transmittal
of fingerprints exists through the State AFIS. 
  
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:   
No, not as of 2/01.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) operates the
SOR system, and all information related to qualifying
offenders goes to and through the OAG. The releasing
authority sends the OAG a copy of the offender's
signed Notification of Duty to Register. The OAG
notifies the local law enforcement agency in the
residence, school and/or employment jurisdiction. 
When the offender then registers locally, the local
law enforcement agency sends the offender's completed
registration form to the OAG.  Change of address
notices also go through the OAG to the new location. 
Both the OAG and local agencies track tardy
registrations and other violations.

DNA Sample:
All sex offenders are required to provide a DNA sample
to the Health Department, State Laboratory Division.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
In North Dakota the Office of the Attorney General
(OAG) verifies the address given by the offender by
receiving an affirmation from the postal service that
mail for a particular offender is being delivered to
the address given on that offender's registration
form.  Addresses are re-verified through the postal
service every six months.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Anticipated by August 2001.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a class A misdemeanor, carrying a
mandatory minimum of 90 days in jail and one year of
probation.  Automatic revocation of probation or
parole is also applicable.  A subsequent offense is a
class C felony.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Registration data is sent to criminal justice agencies
throughout the State in hard copy.  Federal funds will
make SOR information available online through
restricted Internet access and through the NLETS
network in conjunction with driver's license
inquiries.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The list of registered offenders is a confidential
record in North Dakota.  Information from the list
must be released by local law enforcement agencies to
the public as needed for the protection of the public. 
As of 2/01, new legislation would make the SOR
information on high risk offenders and lifetime
registrants available to the public on a website and
would make all SOR information an open record.

Procedures for Public Access:
The list of registered offenders is a confidential
record, but local law enforcement agencies must
release information from the list to the public if the
agency determines that the offender is a risk to the
public and disclosure is necessary for public
protection.  Disclosure of "non-registration
information" (from criminal history records) is also
permitted. As of 2/01, legislation is proposed to
develop risk assessment and community notification
procedures.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Not available as of 2/01.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Ohio
Responsible Agency: Ohio Office of the Attorney
General

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
"Sexually oriented offenses," defined by statute
section within the legislation, are covered.  Covered
offenses include sexual offenses against children and
also specified sexual offenses regardless of the age
of the victim. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for persons convicted of a
covered offense on or after July 1, 1997, and for
persons released to the community following
incarceration for a covered offense, on or after July
1, 1997, independent of the date of conviction, and
offenders moving into Ohio after July 1, 1997. 
Registrants are categorized as (1) sexual predators
(requiring community notification); (2) habitual
sexual offenders subject to community notification;
(3) habitual offenders not subject to community
notification, or (4) sexually-oriented offenders (not
subject to community notification).

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime, 20 years or 10 years.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
5,423

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Ohio SOR now has an automated text and
registration database known as Ohio e-SORN.  It is
housed on a client server at the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation (BCI&I). With
connectivity via Ohio LEADS to all of Ohio's 88
Sheriffs Offices and 34 Ohio Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction throughout Ohio.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
The systems are not linked electronically. A flag is
set in the Computerized Criminal History Files.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No.  Ohio e-SORN will be linked to the NSOR system
early in the second quarter of 2001.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
The Ohio e-SORN database is now linked to Ohio AFIS
and handles electronically submitted fingerprints. 
Sheriffs only ink-and-roll fingerprints if no hit is
found in the Ohio AFIS or e-SORN.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.  Each of the 88 Sheriff registration sites is now
equipped with a digital camera to supply photos to the
Ohio e-SORN database.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
For offenders with prison terms, the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction electronically send
detailed data on an offender to BCI&I and the sheriff
that has jurisdiction in the location where the
offender is going to live prior to his release from
custody.  For offenders with non-prison terms, the
courts, jail officials, or probation officers, as
appropriate, inform offenders of their "Duty to
Register," and the sheriff electronically sends the
offender's completed form to BCI&I.  Local sheriffs
electronically send all registration data (when the
offender registers locally), change of addresses, and
address verifications to BCI&I.

DNA Sample:
DNA is collected as part of the CODIS system.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No. The State SOR program is not responsible for
address validation or reregistration.  In Ohio,
reregistration requires the offender to appear
personally at his local sheriff's office. Sheriffs
have discretion about whether to mail offenders a
nonforwardable notification form (using a format
prescribed by BCI&I) about their duty to reregister.  
Sheriffs must make it clear to offenders that they
must appear in person at the sheriff's office to
reregister.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
If the underlying sexually oriented offense was a
felony, then failure to comply with registration
requirements is a felony in the fifth degree. If the
underlying sexually oriented offense was a
misdemeanor, then failure to comply is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information
  
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
  
Ohio categorizes registrants as: sexual predators
(SP), habitual sex offenders (HSO) subject to
community notification, habitual sex offenders (HSO)
not subject to community notification, and sexually
oriented offenders (SOO). Paper reports are sent to
each sheriff: 1) quarterly on current, in-compliance
registrants; 2) monthly on SOO's and HSO's not subject
to community notification who are out-of-compliance
for 21 days or more; and SP's and HSO's subject to
notification, who are out-of-compliance for 21 days or
more.  
  
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
For SP's or HSO's subject to notification, the local
sheriff notifies the following organizations in
writing: the head of the public children's service
agency, the superintendents of relevant boards of
education, the hiring officers of chartered nonpublic
schools, the heads of preschool programs, the
administrators or providers of day care centers, and
the presidents and heads of institutions of higher
education. The specified geographical notification
area is the school district.    

Procedures for Public Access:   
For SP's and HSO's subject to notification, the local
sheriff notifies in writing all occupants of
residences adjacent to the offender's place of
residence, and additional neighbors within any
category the Attorney General rules a "specified
geographical notification area." Generally
registration information the local sheriff has on SP's
and HSO's subject to notification and SOO's are public
records open to inspection by citizens.
  
Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
No.  

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Oklahoma
Responsible Agency: Oklahoma Department of Corrections

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are: child abuse involving sexual
abuse or exploitation; rape in the first or second
degree or by instrumentation; incest; forcible sodomy;
lewd or indecent proposals or acts to a child under
16; kidnaping or solicitation of minors; trafficking
of children; pornography involving minors;
facilitating, encouraging, offering, or soliciting
sexual conduct with a minor;  procuring or keeping a
child under 18 for prostitution; and sexual battery,
caretaker abuse involving sexual abuse or
exploitation, and indecent exposure.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all adult sex offenders
convicted in Oklahoma on or after November 1, 1989,
and for sex offenders convicted in other States and
moving to Oklahoma after November 1, 1989, independent
of the date of the out-of-state conviction. Individual
with two convictions for covered offenses, one of
which is after November 1, 1997  and for one of the
first five offenses listed in preceding section, are
designated "sexual predators" (from  11/1/97 to
10/31/98) and as of 11/1/98 will be designated
"habitual sexual offenders." 

Duration of Registration:
Ten years following the offender's release to the
community for sexual offenders registered by the
Department of Corrections (DOC) in the State Sex
Offender Registry.  Offender registrations at local
law enforcement agencies are maintained for 5 years.
The State Registry and the local registries are not
linked.  Lifetime registration is required for
offenders classified as "habitual sexual offenders". 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,020

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Oklahoma SOR has a fully automated text database
searchable by all fields, so it can be used not only
to generate lists of registered offender by location,
but also as an investigative tool for law enforcement
(for example, "find all registrants over 6 feet tall
with red hair").

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No. The State Bureau of Investigation (SBI) is the
Repository for Oklahoma's criminal history records. 
The SOR is operated by the Oklahoma Department of
Corrections (DOC).  The DOC notifies SBI of new
registrants, and their criminal history records are
then flagged by SBI staff.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes. The  DOC's  Interstate Identification Index (III)
operator enters an Oklahoma sex offender's record
directly into the FBI system.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No. The SOR receives fingerprints in hard copy (on a
card) and forwards them to the SBI.  There are no
plans for developing an electronic storage or
transmission capability within the DOC in the next
year.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Partial capability.  Since the early 1990's, when an
offender enters the State prison system, a digitalized
photo is taken.  When a sex offender is released to
the community, his photo becomes part of the SOR file. 

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Offenders incarcerated in State prison register
through prison staff prior to release.  Sex offenders
who receive probation or qualifying offenders who move
into Oklahoma from out-of-state register with their
local probation and parole office.  Both areas of the
Department of Corrections forward the information to
the SOR unit.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  The DNA sample is collected as part of the
Oklahoma Sex Offender Registry program.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Oklahoma has address validation, annually for
most registrants, but every 90 days for those
designated "habitual sexual offenders."  The SOR unit
sends out nonforwardable notification letters to both
groups.  Upon receipt of the address verification
letter, the offender has 10 days to verify his address
in person with his local law enforcement agency.  The
local agency returns the signed verification form to
the DOC.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Partially.  The system automatically generates a
monthly list of offenders to be notified, and the
basic notification notice is in the system. Filling in
the specifics--such as name and address-- is done
manually.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a felony, punishable by up to 5 years
in prison and/or a fine of up to $5,000.

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information,
February 2001
  
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
  
Copies of the complete SOR roster are sent by mail to
all district attorney's offices, and all State and
local law enforcement agencies at least every six
months, but generally more frequently.  

Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
In Oklahoma, affirmative notification of organizations
is limited to notice about habitual offenders required
to register every 90 days.  It is  carried out by
local law enforcement agencies. 

Procedures for Public Access:   
The Oklahoma SOR data is considered a public record. 
Citizens can write, phone, or fax a query about a
specific individual to the central SOR unit and get a
response.  Members of the public also can view SOR
files in the DOC's Oklahoma City office.  Since
November 1, 1998, the DOC has made hard copies of the
full registry available to the public for a fee (to
cover copying costs), and citizens can view the
registry files for their jurisdiction at their local
law enforcement agency.    

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
The placement of the SOR on the DOC website is planned
for late 2001.   
  
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Oregon
Responsible Agency: Oregon State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The Oregon law covers predatory sex offenses: rape,
sodomy, unlawful sexual penetration, incest with a
child victim, using a child in a display of sexually
explicit conduct, encouraging child sex abuse,
transporting child pornography into the State, paying
to view a child's sexually explicit conduct,
compelling prostitution, promoting prostitution, and
burglary with the intent to commit a sex crime.  The
listed crimes in any degree or attempts to commit
those offenses are covered.  Kidnaping, contributing
to the sexual delinquency of a minor and sexual
misconduct were added on September 1, 1999.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all persons classified
as predatory sex offenders: any offender, adult or
juvenile, under parole, probation, or post-prison
supervision who was convicted, adjudicated, or pled
guilty to one or more of the four listed crimes.  The
statute is retroactive.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime.  The registered offender may petition for a
waiver from the requirement to register after 10
years.  Registrants may petition for relief from
registration 10 years after completion of supervision
if convicted of one C felony or less.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
9,410

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Oregon SOR has an automated database that is
housed within the correction offender component of the
Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS), a statewide
database information system.  SORDS (Sex Offender
Registration Database System) went into use in August
1999.  It accommodates all sex offender information
and is accessible to law

enforcement agencies statewide. The database is also
compatible with NSOR.  
Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Department of Corrections (DOC), Probation and
Parole or the District Attorney (for bench probation)
conducts the initial registration with the offender,
entering the offender's data electronically into the
SOR on Oregon's Law Enforcement Data  System (LEDS).
While the offender is under supervision, corrections
officials update records as necessary. (The Oregon DOC
had "Sex Offender Network" of specialized probation
and parole officers who focus on management of sexual
offenders in the community.)  Offenders no longer
under supervision or moving to Oregon from out-of-
state register directly with Oregon law enforcement.

DNA Sample:
Yes.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
If the offender moves they are required to report to a
law enforcement agency to register.  Oregon law
enforcement, on a routine basis, has been conducting
county-wide sweep operations to verify offender's
addresses to ensure compliance with the law and 
arrest noncompliant offenders.  As a result,
compliance is running statewide at 86%.

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable as of 2/01.  New procedures are not
known.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Failure to complete initial registration is a class C
felony.  Failure to complete annual reregistration is
a Class A misdemeanor.  Failure to notify officials of
a change of address is a class C felony if the
original sex conviction was for a felony, and a class
A misdemeanor if the original conviction was for a
misdemeanor.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Records are available to law enforcement personnel
throughout the State through the Law Enforcement Data
System (LEDS), a statewide database information
system.  LEDS is searchable by name and date of birth,
but it does not contain photos or allow for parameter
searches. SORDS is now available to statewide law
enforcement through the Internet.  All sex offender
information, including photos, is accessible through
SORDS. 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Any organizational notification is the responsibility
of the local law enforcement agency where the offender
resides in conjunction with the probation or parole
officer supervising the offender. Affirmative
notification is limited to offenders classified as
sexual predators.

Procedures for Public Access:
Regarding community notification, while the offender
is under supervision by a corrections agency the
corrections agency is responsible for conducting the
notification, provided the offender has been
determined to be predatory.  If the offender is off
supervision then law enforcement is responsible for
notifying the community, provided the offender has
been determined to be predatory in conjunction with
the Department of Corrections. The 1999 legislation
passed SB740 which allows for the release of sex
offender information to the public upon request. 

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
There is currently no public access to the sex
offender website.  The public website is in the Oregon
Court of Appeals. Release of public information by
request is handled via phone, mail or fax.  Criminal
Justice Agencies have full access to sex offender
information through the law enforcement website.  

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Pennsylvania
Responsible Agency: Pennsylvania State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The following offenses are covered when the victim is
a minor: kidnaping, rape, involuntary deviate sexual
intercourse, aggravated indecent assault, prostitution
and related offenses, obscene materials and
performances, indecent assault, incest, unlawful
contact or communication with a minor, sexual abuse of
children, and sexual exploitation of children.  The
following offenses are covered independent of the 
victim's age: rape, involuntary deviate sexual
intercourse, aggravated indecent assault, and sexual
assault.  Attempt convictions for any of the listed
offenses requires registration.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for sexual offenders
convicted on or after the statute's effective date of
April 21, 1996, and for sexual offenders convicted
earlier but still under the jurisdiction of the Board
of Probation and Parole or of the Department of
Corrections on April 21, 1996.

Duration of Registration:
The registration requirement for sexual offenders is 
10 years or life.  Two convictions of any listed
offenses or one conviction of rape, aggravated
indecent assault, involuntary deviate sexual
intercourse, sexual assault or incest will result in
lifetime registration for offenders not designated as
sexually violent predators.  For those offenders
designated sexually violent predators, the
registration requirement is for life. 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,533

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Pennsylvania SOR has an automated text database
housed on a personal computer.  All data entry is
manual.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No. As of 2/01, Pennsylvania does not submit to the
NSOR. Tape submissions to the FBI's system are
scheduled to begin in July 2001.  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  Pennsylvania's current electronic fingerprint
network involves 42 agencies throughout the State and
currently transmits prints in 65 percent of all
arrests. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, not as of 2/01.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Completed paper registration forms are sent to State
Police for the SOR from correctional facilities,
probation and parole offices, and Pennsylvania State
Police Stations. The SOR unit both verifies the
information and enters it manually into the database.

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Notification notices are sent out annually for
sexual offenders and every 90 days for those
designated sexually violent predators.

B. SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.  Letters, reports, and fliers are automatically
generated by the current system.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a felony of the first or third
degree.

Dissemination of Sex Offender 
Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Dissemination to State and municipal police is through
Sexual Offender Fliers and via uniscope messages using
the Commonwealth Law Enforcement Assistance Network
(CLEAN).  The information is available to all law
enforcement, although the SOR database cannot be
accessed directly through CLEAN.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
State and municipal police conduct notifications for
sexually violent predators and those out-of-state
offenders subject to notification.  The central SOR
unit prepares the notification fliers, and local,
State and municipal police personnel notify qualifying
child and youth service agencies; public, private and
parochial schools; day care centers and preschool
programs; and institutions of higher learning.  The
procedures are established by State law, State Police
regulations and municipal police regulations.

Procedures for Public Access:
Community notification is conducted by the appropriate
State or municipal law enforcement agency for both
sexually violent predators and out-of-state offenders
subject to notification.  The State Police prepare the
flier, and the local State police or municipal
department notifies the victim (for sexually violent
predators only), and qualifying neighbors, and
maintains records of those notified.  Community
meetings may be held.  Individual citizens or
representatives of the media may request a specific
flier by appearing in person at the local State or
municipal agency and requesting the information. 
"Blanket" requests for information on multiple
offenders are referred to the State Police SOR unit.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
No.

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Rhode Island
Responsible Agency: Rhode Island Office of the
Attorney General

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Both criminal offenses against a minor and sexually
violent offenses against an adult or child victim are
covered. Criminal offenses against a minor include
kidnaping (11-36-1), kidnaping with intent to extort
(11-26-2), where victim is age 16 and older but under
age 18, or kidnaping of a minor (11-26-1.4), any
violation of 42 U.S.C. .14701, 18 U.S.C. 4042(c), 3rd
degree sexual assault (11-37-6), assault with intent
to commit 1st degree sexual assault (11-37-8), 1st
degree child molestation (11-37-8.1), 2nd degree child
molestation (11-37-8.3), Soliciting an incompetent
person (11-1-10) where the underlying offense is a
violation of Chapter 34 (Prostitution and Lewdness),
or or false imprisonment of a minor; Exploitation for
commercial or immoral purposes (11-9-1 (b) or (c)), or
Murder (11-23-1) in the commission of, or attempted
commission of kidnaping where the victim is under age
18. Sexually violent offenses include: 1st degree
sexual assault (11-37-2), 2nd degree sexual assault
(11-37-4), 3rd degree sexual assault (11-37-6),
assault with intent to commit 1st degree sexual
assault (11-37-8), 1st degree child molestation (11-
37-8.1), 2nd degree child molestation (11-37-8.3),
assault with intent to commit specified felony limited
to sexual assault (11-5-1), murder in the commission
of, or attempted commission of rape, or any degree of
sexual assault or child molestation or any
substantially equivalent offense in any other
jurisdiction (11-23-1), or any violation of 42 U.S.C.
.14701, or 18 U.S.C. 4042(c). SEE R.I.G.L .11-37.1-2
(5)&(10).

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for any person convicted in
Rhode Island on enumerated offenses listed above in
"Covered Offenses" along with any person who in Rhode
Island or any other jurisdiction has been convicted of
an offense against the victim who is a minor, has been
convicted of a sexually violent offense, has been
determined to be a sexually violent predator (offender
must be convicted of a sexually violent offense, have
a mental abnormality or personality disorder that
makes the person likely to engage in predatory
sexually violent offenses), is determined to be an
aggravated offender (convicted of 1st degree child
molestation or 1st degree sexual assault), is a
recidivist (an offender having a prior conviction of
any offense described in covered offenses), and non-
resident students or workers defined in .11-37.1(d). 
SEE R.I.G.L .11-37.1-3.

Duration of Registration:
The registration requirement for offenders is for 10
years upon their release into the community from
incarceration, or upon being placed on probation in
the event of an offender who is not incarcerated
quarterly address verification for the first two years
and annually for years 3-10, UNLESS the offender is
determined to be a sexually violent predator,
aggravated offender, or recidivist, registration is
mandated for the offender's lifetime. Address
verification is done quarterly for lifetime
registrants.  Regarding non-resident students or
workers, registration is annually for as long as the
non-resident student or worker is present at school or
work in Rhode Island.  SEE R.I.G.L .11-37.1-4.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
There are 1,424 registered sex offenders in the
central registry as of February 1, 2001.


Automation of Sex Offender Registries     

Extent of database automation:  
As of 2/01, automation of the Rhode Island SOR was
very limited.  However, a new, fully automated SOR
database will be put on the new Rhode Island Law
Enforcement Telecommunication System (RILETS) and be
available to criminal justice agencies statewide.  The
SOR database is in transition.  Data conversion and
entry is currently taking place.  The Central Registry
Node is currently operational. Electronic registration
intrastate is being developed and is expected to be
available in late 2001.    
Database is linked to criminal history files:
As of October 2000, the Rhode Island SOR and the
criminal history files are linked to RILETS. When the
SOR is populated with offender information after data
conversion and entry, testing will be conducted on the
database so that any name query for wants and warrants
and criminal history data will automatically check the
SOR database and respond with any information. 
  
SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.  The SOR system is fully
compatible with NCIC-2000, and will have the
capability to electronically transmit data.    

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:   
Rhode Island has taken delivery of a complete AFIS. 
Currently, the development of protocols is being
accomplished to electronically store fingerprints and 
livescan protocols are being developed to
electronically transmit fingerprints.  (The AFIS
acquisition was supported by an earlier NCHIP award.)

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:   
As of February 1, 2001, digital cameras have been
purchased for local law enforcement agencies and
training has been conducted.  Protocols are being
developed concerning storage and transmittal of
photographs electronically.

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
As of 2/01, the offender's signed "Notification of
Duty to Register" form is sent to the SOR by the
relevant corrections officials.  The offender's
residential registration, photo and fingerprints are
sent by the local law enforcement agency from the
jurisdiction where the offender resides, to the Bureau
of Criminal Identification in the Office of the
Attorney General.  Presently, this information is
transmitted manually from local law enforcement.  It
is anticipated by late 2001 that Rhode Island local
law enforcement can enter and update offender
information directly into the system.

DNA Sample:
Rhode Island has established a State DNA database
pursuant to R.I.G.L. .12-1.5-1 et. seq.  The database
is administered through the Department of Health.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Local law enforcement notifies offender registrants
concerning address verification.  Offender's initial
registration is done by personal appearance at the
local law enforcement agency, where the offender
stated identified as their residence within 24 hours
of sentencing, or release from incarceration.  Non-
resident students or workers most report within 24
hours of their entry into the State.  Presently, this
information is collected manually and transmitted
manually to the SOR.  Protocol, procedures, and
electronic connection to the SOR by local law
enforcement has been developed as of February 2001.

SOR Notification Automated:
No, not as of February 2001.  With the development of
protocols and procedures and an electronic connection
to the SOR through RILETS, local law enforcement will
be able to generate and send verification notices for
offenders residing within their jurisdiction.  It is
anticipated that local law enforcement will be able to
update verification information in the SOR when the
protocol is implemented.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
R.I.G.L. .11-37.1-10 proscribes that noncompliance of
registration or verification is a felony punishable by
up to two years incarceration and/or a fine up to
$2,000.  Also, failure to comply with registration or
address verification is violation of the terms of
release and may result in probation or parole
revocation or other sanction.

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR data is accessible statewide to law
enforcement agencies through the Rhode Island Law
Enforcement Telecommunications System (RILETS) .11-37-
11-(b)(1).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The Attorney General has promulgating and filed with
the Secretary of State Community Notification
Guidelines under the Administrative Procedures Act. 
The Parole Board assess the risk of re-offense by each
offender referred to it and determines the appropriate
level of notification.  Upon notice to the offender,
the offender can challenge the level of notification
and the sentencing court will review the information
and make a determination of the appropriate level of
community notification.  Local  law enforcement
carries out the determined level of community
notification pursuant to a "Community Notification
Plan" filed with the Parole Board, yearly, from each
jurisdiction, and the Attorney General's Community
Notification Guidelines. Organizational notification
is mandatory for those offenders determined to be
Level II (moderate risk) and Level III (high risk) who
are not in a residential treatment facility.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Rhode Island statute is a tier level system where
the Parole Board assigns a risk level for each
offender and community notification is accomplished
pursuant to a plan filed with the Parole Board by each
local law enforcement jurisdiction.  If the offender
is determined to be a Level II offender (moderate
risk), notification takes place to organizations
within the jurisdiction where the offender resides. 
This notification is to the victim and/or witnesses if
requested, day care centers, schools, women's
organizations or church groups where the people whom
the offender might victimize are located.  Regarding
school notifications, the community notification plan
request that each school provide a list of parents who
wish to have notification regarding sex offenders who
reside in the area of the school receiving community
notification.  For offenders determined to be Level
III (high risk) offenders, local law enforcement
agencies notify organization types listed for Level II
and individual members of the community in the area
where the offender resides or other areas where people
who may be victims of the offender may have contact
with the offender.  Community notification for Level
III offenders can be accomplished by fact sheets,
fliers, news releases, advertisements, computerized
access to fact sheet information, and/or public access
to fact sheets at agency offices.  Offenders subject
to community notification receive notice of the
proposed community notification and can object to the
proposed notification and have a right to judicial
review of the proposed community notification.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Rhode Island has amended the statute to allow the
Parole Board to utilize the Rhode Island State Police
Web Site for the public release of identifying
information of Level III sexual predators who have
been convicted, incarcerated, and released, and who
the Parole Board finds are likely to travel out of the
State.  No juvenile identifying information will be
listed.  As of February 1, 2001, the protocols for the
website have not been developed.  R.I.G.L. .11-37.1-
12(c)(5).
  
.Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: South
Carolina
Responsible Agency: South Carolina State Law
Enforcement Division (SLED)


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are listed in Section 23-3-430 of the
South Carolina Code of Laws.
  
Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all sex offenders
convicted in South Carolina and residing within the
State, regardless of age, and for all offenders,
regardless of age, who have been convicted in another
State of "any offense which can be reasonably
interpreted as corresponding to those provided for in
the South Carolina Sex Offender Registry" and who move
to South Carolina. This includes persons who remain in
the State for a total of 30 days during a 12 month
period such as military personnel and students.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,924


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The South Carolina SOR has an automated database with
connectivity for data entry via Intranet and inquiry
via Internet. 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01.  South Carolina reports that
future linkage is anticipated.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No, not as of 2/01. South Carolina is in the process
of upgrading its current AFIS database to an
Integrated AFIS (IAFIS) in order to be FBI-compliant,
but most local sites will not have compatible livescan
fingerprinting systems.  Initially, IDIS software is
being proposed as an alternative for low volume
contributors.  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
"Pre-registration" information on an offender comes
from the South Carolina Department of Corrections
(SCDC), the Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ), or
the Department of Probation, Parole and Pardon
Services (PPPS) via an automated form to the South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED), which
manages the Sex Offender Registry.  SLED ensures entry
of the pre-registration information into the SOR and
notifies the sheriff in the offender's county of
residence.  The offender must register in person with
the sheriff, who also takes the offender's photo and
fingerprints, and transmits the full package to the
South Carolina SOR. 

DNA Sample:
Yes, a DNA sample is taken and maintained, but not as
part of the SOR program.  Offender DNA samples are
covered under a separate section of State Criminal
Code.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No.  South Carolina law mandates annual registration
of all convicted sex offenders with the county sheriff
of the jurisdiction where the offender resides, but
makes such annual registration the responsibility of
the offender.  Sexually violent predators are required
to reregister every 90 days.

SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable at this time.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a misdemeanor with a mandatory
sentence of 90 days incarceration.  The second offense
is a misdemeanor with a mandatory sentence of one year
of incarceration. A third or subsequent offense is a
felony with a mandatory sentence of five years'
incarceration.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information is available statewide to all
criminal justice agencies with access to South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division (SLED) Criminal
Justice Information System (CJIS).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Affirmative notification is the responsibility of the
county sheriff where the offender lives and is to be
conducted in the interests of public safety and
preventing criminal activity.  SOR law specifies that
for "persons adjudicated delinquent in family court"
for certain non-violent/less serious offenses,
information may be released only to schools and other
relevant organizations.

Procedures for Public Access
Local SOR information is open to public inspection
upon a request to the county sheriff. Requests must be
made in writing and include the name of the requestor
and the name or address of the person about whom
information is sought. SLED provides public access via
the Internet to statewide SOR information.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  The SOR website is within the agency website and
may be found at: http://www.sled.state.sc.us
A substantial number of hits are believed to occur
monthly but are not tracked separately..Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: South Dakota
Responsible Agency: South Dakota Office of the
Attorney General


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
All felony sex offenses are covered.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for all sexual offenders
convicted as adults in South Dakota, all Federal or
out-of-state offenders convicted of covered sexual
offenses in other jurisdictions and moving into South
Dakota, and juveniles, 15 years or older, adjudicated
since 1997 of certain enumerated sex offenses.

Duration of Registration:
Lifetime, with the exception of persons placed on the
Registry as juveniles.  They may petition the court
for removal based on 10 offense-free years.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,182, including adjudicated juveniles, and federal
and convicted felons from out-of-state now residing in
South Dakota


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The South Dakota SOR has an automated text database.
The initial steps in the process are manual. The
Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) receives hard
copy sexual offenders' acknowledgments of the Duty to
Register notice and their Registration Forms. The DCI
runs criminal history checks, processes offenders'
fingerprints into the AFIS, and creates a name folder
for the hard copy forms and photo. The data is then
entered into the automated SOR.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of February 2001.  The State is in the
process of upgrading its system to allow participation
in the permanent NSOR.


SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partially.  South Dakota is part of a 3-state regional
AFIS now being upgraded under NCHIP funding. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, not as of 2/01. 


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
"Duty to Register" forms and acknowledgments are
completed by offenders and the relevant probation,
court services, State DOC, or Federal officials.  The
original is sent to the Division of Criminal
Investigation (DCI) for entry in the SOR. Copies go to
the applicable local law enforcement agency, the
State's attorney, and the offender.  The DCI
Compliance Coordinator monitors the offender's
official registration with the local law enforcement
agency where he will reside. The original of the
Registration Form is sent to DCI, with the offender's
fingerprints (on an FBI card) and his photo. All forms
are submitted to DCI in hard copy. 

DNA Sample:
DNA sample is not taken as a formal part of the SOR
registration, but there is a DNA indicator field to
note if State Forensic Lab has a sample on file. 
Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) has the
responsibility for collecting and filing DNA
information from all persons convicted of sex crimes.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The Division of Criminal Identification (DCI)
conducts direct certified mailing to all registered
offenders annually as an address verification audit.
The form must be signed by the offender and returned
within 10 days.  The registered offender is also
required to verify his address annually with his local
registering agency by filling out a reregistration or
update form.  An offender has 10 days to notify the
local law enforcement agency of any change of 
address by completing an update form where he is
residing.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No, not as of 2/01.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Failure to register initially and violations of the
reregistration requirements carry the same penalties.
The first offense is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable
by up to one year in jail and/or a fine of up to
$1,000.  Any subsequent offense is a class 6 felony,
punishable by up to two years in prison and/or a fine
of up to $2,000.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
South Dakota states its registered sex offender
automated database is accessible to all criminal
justice entities nationwide instantly through standard
telecommunication formats. Intrastate access is
through the South Dakota Law Enforcement
Telecommunication System (SDLETS), available to law
enforcement agencies on a 24-hour basis.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
No procedures for affirmative notification to
organizations are specified.  Names of school or child
welfare employees or potential employees may be
submitted to a law enforcement agency for a sexual
offender records check.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) sexual
offender registration file is available to all law
enforcement agencies on a 24-hour basis, but is not
open to inspection by the public.  However, the
registration records collected by local law
enforcement agencies and the registration lists
provided to local law enforcement by DCI are public
records and may be viewed at local law enforcement
offices.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
No.



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Tennessee
Responsible State Agency: Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are aggravated rape; rape; rape of a
child; aggravated sexual battery; sexual battery;
sexual battery by an authority figure; statutory rape;
aggravated prostitution; especially aggravated sexual
exploitation of a minor; aggravated exploitation of a
minor; sexual exploitation of a minor; incest;
especially aggravated kidnaping of a minor (except by
a parent); aggravated kidnaping of a minor (except by
parent); false imprisonment or kidnaping of a minor
(except by a parent); attempt, conspiracy or
solicitation to commit a covered offense; criminal
responsibility for facilitating the commission of a
covered offense; and accessory after the fact of a
covered offense.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for persons convicted of a
covered offense, including those convicted of a
comparable offense in another State, country, or a
military court.  Registration is mandatory for persons
convicted of a covered offense before January 1, 1995,
but discharged from incarceration with or without
criminal justice supervision after January 1, 1995
(i.e. anyone who was still serving his sentence or
still under supervision on January 1, 1995 must
register).

Duration of Registration:
10 years after the termination of criminal justice
supervision or discharge from incarceration without
supervision, at which point the offender may petition
for relief from the registration requirement.
Exceptions: (a) one or more prior conviction(s) for
sexual offense(s); or  (b) convicted of sexually
violent offense - - must register for life.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
4,561

Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Tennessee SOR has an automated text database.  It
is accessible to local law enforcement through
transactions on the State law enforcement network.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes. 

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.  Tennessee contributes to the FBI via the State
law enforcement network.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes, through the State's AFIS.  Through a combination
of NCHIP and Byrne funds, TBI's AFIS is being upgraded
and the Department of Corrections (DOC) is upgrading
their livescan equipment to be more compatible with
the TBI repository.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Initial information comes from the agency releasing
the offender to the community: the Department of
Corrections (DOC), Probation or Parole, or court
services.  The offender completes and signs (1) his
Notification of Duty to Register form and (2) the
official Registration Form.  Both forms are then sent
to the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) where
the data is manually keyed into the registry and sent
on to the FBI.  Local law enforcement can access SOR
data through the State law enforcement
telecommunications network.
     
DNA Sample:
Yes, but the DNA program operates under a separate
law. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 40-35-321
requires TBI to establish a DNA database for convicted
sexual offenders, maintained by Forensic Services
Division.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  Every 90 days TBI sends, by certified mail with
return receipt requested, a nonforwardable
Verification and Monitoring Form to all registered
offenders.  Registrants must sign it and return it to
TBI headquarters within 10 days. Exceptions: (a)
incarcerated offenders; and (b) offenders whose
address is unknown, both groups stay on the registry
but do not receive monitoring forms. 

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable
by not less than 180 days in the county jail.  Any
subsequent offense is a Class E felony.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information     
         

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information is available to all criminal justice
agencies through the State's law enforcement
telecommunications network. The Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation (TBI) notifies the applicable local law
enforcement agency of the offender's places of
residence and employment and changes of address.  TBI
also notifies all district attorneys general of all
offenders in their jurisdiction, both those in and out
of compliance.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The TBI or a local law enforcement agency may release
relevant information deemed necessary to protect the
public concerning a specific sexual offender.  TBI
policy is to leave such decisions up to local law
enforcement agencies.

Procedures for Public Access:
For offenses committed prior to 7/1/97, the registry
information is confidential and is released only to
law enforcement officials.  For offenses committed on
or after 7/1/97, the registry information is by
statute a public record.  It can be accessed by using
the TBI website or by calling toll free 888-837-4170.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. http://www.ticic.state.tn.us/SEX_ofndr/
search_short.asp  The website is operated by the
Tennessee Internet Crime Information Center 
(TICIC).  The website only includes offenders whose
offenses were committed on or after July 1, 1997.



.Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Texas
Responsible State Agency: Texas Department of Public
Safety

  
Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are categorized as sexually violent
offenses or sexual offenses.  Covered sexually violent
offenses are indecency with a child, by contact;
sexual assault; aggravated sexual assault; sexual
performance by a child; aggravated kidnaping with the
intent to abuse the victim sexually; and burglary if
committed with the intent to commit any listed
offense.  Covered sexual offenses are indecency with a
child, by exposure; incest; indecent exposure (2nd
conviction); compelling prostitution; possession or
promotion of child pornography; attempted conspiracy
or solicitation to commit any of the listed offenses.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for persons (adult and
juvenile) incarcerated or under probation, parole, or
mandatory supervision on or after 9/01/97 for
conviction of a covered crime, or with adjudication
occurring on or after 9/01/70.  The exception is the
offense of "Compelling Prostitution" (Section 43.05)
which requires registration if the conviction or
adjudication occurs on or after 9/01/97.

Duration of Registration:
For adults incarcerated or under supervision as of
9/01/97, there is a lifetime registration requirement
for a sexually violent offense or specified offenses
against children and a registration requirement of 
"duration of supervision plus 10 years" for other
covered offenses.  For adults discharged from
supervision before 9/01/97, the duty to register
expired on the date of discharge.  For juveniles, the
registration requirement is for "duration of
supervision plus 10 years" if they are adjudicated on
or after 9/01/95.  For juveniles adjudicated before
9/01/95, the duty to register expires on the date of
their discharge from supervision. 

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
29,494

  
Automation of Sex Offender Registries


Extent of database automation:
The Texas SOR has an automated text database on a
client server environment.  The department has set up
a secure website that allows registering agencies to
verify and update registration information online. 
This allows the database to be updated in a timely
manner eliminating the paper forms.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No. As of 2/01, SOR data has been tested and should be
online by June 2001.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partial. The capability for electronic storage and
transmittal of fingerprints exists through the State
AFIS, but the agencies submitting fingerprints to the
SOR send special fingerprint cards in hard copy to the
SOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.  The system has the capability of keeping a
historical file of mugshots.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The institution releasing the offender to the
community (the Department of Corrections, the local
jail, or Court Services) completes the initial
registration and a written Notice of Duty to Register,
and sends the forms to the local law enforcement
agency where the offender will reside. That agency
completes registration with the offender, verifies the
address, obtains the offender's fingerprints and
photo, and submits the full package to the Department
of Public Safety (DPS) which enters the data into the
SOR.  The local law enforcement 
agency conducts any required school or newspaper
notification.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  A parallel program within DPS focuses on
building a DNA database of all convicted sexual
offenders.
Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No.  As of 2/01, offenders are responsible for
personally verifying their addresses annually with the
local law enforcement agency where they reside. 
Offenders with two convictions for sexually violent
crimes must verify their addresses every 90 days.  The
procedural requirements for verification are at the
discretion of the local law enforcement agency. The
Department of Public Safety provides sample forms
which local agencies may use.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Not applicable.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a State jail felony and can result 
in revocation and re-incarceration.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Local law enforcement agencies can access the SOR
database through a specialized Texas Crime Information
Center (TCIC) inquiry issue via the Texas Law
Enforcement Telecommunication System (TLETS).  Out-of-
state law enforcement agencies have access to
information through the Interstate Identification
Index (III) or NCIC.  Criminal justice agencies can
also access the SOR database through a secure website. 
The website allows online updates and multiple
queries.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The local law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction
where the offender resides provides written notice to
the superintendent of public schools and to the
administrators of private primary and secondary 
schools concerning any registered sexual offender
whose victim was under the age of 17.

Procedures for Public Access:
Registry data is public information, but the, social
security number, phone number, driver's license
number, and photo are not released. Newspaper
notification is made on adult offenders only for
convictions or adjudications on or after 9/01/95 where
the victim was under the age of 17. Citizens may write
to their local law enforcement agency or the Texas
Department of Public Safety (DPS) requesting listings
of registered offenders.  

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable) 
SOR data is available, free of charge, on the Crime
Records Website: http://records.txdps.state.tx.us/
The site currently receives an average of 1.4 million
hits per month.
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Utah
Responsible State Agency: Utah Department of
Corrections


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Violations of Utah Code Sections 76-7-102, 76-9-702.5,
76-5a-3, 76-10-1306, 76-5-301.1, and attempting,
soliciting or conspiring to commit a felony under
Title 76, Chapter 5, Part 4, Sexual Offenses are
covered offenses. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for adults and any juveniles
who have been certified as adults and who have been
convicted in Utah of a covered offense; any individual
convicted of any comparable offense by any other State
or by the United States Government; any individual
committed to a State mental hospital for the
commission or alleged commission of one or more
covered offenses; non-resident offenders who are
employed, carry on a vocation or who are a student in
the State of Utah.

Duration of Registration:
The registration requirement begins upon conviction
and continues for 10 years after termination of the
offender's sentence.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
5,192


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Utah SOR has an automated text database
incorporating mugshot capture and storage capability.
The Utah SOR is part of the Department of Corrections
(DOC) automated offender tracking system (O-Track). 
The sex offender registration portion of the O-Track
system is named I-Track.  Registration information
submitted by law enforcement or the courts is
submitted in hard copy form, while registrations
completed by Adult Probation and Parole Offices are
submitted electronically.  The Utah SOR began
utilizing this database in October 2000.  

Database is linked to criminal history files:
The Bureau of Criminal Identification (BCI) of
Department of Public Safety maintains the State's
criminal history files.  The DOC maintains the State's
SOR files separately from BCI.  BCI allows access to
its NCIC data link for timely online data entry of SOR
information.  A direct link allowing information
exchange between these two departments' files is
anticipated by the end of 2001.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
DOC began electronic transmission to the FBI NSOR in
September 2000.  The manual entry of registrant's
information was found to be resource intensive. 
Therefore, DOC is reviewing options, which will allow
for a mass data dump of the required NSOR fields. 
 
SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
DOC has obtained livescan equipment for all offices of
Adult Probation and Parole throughout the State.  DOC
plans to use electronic uploads and online entry
rather than hard copies.  This process has yet to be
determined.  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Mugshot capability has been incorporated into the 
I-Track system.  The added ability to store a series
of mugshots on an individual offender is forthcoming.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Law enforcement agencies are mandated, by State law,
to notify the SOR of the arrest of a person suspected
of any offense, which if convicted would require
registration.  The convicting courts are mandated to
submit a copy of the Judgment and Sentence to the
Department.  County Sheriff's are required to register
and submit registrations on offenders not remanded to
DOC's supervision or custody.  DOC is mandated to
register all offenders placed on supervision with or
in the custody of the department.

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  The SOR sends address verification notices to
registrants as directed by the Utah State Code.
Offenders must register annually and also within 10
days of every change of address with the probation and 
parole office responsible for the jurisdiction of
residence.  For lifetime parolees (sexually violent
predators), address verification is required every 60
days.

SOR Notification Automated:
No, not as of 2/01. DOC plans to automate this process
in the future.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a Class A misdemeanor, carrying a term of
incarceration of not less than 90 days and also at
least one year of probation.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Department of Corrections (DOC) employees can access
the SOR database through the O-Track system.  Any Utah
law enforcement agency may request access to the O-
Track system.  The SOR also notifies law enforcement
agencies on a monthly basis of offenders who are
paroling or discharged from prison.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Since the creation of the Utah Sex Offender Registry
in 1987, the State Office of Education has been
notified of all registered sex offenders who have
reported employment within the education system.   

Procedures for Public Access:
Effective 04/29/96, registration data, specified in
State law, became public record when released upon a
written request.  In 1998, the information was
designated public, and DOC utilizes the Internet to
disseminate.  By year-end, however, legal issues and
constraints precluded adding new offenders.  In
September 2000, resolution of the legal issues was
obtained.  The resolution allows DOC to utilize the
Internet, and display all current registrants. 
Written requests are accepted as well.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
In December 2000, DOC/SOR displayed an improved
Internet registry website containing all current
registrants.  Located at: http://www.udc.state.ut.us 
.Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Vermont
Responsible State Agency: Vermont Department of Public
Safety


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are sexual assault, aggravated sexual
assault, lewd and lascivious conduct, sexual activity
by a caregiver, (all as defined in specified statute
sections) or an attempt to commit any of the offenses
listed.  If the victim is a minor, covered offenses
include all of those already listed, plus kidnaping,
lewd and lascivious conduct with a child, in violation
of specific statute sections, sexual exploitation of
children (all as defined in specified statute
sections) or attempts to commit any of these offenses. 
For purposes of covered offenses requiring
registration, conduct that is criminal only because of
the age of the victim shall not be considered a
criminal offense if the perpetrator is under the age
of 18.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for persons convicted of any
of the covered offenses listed above and for persons
who have been convicted of a comparable sex crime in
any jurisdiction of the United States, including a
State, territory, commonwealth, the District of
Columbia, or a military court and subsequently take up
residence in Vermont.  (As noted above, conduct that
is criminal only because of the age of the victims
shall not be considered a criminal offense requiring
registration is the perpetrator is under the age of
18.)

Duration of Registration:
Registration is required for 10 years after release to
the community and discharge from probation or parole. 
A person designated as a sexually violent predator may
petition the court for removal of the designation 10
years after release from incarceration or after
discharge from probation or parole, whichever is
later.  The petition must include the recommendations
of at least two experts in the behavior and treatment
of sexual offenders.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
1,509




Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Vermont SOR has an automated text database on a
stand-alone personal computer.  It is maintained by 
the Vermont Criminal Information Center (VCIC) of the
Department of Public Safety.  Most processes are
manual. NCHIP funds are being used to move the SOR to
a different hardware and software platform for
interfaces with the FBI and with the computerized
criminal history system, and in order to automate
accessing and transmitting data. 

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  The capability exists through the Tri-State AFIS
network shared by Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine,
although, as of 2/01, it was not linked in any way
with the current SOR.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
No, not as part of the SOR as of 2/01.  Fingerprints
are stored in the AFIS, but most photographs are
maintained in paper form.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The court submits the initial registration data from
the offender to the Department of Public Safety's
Vermont Criminal Information Center (VCIC) immediately
upon conviction and then submits the conviction record
within 10 days of sentencing. Prior to an offender's
release, the Department of Corrections (DOC) formally
notifies the offender of his Duty to Register,
notifies the offender's parole officer, and updates
and adds to the SOR data at VCIC. The Department of
Public Safety/VCIC will then notify the FBI.
DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is punishable by imprisonment for
not more than two years or a fine of not more than
$1,000 or both.  The second and subsequent offenses
are punishable by imprisonment for not more than three
years or a fine of not more than $5,000 or both.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 2/01, no automated links exist between the SOR
and Vermont's intra-state law enforcement network, the
NLETS, or NCIC.  All requests to the SOR for data or
dissemination are processed manually. 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Vermont registry information is confidential.  It may
be given to law enforcement agencies for law
enforcement purposes, to State or federal agencies for
confidential background checks, and to employers and
school districts authorized to request Vermont Crime
Information Center (VCIC) data for public protection
purposes, as well as to the offender for review
purposes.  Legislation to expand community and
organizational notification was introduced in the
legislature in January 1999, but  no action was taken.

Procedures for Public Access:
As of July 1, 2000, information is available to the
public regarding a specific offender if the requester
articulates a public safety concern. Requesters may
contact the registry in writing or by telephone.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes, but the Vermont website provides only information
on the Registry.  No data is posted on registered
offenders.  The website has a description of the VCIC
SOR, the registration requirements, and a link to the
text of the law.
http://www.dps.state.vt.us/cjs/s_registry.htm 

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Virginia
Responsible State Agency: Virginia State Police

Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
The following sexually violent offenses are covered:
rape, forcible sodomy, sexual penetration with an
object, abduction for immoral purposes and aggravated
sexual battery or any attempts of the aforementioned
offenses except aggravated sexual battery.  The
following sexual offenses also are covered: abduction
(victim is a minor, physically helpless or mentally
incapacitated), carnal knowledge of a child between 13
- 15 years, carnal knowledge of certain minors,
attempted aggravated sexual battery, crimes against
nature, incest, taking indecent liberties with a
child, indecent liberties with a child by a person in
a custodial relationship, break and enter with intent
to commit rape and pornography involving children.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for adult sex offenders
convicted of a covered offense on or after July 1,
1994, and for juvenile felony sex offenders convicted
in circuit courts or any person serving a sentence of
confinement or under community supervision as of July
1, 1994.

Duration of Registration:
Sexual offenders are required to register for 10
years.  They may then petition the court for removal
from the registry, but if denied, they must wait two
years to re-petition. Those convicted of a second
covered offense or designated as sexually violent
offenders must register for life.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
9,306


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Virginia SOR database itself is fully automated. 
The system calculates dates and generates notices for
offenders' reregistration, is searchable by county or
zip code, and generates reports for the program.    


Database is linked to criminal history files:
No, not as of 2/01.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes, since June 2000.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No, the Virginia SOR does not have this capability as
of 2/01. The State has an AFIS and uses the Networked
AFIS Transaction Management System (NATMS) to
automatically enter and update its criminal history
records, but the Virginia State law requires that the
SOR fingerprints be stored separately from any other
records. NSOR-AP funds will add SOR transactions to
Card Scan, NATMS, and LiveScan to enhance automated
fingerprint entry and comparison on AFIS, and
electronic transmission to the FBI.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
As of 2/01, the SOR scans and stores color photographs
of all sex offenders and they are a part of violent
offender registrations via the Internet for public
inquiry.  Otherwise, there is currently no statewide
system or standard for photo-imaging system. 

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
At conviction, the court remands the offender to the
local law enforcement agency which completes the
registration, fingerprints the offender, and takes his
photo, and mails hard copy to Department of State
Police (DSP). The Department of Corrections (DOC), the
local sheriff or the jail administrator update the
data prior to the offender's release to the community
and mail hard copy to DSP. Local agencies also mail
hard copy information on offenders moving to Virginia
from out-of-state, on address changes, and on
reregistrations.  SOR registrants are flagged in the 
DOC databases in order to raise compliance with
registration requirements.


DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The State Police SOR computer system
automatically calculates the appropriate
reregistration date for each registered offender and
produces a reregistration notice. The forms are sent
via "restricted delivery," so that only the offender
can sign for and receive them.  Reregistration forms
require inked thumbprints that are done by any local
law enforcement agency or by the State Police.  

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
Yes.  Reregistration notifications are automated.  The
SOR system generates notification letters and also
automatically generates a listing of offenders who
fail to reregister.  Notification to law enforcement
agencies of an offender's failure to reregister is
programmatically produced and a program to initiate a
DMV query will begin after completion of NSOR
projects. 

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Violation is a Class 1 misdemeanor for individuals
originally convicted of a "sexual offense" and a Class
6 felony for individuals originally convicted of a
"sexually violent offense." 
  
       
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Department of State Police (DSP) makes complete
sex offender registrations available via the Virginia
Criminal Information Network (VCIN) for criminal
justice purposes.  The DSP notifies the chief law
enforcement officer of a jurisdiction of any
registrations or reregistrations in his/her
jurisdiction.
The QXS transaction that was initiated on 1/01 
automatically returns a SOR upon a query of QD, QH,
QNAM and QW.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
SOR information can be disseminated by DSP only to
public, private and parochial schools; child welfare
agencies; day care homes or a register or unregistered
small family day care home; employment, volunteering
services, for public protection, and the protection of
children in general. Effective 1/1/99, schools and
child care organizations will be able to request and
receive automatic notification (electronic or U.S.
Mail) of all registrations and reregistration in their
own or contiguous zip codes.  Effective 7/1/99 the
scope of dissemination will be expanded to include day
care services and child-minding services.

Procedures for Public Access:
Information regarding a specific person shall be
disseminated to citizens upon receipt of an official
request form, which may be submitted directly to the
Department of State Police or to the State Police
through a local law enforcement agency.  The official
request form shall include a statement of the reason
for the request.  Effective 1/1/99, violent sex
offender records became available through the
Internet.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Effective 1/1/99, Internet website completed to
include information and photos of violent sex offender
registrants. There are 10,000 to 12,000 visits to the
SOR website daily. http://www.vsp.state.va.us


Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Washington
Responsible State Agency: Washington State Patrol


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are the offenses defined as sex
offenses by the Revised Code of Washington (RCW)
9A.44, 9A.64, 9A.68A and 9.94A.030, and sexual
exploitation of a minor, sexual misconduct with a
minor, pornography involving minors, patronizing a
juvenile prostitute, and criminal attempt,
solicitation, or conspiracy to commit a sexual
offense. Washington law also covers kidnaping
offenders where the victim is a minor and the offender
is not the minor's parent.  (NOTE:  Washington law can
be viewed on the Internet using URL: 
(http://www.leg.wa.gov) 


Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for adult and juvenile
felony sex offenders convicted, in custody, or under
criminal justice supervision on or after July 28,
1991; for those convicted of comparable offenses in
other jurisdictions; and for defendants charged with a
felony sex offense and found "not guilty by reason of
insanity," Registration also is mandatory for
kidnaping offenders convicted, in custody, or under
criminal supervision, on or after July 27, 1997.

Duration of Registration:
Registration is required for lifetime if the offender
was convicted of a Class A felony, for 15 years after
the last date of release from confinement if the
offender was convicted of a Class B felony, and for 10
years after the last date of release from confinement
if the offender was convicted of a Class C felony. 
Any registrant may petition the court for relief from
the registration requirement, but must show "clear and
convincing evidence" that future registration will not
serve the purpose of the law.  Juveniles who were
under 15 at time of their offense must be offense free
for 24 months and meet a "preponderance of the
evidence" standard in accordance with RCW 9A.44.140.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
15,304



Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
Full.  The Washington State Patrol (WSP) manages the
Sex and Kidnaping Offender Registry (SOR).  The data
is linked between two databases: 1)Washington State
Identification System (WASIS - criminal history); and
2)Washington Crime Information Center (WACIC - wants,
warrants).  WASIS and WACIC now support the data
collection needed for the FBI NSOR and to provide the
SOR data online for Washington criminal justice
agencies.

Database is linked to criminal history files
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Yes.  As of July 2000, Washington's law enforcement
telecommunications system, ACCESS, meets the
transmission requirements for the permanent NSOR and
NCIC 2000.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Partial.  Some sex offender fingerprints are still
submitted on paper cards taken by conventional inking
methods.  Currently, 21 sheriff's offices have
livescan units.  The date projected for the interface
between local sheriffs' livescan units, the State
criminal history files and the AFIS is July 1, 2002.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes.  WASIS is capable of storing mugshots. The
projected date for capability of transmitting digital
images of mugshots is July 1, 2002.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Department of Corrections (DOC) registers
offenders prior to their release with the sheriff in
their planned county of residence and with the WSP for
the SOR. The offender confirms the information with
the sheriff upon his release, and the sheriff submits
the offender's photo, fingerprints, and other material
to WSP.  If a Wanted Person Inquiry into WACIC is done
it will provide law enforcement with information on
registered sex offenders and corrections client
details from DOC.  

DNA Sample:
No.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  It is the responsibility of local law
enforcement agencies to conduct annual address
verifications and reregistrations that are required. 
It is the responsibility of the WSP to notify
offenders each year of any legislative changes that
affect registration requirements.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
Noncompliance is a Class C felony if the underlying
conviction was for a Class A felony offense. In other
cases, noncompliance is a gross misdemeanor. 


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
  
Dissemination of SOR information is available to local
law enforcement and Indian tribal police.  "Wanted"
checks conducted through WACIC return SOR flags for
DOC registered sex offenders.  Criminal history checks
conducted through WASIS yield rap sheets that contain
sex offender information.  Offender photos and current
addresses are included on the rap sheet.  There is a
projected data of July 1, 2002, for law enforcement
statewide to receive access to mugshots online.   
  

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:    
Eight months prior to release, sex offenders are
classified for risk by a DOC committee, however the
local law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction
where the offender resides makes the final risk
determination. For Level II and III (moderate and high
risk) offenders, the local school, neighbors and
community groups may be notified under the community
notification act.  A WSP pre-employment records check,
requested in writing or through a limited access
Internet site, will note if the individual is a
registered sex offender.   
  
Procedures for Public Access:   
WSP disseminates limited sex offender information to
the public and only in response to a written "public
information disclosure request."  Based on the
offender's  risk level, the local law enforcement
agency has the authority to notify neighbors and
community groups for moderate and high risk offenders,
and may issue press releases for high risk offenders. 
Some local law enforcement agencies also use Internet
sites for dissemination of information on registered
offenders in their jurisdiction.     
  
Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)  
No.  The only SOR data on a State website is a
restricted access site used for employment background
checks.  
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: West
Virginia
Responsible State Agency: West Virginia State Police


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Covered offenses are sexual assault in the 1st, 2nd,
or 3rd degree; sexual abuse in the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd
degree; abduction of a person or kidnaping of a child;
procuring for prostitution; incest; sex abuse by a
parent, guardian, or custodian; filming, distributing,
exhibiting, or facilitating materials depicting
sexually explicit conduct of minors or any attempt to
commit the above named offenses.  Also covered are
those individuals found not guilty by reason of mental
illness, mental retardation or addiction of any of the
above named offenses.  Also covered is any offense
that is determined to be sexually motivated.

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for those convicted of any
covered offense, those under community supervision for
a covered offense, and those released following
incarceration for a covered offense, or those
convicted of similar offenses elsewhere and moving to
West Virginia.  Registration is mandatory for those
convicted of covered offenses who work or attend
school within West Virginia while residing in another
State.

Duration of Registration:
10 years is required for sexual offenders.  Lifetime
registration is required for violent, recidivistic,
predatory offenders, or any qualifying offense
involving a minor.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
950


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The West Virginia SOR has limited automation of its
text database.  It can be searched and sorted by name
and date of birth only.  The SOR resides on the
State's computerized criminal history system (CCH).

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
No, not as of 2/01.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No.  As of 2/01, WVSOR required only a single
thumbprint, and had no AFIS. The planned AFIS is to
have livescan capability at the regional jails for
digitalized fingerprints and mugshots, and to have
AFIS investigative workstations at local State police
offices. Legislation, effective 6/15/98, mandated full
fingerprints, so there is also a need to get the full
ten-prints on offenders registered prior to 6/15/98. 

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
26 digital cameras in place and able to electronically
transmit mugshots.  Approximately half of SOR photos
are currently maintained in hard copy.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
As of 2/01, if the offender is incarcerated, the DOC
faxes data to both the SOR and the State Police
detachment where the offender will reside, prior to
his release. If the offender has a probation sentence,
it is the responsibility of his probation officer to
ensure that he is registered and the SOR is notified. 
Hard copy forms are sent to the Criminal
Identification Bureau.   (Under legislation effective
6/98, information now comes at the time of conviction
from the supervising criminal justice authority, and
is updated at pre-release from confinement.)

DNA Sample:
Yes.  Since July 1996, all persons convicted of
violent crimes and sexual crimes are placed into a
CODIS DNA database. 

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes.  The SOR generates a letter with a reregistration
card annually for sexual offenders and every 90 days
for sexually violent predators.   The offender must
personally take his card to the local State Police
detachment within 10 days.  The State Police phone the
postal service to verify the offender's address,
update their records and may re-photograph the
offender.  They also do an unannounced verification
visit to each offender.

SOR Notification Automated:
No.

Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of $250.00 to $10,000, or imprisonment for not
more than one year, or both.  A subsequent offense, or
any offense for those with lifetime registration, is a
felony, requiring imprisonment for one to five years.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR data is available electronically to all criminal
justice agencies that have access to WATCH (West
Virginia's criminal history records system). As of
4/98, the State Police notified the city and county
law enforcement agencies where the offender would
reside after an offender registered with them. 
Legislation effective 6/98 now requires additional
notification if the residence jurisdiction differs
from the school or work location.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
State Police fax notification to school
superintendents and child protective agencies of all
registered offenders in their counties. Other civic
and religious organizations can register with SOR and 
automatically receive SOR data. 

Procedures for Public Access:
Individual citizens can receive SOR information (on 10
registrants) upon application to (and approval by) the
circuit court of jurisdiction where the requestor
reside.  Legislation effective 6/15/98 makes lifetime
registrants subject to community notification.  West
Virginia began its community notification program in
September 1998.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes. In conjunction with community notification, data
on lifetime registrants is mounted on the State Police
website.  Twenty-three counties are currently online. 
http://www.wvstatepolice.com

                       
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Wisconsin
Responsible State Agency: Wisconsin Department of
Corrections


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
All Wisconsin felony sexual offenses are covered.  
All felony sex convictions from other jurisdictions
are treated as covered offenses. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for offenders convicted of,
incarcerated, or under criminal justice supervision
for any felony sex offense on or after 12/25/93,
including persons entering Wisconsin under interstate
compacts, persons committed under the sexually violent
persons law to mental health institutions, and any
offender whose crime the court determines to be
"sexually motivated."  Juveniles adjudicated for a
covered offense are required to register, unless
waived by court order.  As of May 27, 2000, all people
found to have committed a sex offense by another
jurisdiction (another State, Federal court, military
court, or tribal court) and enters Wisconsin to live,
work, pursue a vocation and/or attend school, must
register in Wisconsin.

Duration of Registration:
Registration is required for 15 years following
discharge from Wisconsin supervision, as well as for
the full term of any form of community supervision. 
There is a lifetime registration requirement for
offenders committed under the Sexually Violent Person
law, those convicted of two separate episodes of
felony sexual offense, or those convicted of First or
Second Degree Sexual Assault, First or Second Degree
Sexual Assault of a Child, or Repeated Acts of Sexual
Assault of a Child.  Offenders who are registered due
to a conviction by another jurisdiction and enter
Wisconsin to live, work, pursue a vocation and/or
attend school, must register for whichever is less: 10
years or the period of time that the person lives,
works, pursues a vocation or attends school in
Wisconsin.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
11,999 are now in the Registry database.  Wisconsin
reports that of these, approximately 10,000 have full
and complete registration information, in part due to
legislative amendments effective 6/01/97, but with
retroactive application to 12/25/93.


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Wisconsin Sex Offender Registry Program (SORP) has
an automated text database maintained by the State
Department of Corrections (DOC).  The SORP has only a
batch interface with the State Department of Justice
(DOJ) TIME system, which transmits to NCIC and to law
enforcement agencies statewide.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
Yes.  The computerized criminal history files (CCH)
maintained by the State DOJ indicates whether an
individual is in the DOC SORP.

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Wisconsin Department of Corrections began contributing
to the FBI's interim system on 6/01/98 and submits
data monthly, on diskette.  DOC SORP now has an online
linkage for system upgrades between FBI NSOR and the
DOC SORP through the DOJ TIME System.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
No.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes, as of June 1, 2001.  DOC will require registrants
to provide a recent photograph.  Digital cameras have
been purchased for every community corrections office,
institution, and Sex Offender Registration Specialist
statewide.  

Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
The Sex Offender Registry Program (SORP) is run by
Wisconsin Department of Corrections (DOC). The initial
registration is submitted prior the offender's release
from prison or jail or comes directly from a
supervising field agent to the DOC. The long range
plan is to achieve more timely information by
automating and decentralizing the data entry function,
so that the supervising agent for offenders on active
field supervision can directly enter information into
the SORP for both the initial registration and for
changes of addresses and other updates. 

DNA Sample:
Yes.  The SORP registration form has a field
indicating if a DNA sample was required and taken.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
Yes. The DOC is required to mail non-forwardable
annual reregistration notices to all regular
registrants and send notices every 90 days to persons
committed under the Sexually Violent Person law.
Registrants must complete the form and submit it to
the DOC SORP within 10 working days.  The DOC SORP
reviews the data and enters it manually into database.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
As of 2/01, functions related to automated registrant
notification and random/scheduled verification letters
are completed.  Automated reports are produced,
documenting all contacts and attempts to locate
noncompliant registrant, and provided to local
district attorneys to have a warrant issued for
arrest.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
For a first offense, the penalty is a misdemeanor: up
to $10,000 fine and/or 9 months in jail.  For a second
and subsequent offenses (as determined for a prior
conviction for noncompliance): up to $10,000 fine
and/or five years in prison. 

  
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Some SORP data is available through the Department of
Justice (DOJ)  online database (TIME system), which is
now updated weekly by a batch interface between the
DOJ and the Department of Corrections (DOC).  The DOC
also develops Special Bulletins on high risk
registrants prior to release from prison.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Il:
The DOC Sex Offender Registry Program (SORP) provides
SORP data on geographic areas to Neighborhood Watch
Groups, in response to a written request that has been
approved by the local law enforcement agency.
Affirmative notification to schools or other
organizations is the decision and responsibility of
the local law enforcement agency.

Procedures for Public Access:
Victims and victims' families have direct access to
SORP information related to their offender(s) via 1-
800-Victim Information Notification Everyday (VINE)
and their Victim Access number, or they may request
written notification of the offender's change of
address or similar information.  The general public
can access basic SORP data on a specific person, but
they must provide the name, date of birth, and the
Social Security Number or the driver's license number
of the subject of their inquiry. Affirmative community
notification is the responsibility of the local law
enforcement agency.

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
The website is in development and an informational
page will be available on June 1, 2001.
<http://widocoffenders.org>  
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Wyoming
Responsible State Agency: Wyoming Office of the
Attorney General


Who is in the Registry?

Covered Offenses:
Wyoming felony (aggravated) sex offenses, include
first and second degree sexual assault, incest, most
third degree sexual assaults and most immoral and
indecent acts, plus crimes against children
convictions.  Conspiracy to commit any of the above
offenses has the same registration requirements as
having committed the actual offense. 

Mandated Registrants:
Registration is mandatory for persons convicted of a
covered offense who are sentenced on or after January
1, 1985.  This includes those individuals convicted of
a comparable offense in another State or jurisdiction
who move to Wyoming.

Duration of Registration:
There is lifetime registration for offenders convicted
of first, second and some third degree sexual
assaults, incest, and some immoral and indecent acts
(aggravated sex offenders).  For other sexual
offenders, the registration requirement is for 10
years following release to the community (Non-
aggravated sex offenders ).  Time is tolled for any
confinement time.  Upon release from confinement the
county attorney who has jurisdiction over the offender
will conduct a risk of re-offense hearing.  The
hearing is mandatory for aggravated sex offenders. 
The county attorney may determine a non-aggravated sex
offender is  low risk or conduct a hearing for a
higher risk.  The offender may petition for a
reduction of the risk assessment.

Offenders in Registry, 2/01:
682


Automation of Sex Offender Registries

Extent of database automation:
The Wyoming central registry now exists within a
database on an AS400 computer.  A contract is
currently in place to establish an interface to the
Wyoming Criminal Justice Information Network (WCJIN)
to support statewide law enforcement 

access, NLETS queries, and transmission to NCIC and
FBI.

Database is linked to criminal history files:
No as of 2/01 the AS400 is not  linked to Wyoming's
computerized criminal history files (CCH).

SOR transmits electronically to FBI NSOR system:
Individual entries are manually loaded into NCIC by
teletype.  

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal &
storage of fingerprints:
Yes.  IAFIS is online and in the testing process.

SOR system has capability for electronic transmittal
and storage of mugshots:
Yes, transmission and storage is available for the
State registry but not into NCIC.  Pictures of all
offenders are received when registered, but only those
found to have a high risk of re-offense are scanned
and stored in the State system.  If there is a need
for an offender's  photo, it can be scanned and
forwarded electronically.  The SOR is currently
pursuing  browser technology to permit a subject's
photo image to be maintained electronically.


Operation of Sex Offender Registries

Source for Initial Information on Offender:
Offenders are registered prior to release from
confinement by Department of Corrections personnel and
if no confinement was adjudged then the County Sheriff
will register a convicted offender prior to release by
the court.  The Sheriff having jurisdiction of the
offender will register individuals entering the State. 
Registrations are forwarded in hard copy, with photo
and fingerprint cards to the Division of Criminal
Investigation.

DNA Sample:
Yes.  Mostly for those individuals leaving the
Department of Corrections after July 1, 1999.

Validation and Reregistration Procedures:
A.  State SOR Proactively Notifies Registrants:
No.  A system is currently being developed and should
be in use shortly.

B.  SOR Notification Automated:
No.

C.  Penalties for Noncompliance:
The first offense is a high misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of up to $750, imprisonment for not more than
one year or both.  Any subsequent violation is a
felony punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, 
imprisonment for not more than two years, or both.


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 2/01 the only access is through NSOR and only
those individuals that have an FBI number are
registered (many do not have FBI numbers).  Access is
currently being developed for law enforcement
statewide.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The District Court or County Court determines the
offender's risk of re-offense.  For moderate and high
risk offenders, State statute authorizes local law
enforcement to notify organizations in the community,
including schools, religious groups, and youth
organizations.  

Procedures for Public Access:
For offenders determined to have a moderate or high
risk of re-offense, local law enforcement will provide
notification to all residents living within 750 feet
of the offender, plus organizations in the community
including schools, religious and youth organizations. 
Notifications are by handbills, which include the
offenders photograph, name, address, date of birth,
date and place of conviction, crime for which
convicted, and physical characteristics including
race, sex, height, weight, eye and hair color.  High
risk offenders are also posted on the website using
the handbill format as noted above.  

Internet Website: (include web address and number of
hits per month, if applicable)
Yes.  This office is currently using the State
website:  http://attorneygeneral.state.wy.us/dci 



