U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Summary of State Sex Offender Registry
Dissemination Procedures, Update 1999

Individual State Summaries


Devon B. Adams
August 1999, NCJ 177620

The Factsheet to which this information is an addendum is available
from www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sssordp.htm.
This report is one of a series.  Previous editions are available
and more recent editions may be available.  To view a list of all
in the series go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#registries.


Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Alabama
Responsible Agencies: Alabama Department of 
Public Safety (DPS) and Alabama Criminal Justice 
Information Center (ACJIC) 
                                

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information,
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice
Agencies:
All Alabama law enforcement or criminal justice
agencies with access to criminal history information
have access to sex offenders information through the
Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center
(ACJIC).  For sexual offenders qualifying for
community notification, the Alabama Department of
Public Safety (DPS) sends a "flier" containing a
photo and detailed information on the offender to the
local law enforcement agency where offender
resides.  The local agency duplicates the flier and
mails it to everyone within a specified geographic
area.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and
the Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, the Alabama SOR has no specified
procedures for affirmative notification to schools or
organizations other than the community notification
requirements outlined in the following section. 

Procedures for Public Access:
When an offender qualifies for community
notification (those convicted of rape, sodomy, sexual
torture, sexual abuse, and child sexual abuse and 
incest, when the victim is under 18 years old and 
the offender is over 20 years old), fliers with the
offender's photo are mailed to everyone living within
1,000ft. of his home in cities, 1,500ft. in towns,
and 2,000ft. in rural areas.  Citizens also may 
review fliers at local law enforcement agencies.

Internet Website:
An Internet website for the sex offender registry 
can be found at <www.gsiweb.net>   

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Alaska
Responsible Agency: Alaska State Troopers
                                  

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Copies of the lists for 1) registered sex offenders, 
2)unregistered sex offenders and 3) noncompliant
registered sex offenders are sent to local police
departments every 2-3 months through the regular mail, 
or where E-mail address is available.  Dissemination 
to criminal justice agencies also occurs through the
Alaska Public Safety Information Network (APSIN). 
Almost all Alaska criminal justice agencies have 
online access to APSIN, and sex offender data/status 
will be provided for any "person query."  Agencies 
with access to the Internet can query and sort SORCR 
data by geographic location and view mugshots.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, no special or affirmative notification of
schools or other organizations is reported. (See
Procedures for Public Access, below.)

Procedures for Public Access:
The public has access to information on registrants
through Alaska's Internet site.  All offenders required 
to register, whether they are registered, have never
registered, registered but are out-of-compliance, or 
in jail, will be on the Internet  The public may also 
obtain information from the local police station, and 
they may receive hard copy reports on individual sex 
offenders through the SORCR office in response to 
individual requests.

Internet Website:
Yes, began June, 1997; now averaging over 1,200
queries per day. The website has been visited 
approximately 180,000 times since 6/23/98. 
<http://www.dps.state.ak.us/sorcr/> 



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Arizona
Responsible Agency: Department of Public Safety

     
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Information on registered sexual offenders is
disseminated to criminal justice agencies through
Arizona Criminal Justice Information System (ACJIS)
in response to criminal history queries.  As of 5/99, 
detailed information on the offender, his risk 
assessment, and the offense summary is maintained 
by the Sex Offender Community and Notification Unit 
for use by and with local law enforcement agencies 
in the community notification program.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The Arizona community notification program focuses on
"neighborhoods" at risk, rather than specific
organizations or victim types. There is a State-level
Community Notification Coordinator, but the local law
enforcement agency determines the level of notification,
and the geographic "neighborhood" to be notified, 
based on a review of the individual's risk assessment. 
Level 1 (low risk) requires minimal notification, 
level 2 (medium risk) gives the local agency wide 
discretion on the extent of notification, while 
level 3 (high risk) requires extensive notification 
within the "neighborhood" at risk. 

Procedures for Public Access:
As of May 1999, there is no automatic public access to
SOR information.  Each law enforcement agency keeps a
notebook on registered offenders residing in that
jurisdiction. Citizens may ask to see the file and 
usually have to demonstrate a need to know.  Access 
is at the discretion of the law enforcement agency, 
with a log kept of who views the file. 

Internet Website:
New legislation mandates the Department of Public
Safety to develop an Internet website with information
on all level 2 and 3 offenders.  The anticipated date
of completion is January 2000.
                              
                    


Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Arkansas
Responsible Agency: Arkansas Crime Information Center


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Through the statewide Arkansas Crime Information
Center (ACIC) network, all data provided on the Sex
Offender Registration form and entered into the SOR 
are available to all law enforcement agencies within 
the State.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies in accordance with guidelines
developed by the Child Abuse, Rape, and Domestic
Violence Commission.  Notification to organizations,
schools, and institutions is made for offenders
determined to be medium (level 2) or high (level 3)
risk.

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99 there are no procedures for general public
access to information from the Arkansas Sex Offender
Registry system.  As noted, community notification is
conducted by local law enforcement; in some cases
schools may notify parents of information received from
a law enforcement agency.

Internet Website:
As of January 1999, the ACIC website provided
information on the Arkansas law, the offenses requiring
registration, and a numerical listing of the number of
registered offenders in a given county, but did not post
data on individual offenders.
     


Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: California
Responsible Agency: California Department of Justice,
Division of Criminal Justice Information Services 
               

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR information is available to all California law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies through the
California Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System (CLETS) or to those with access to Violent
Crime Information Network (VCIN) workstations. Out-
of-State agencies can access SOR information through 
a criminal history query.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Notification is the responsibility of the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides.
Legislation specifies the conditions for limited
notification to organizations or to specific individuals 
or for broader public advisories and notification on 
high-risk sex offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
Public access to SOR information is provided in two
ways. California has a CD-ROM and the State operates a
900 phone number of serious and high risk registered sex
offenders.  Adults living in California (other than
registered sex offenders) may view the CD-ROM at their
local enforcement agency at no fee (the names of those
viewing CD-ROM are maintained for 5 years). 
Nationwide, adults may reach the Sex Offender
Identification Line at 1-900-463-0400.  There is
a $10 fee for this service.

Internet Website:
No.  California does not have sex offender 
registrants on a website.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Colorado
Responsible Agency: Colorado Department of Public Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Information from the State's electronic SOR is available
to all Colorado law enforcement and criminal justice
agencies online through the Colorado Crime
Information Center (CCIC).  Out-of-State agencies may
send an NLETS AM message for a search of the registry.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Notification is the responsibility of local law
enforcement agencies which may notify organizations or
individuals "for reasons of public protection." Legislation 
does not mandate affirmative notification to specific 
organizations or institutions.

Procedures for Public Access:
The public has access to information on registered sexual
offenders only through the local law enforcement agency
where the offender is currently registered.  In Colorado,
the SOR information is considered a public record.

Internet Website:
No.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Connecticut
Responsible Agency: Connecticut Department of 
Public Safety
     
     
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of October 1, 1998, registry information from the new
statewide sex offender registry became available to law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies, in as much as
these agencies are required to maintain copies of sex
offender registrations for their jurisdictions respectively
and make them available to the public. The statewide
registry is maintained centrally by the Department of
Public Safety, with information disseminated to the law
enforcement agency for the municipality of residence of
the sex offender.  (Prior to October 1, 1998, registries
were maintained at the local level only.)  In addition,
criminal history information is available to law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies only by query
via the Connecticut On Line Law Enforcement
Communications Teleprocessing (COLLECT) system. 
Sex offender registration information is to be transmitted
to the FBI for inclusion in the National Registry. 
Effective January 1, 1999, the web based sex offender
registry became available to all.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Any law enforcement agency, including the Department
of Public Safety, Division of State Police and municipal
law enforcement agency, is authorized to notify any
governmental agency, private organization, or individual
of registration information when it is believed that the
notification is necessary to protect the public or an
individual from a sex offender.  This wording became
effective with legislation effective October 1, 1998. 
(In a January 1999 report, a statutorily established 
Sex Offender Registration Committee recommended interim
guidelines for community notification.)  Effective
January 1, 1999, the web based sex offender registry
became available to all.

Procedures for Public Access:
Under legislation effective October 1, 1998, two
procedures for public access were established: (1) a 
copy of the sex offender registrations became available 
for public inspection in law enforcement agencies  
serving the sex offender's residence municipality, and
(2) the statewide sex offender registry on the Internet
was established, to be available January 1, 1999.  Law
enforcement agencies must make the copies of the
registration information available during business hours;
most are available 24 hours a day via dispatcher/clerk
offices.  The Internet site is available 24 hours a day,
7 days a week.

Internet Website:
The Internet site is located on the State of Connecticut,
Department of Public Safety homepage.  The site became
operational January 1, 1999.  The site address is:
<http://www.state.ct.us.dps/> 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: District 
of Columbia 
Responsible Agency: Metropolitan Police Department

                                   
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR staff sends the offender's case jacket (hard
copy) to the Special Investigation Division which  
notifies the Commander of the police district where 
the offender resides, and coordinates any community 
notification. As of 1/99, this is constrained by the 
small number of offenders classified as to risk level. 
(FY '98 NSOR-AP funds sought to develop infrastructure 
to make SOR database available electronically to 
authorized users on Metropolitan Police Department 
Network.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, there were no formal procedures for
notification to schools or youth-serving organizations. 
District of Columbia law permits community or
organizational notification only for offenders with 
formal risk classifications of Level 2 (moderate risk)
or Level 3 (high risk), as determined by the court 
based on the recommendation of expert Sex Offender 
Advisory Council. As of 1/21/99, only 5 registrants 
have formal risk classifications.  Without assessment 
and classification, all registrants must be treated 
as Level 1 (low risk).  (FY'98 NSOR-AP plans include 
developing a database of organizations that qualify 
for affirmative notification.)

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, there was no public access to SOR
information. Community notification procedures are
being developed by the police department and an
interagency task group to reflect new legislation under
development and the police department reorganization. 
As noted, community notification is constrained by the
small number of registrants with risk assessments and
classified risk levels.

Internet Website
No. There was no Internet website as of 5/99.  There is
some discussion of a website under the new legislation
being developed, but no decision.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Delaware
Responsible Agency: Delaware State Police
                                  
                         
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information from the SOR is available through
Delaware Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS),
accessible to all criminal justice agencies in Delaware. 
Fingerprints are maintained in State's central AFIS and
interfaced to CJIS.  There is no central mugshot
capability as of 5/99; most agencies take Polaroids and
maintain their own mugshot files.  By 9/99, CJIS should
have central mugshot capability.  (Also, a law, signed
4/21/98, requires that SOR registrants be identified by 
a "Y" on their driver's licenses, with the designation
explained on back of license.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Notification of organizations is the responsibility of 
the local law enforcement agency where the offender 
resides. Notification measures are based on the 
offender's assigned risk level which is determined by 
a risk assessment performed by the State Attorney 
General's Office and the Sentencing Court.  For Tier 
Two (moderate risk) offenders, notification is at the 
discretion of the local law enforcement agency. 
Tier Three (high risk) offenders, the law requires 
mandatory community notification.  The State Police 
may be involved only when no local agency has 
jurisdiction. 

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, public access to SOR information is through
the notification program conducted by the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides. For Tier
II offenders, notification is at the discretion of the local
law enforcement.  Community notification is required for
Tier III offenders.  Notification is conducted in a variety
of ways such as; door-to-door, mailings, local media, etc. 
The public may also view both Tier II and III offenders
on the Internet.   Local law enforcement agencies also
have the discretion to notify any citizen about a specific
offender who, they believe, poses a risk to that
individual.  (See also the driver's license designation
noted above.) 

Internet Website:
Yes. <http://www.state.de.us/dsp/sexoff/index.htm>  
The site has photo capability, but as of 5/99 no photos
were posted. 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Florida
Responsible Agency: Florida Department of Law 
Enforcement


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE),
which operates the SOR,  enters sexual offender and
sexual predator data into Florida Crime Information
Center (FCIC) "hot files," which are   accessible to all
State law enforcement personnel.  When an offender is
released from incarceration, a teletype notice is sent 
to all law enforcement agencies in the county where the
offender plans to reside. When the FDLE is notified by
the Departments of Corrections (DC) or Highway Safety
& Motor Vehicles (DHSMV) of the change of address of
a registered offender, the FDLE transmits it to law
enforcement agencies and updates FCIC hot file.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Organizational notification is a local responsibility.  
For those offenders classified as "sexual predators"
(determined by a court finding, based on type and/or
number of offenses), the sheriff or chief law enforcement
officer of the jurisdiction where the predator will reside
is required to notify the public (and organizations) "in a
manner deemed appropriate" in addition to the mandatory
notification to all schools and daycares within a one-mile
radius of a sexual predator's residence within 48 hours of
law enforcement's notification from the SOR.  For other
registered sexual offenders, notification is at the
discretion of the local law enforcement agency.

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SOR information
through the FDLE Internet Website,
<www.fdle.state.fl.us>, through a toll-free phone 
line (1-888-357-7332), and through fliers and 
leaflets produced for community notification on 
sexual predators.

Internet Website:
Yes. <http://www.fdle.state.fl.us/ 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Georgia
Responsible Agency: Georgia Bureau of Investigation

 
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Dissemination to law enforcement and criminal justice
agencies takes place in two ways.  When the Georgia
Crime Information Center (GCIC) enters or updates
information in the Sexually Violent Offender Registry
(SVOR), that action automatically triggers a notice to 
the sheriff of the offender's county of residence as 
well as a notice to FBI.  The information is available 
to other law enforcement and criminal justice agencies 
through a criminal history query.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, organizational notification is the
responsibility of, and at the discretion of, the local
sheriff.  (A 1997 State Attorney General's opinion states
that the sheriff must release relevant information for
offenders classified as sexually violent predators, but 
that he has the authority to determine the specific 
information to be released and the manner of 
dissemination.)

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, public access to information on registered sex
offenders is at the discretion of the local sheriff.
Georgia's legislation states that the sheriff "shall release
relevant information collected under this Code section
that is necessary to protect the public . . ."  and 
stipulates "nothing herein shall prevent any sheriff from
posting this information in any public building."  As of 
5/99, a number of sheriffs posted information on registered
sexual offenders in their jurisdictions on their Internet
websites.

Internet Website:
A website was launched in May of 1998. 
<www.ganet.org/gbi/disclaim.html> 



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Hawaii
Responsible Agency: Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center
                                  

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Law enforcement and criminal justice agencies can
access SOR data through searches of the criminal history
files maintained by Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center
(HCJDC).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Public information on registered sex offenders is
available to schools, and organizations serving children,
the elderly, the mentally ill, or other vulnerable
populations at the HCJDC office and at main county
police stations.

Procedures for Public Access:
Hawaii's legislation specifies the specific items of SOR
data that are to be accessible to the public. Public record
registration data is currently available at the main county
police departments and at the Hawaii Criminal Justice
Data Center (HCJDC).  This information is also
integrated into the Criminal History Public Access
facility, which can be used by general public for
background checks via various search options.

Internet Website:
No.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Idaho
Responsible Agency: Idaho Department of Law Enforcement


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The text content of the SOR is available online to all
criminal justice agencies with access to the Idaho Law
Enforcement Telecommunications System (ILETS).
When a law enforcement officer makes a driver's license
inquiry or a wanted person inquiry (State or National),
ILETS will cross-check the automated SOR database.
(FY'98 NSOR-AP application sought support for a series
of seminars for the criminal justice community on
registration, reporting, and access requirements of new
program.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The Department of Law Enforcement (DLE) makes
affirmative notification to the Departments of Education
and Health & Welfare and provides schools and
organizations working with youth, women and/or
vulnerable populations with free public access to
statewide lists and responses to individual inquiries. 
(FY'98 NSOR-AP application sought funds for seminars
to inform the educational community and the general
public about access, to and use, of registry information.)

Procedures for Public Access:
Citizen may inquire whether an individual is a registered
sex offender, by submitting a written inquiry to the
Department of Law Enforcement (DLE) or local sheriff,
including the subject's name and his date of birth or
address.  Citizens can also request lists of registrants 
by zip code or county through either DLE or local sheriff. 
Name checks and lists are $5 per query.  Citizens may
request a photograph of a registrant from DLE for $10
per request.  DLE will issue quarterly press releases of
offenders not in compliance with SOR requirements for
media pick-up.

Internet Website:
No.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Illinois
Responsible Agency: Illinois State Police

                                   
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR information is available online, 24 hours per day,
to every Illinois law enforcement agency through the
Illinois Law Enforcement Agencies Data System
(LEADS).  The status of a specific offender (registered,
not registered, conditions of parole/probation, etc.) is
immediately available to any agency conducting a routine
query, including a traffic stop.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
County Sheriff's and the Chicago Police Department provide
quarterly lists of sex offenders to all schools, and child
care facilities. The Illinois State Police provides online 
access to the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services. Local law enforcement agencies developed 
lists of local organizations that serve children and 
make sex offender information available to them.  
By administrative rule, each law enforcement agency 
must designate a liaison to assist schools, child care 
facilities, youth groups, and the public regarding 
access and use of SOR information.

Procedures for Public Access:
Local law enforcement agencies provide public access
to the list of sex offenders residing or working in 
the county (Cook County is divided into three regions).
Any law enforcement agency may, upon its discretion,
provide SOR information to any person or entity likely 
to encounter the sex offender. The Illinois State Police 
(ISP) also operates an automated victim notification 
program (at the victim's request, he/she is notified of 
the offender's release, address changes, death of offender, 
etc.) 

Internet Website:
Any law enforcement agency may post SOR information and
photographs on the Internet.  [Legislation with an effective
date of July 1, 2000, is awaiting the governor's signature.
This legislation mandates the Illinois State Police to 
establish a website with information and photographs for 
all sex offenders required to register in Illinois.]




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Indiana
Responsible Agency: Indiana Criminal Justice Institute


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Sex and Violent Offender Registry (SVOR) data is 
available to State law enforcement and criminal justice 
agencies in response to queries, but it is not on a 
computerized network directly accessible to law 
enforcement agencies.  Agencies also may obtain 
copies of the updates sent to schools and youth 
organizations.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The SVOR data and all updates are sent (in hard copy) to
all public and private schools, the Indiana Family and
Social Services Administration and their licensees (such
as group homes), and to agencies that work with children
and have requested copies.  The SVOR unit also places
copies in all public county libraries.  This information
contains all four databases.  Since July 1, 1994, the
Indiana Criminal Justice Institute (ICJI) has made SVOR
information available on a computer diskette.  

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SVOR data in hard copy
in public libraries throughout the State and on the State
of Indiana website on the Internet.  Since July 1, 1994, it
also has been made available on computer diskette.  The
SVOR data available to the public does not include street
addresses, but does reflect all databases.

Internet Website:
Yes.  The Indiana SVOR is on the Internet at
<www.state.in.us/cji/registry/index.html>



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Iowa
Responsible Agency: Iowa Department of Public Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR data from the Department of Public Safety
(DPS) is directly accessible to all law enforcement 
and criminal justice agencies in the State having 
access to "Iowa On-line Warrants and Articles System" 
(IOWA System). 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Legislation effective 7/1/98 states that for registrant
classified as "at risk", affirmative public notification may
include "notification of agencies or organizations in the
community in which the registrant lives, is employed or
attends school..." Under both original and amended
legislation, the offender receives prior notice of any
public notification plans and may appeal.

Procedures for Public Access:
Current legislation (effective 7/1/98) allows for registry
information to be disseminated from sheriff offices and
police departments and the identifier used by the
requester may be date of birth, social security number or
address.   Affirmative public notification by a local
enforcement agency requires prior authorization by Iowa
DPS.  Current legislation (effective 7/1/98) allows for
citizens to request from the sheriff or local police
department a list of registrants in their county 
classified as "at risk."

Internet Website:
Information pertaining to the registry is available as of 5/99.  
Individual offender information is anticipated to be accessible 
to the public on the Internet in October 1999.  
<http://www.state.ia.us/government/dps/index.html> 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Kansas
Responsible Agency: Kansas Office of the Attorney 
General
     

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, the SOR unit conducts notification to law
enforcement agencies and prosecutor's offices for
offender noncompliance with address change or re-
registration requirements. When work on the SOR "hot
file" is complete (late 1999), all Kansas criminal justice
agencies will have full and direct access to the SOR data.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, affirmative notification to schools and
relevant organizations is the responsibility of local law
enforcement.

Procedures for Public Access:
The general public has access to SOR information
through an Internet website.  Members of the public  may
also inspect registration records at a local sheriff's 
office or at the Kansas Bureau of Investigation.  (The 
date of commission of specific offenses determines 
whether an offender's registration information is a 
public record.)

Internet Website:
Yes.  The Kansas SOR website is operated by the 
Kansas Bureau of Investigation (KBI) 
<www.ink.org/public/kbi/kbisexpage.html> 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Kentucky 
Responsible Agency: Kentucky State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR data is directly accessible to all criminal 
justice agencies that are members of the Law 
Information Network of Kentucky (LINK) which provides 
access to State "hot files," NCIC, NLETS, and NOAA.
While most agencies in large population centers have LINK
connectivity, many small or rural agencies do not.  The
SOR unit disseminates information to these agencies by
mail. The sheriffs are notified by the Department of
Corrections of all sex offenders and their associated 
risk assignments released to their jurisdictions.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of July 1998, Kentucky's revised sex offender
legislation became effective.  This modeled Kentucky's
law after the Megan's law and requires the evaluation of
all sex offenders released after the effective date of the
legislation and the assignment of a risk level either low,
moderate, or high.  It authorizes the release of
information concerning high risk offenders to the general
public.  It also authorizes the release of information
concerning moderate risk offenders to schools and
agencies such as daycare centers and other organizations
dealing with children, as well as to victim advocacy
groups.  Statute requires the organization to file a request
with the Sheriff of their jurisdiction for notification.  

Procedures for Public Access:
Effective July 1998, the sheriffs are responsible for
notifying the general public in their jurisdiction of 
the "high risk" offender by whatever means they deem
applicable.  The use of statewide media outlets is
authorized as well as any other means that may be made
available in the future.  Kentucky State Police plan an
Internet website with this information.  The Kentucky
Department for Libraries and Archives plans to provide
free Internet access at as many as possible of the 187
libraries within the State.

Internet Website:
A  website is under development intended to allow public
access to information concerning high risk offenders. 
This site will have sufficient security features in place
to allow those law enforcement/criminal justice agencies
that currently do not have access to Kentucky's LINK
system to access information concerning sex offenders.  
                          



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Louisiana
Responsible Agency: Louisiana State Police

     
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, the Office of State Police notifies other law
enforcement agencies of SOR data by mail and responds
to specific queries, but local law enforcement agencies
and individual officers do not have direct access to the
information.  (FY NSOR-AP funds sought for data
processing support in order to link local law enforcement
to the Registry through the existing Louisiana Law
Enforcement Network, and to fund the Louisiana
Supreme Court to provide the capability for  the judiciary
and law enforcement to query the Registry directly.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, affirmative notification of schools and
organizations is at the discretion of the local law
enforcement agency where the registrant resides.  In
addition, community notification provisions require the
offender to give notice of the crime for which he was
convicted, his name, and his address to the
superintendent of the school district where he will reside
who, in turn, informs the principal of every school with a
one mile radius of the offender's address and the
principals of other schools as the superintendent deems
appropriate.  Other organizations serving children or
vulnerable populations may receive notice directly from
the offender as he fulfills the community notification
requirements described below.  

Procedures for Public Access:
Citizens may make a public records inquiry to the local
law enforcement agencies or to the Registry.  In addition,
individual citizens may be informed directly through
community notification provisions that require the
offender to give notice of the crime for which he was
convicted, his name, and his address to at least one
person in every residence or business within a one mile
radius of his residence in a rural area and a three square
block area in an urban or suburban area; as well as to
give notice to the school superintendent (see above); to
the landlord, lessor, or owner of the residence or property
where he will reside; to publish notice twice in the
official journal of the governing authority of the parish
where he will reside; and to give any other notice deemed
appropriate by the court or the Parole Board.

Internet Website:
No, as of 5/99.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP application requests
support to create a web page for the public and to link the
web page to the Registry for additions and/or updates.)



                                                             
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Maine
Responsible Agency: Maine State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, local law enforcement agencies are notified
of SOR information by U.S. mail.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP
funds sought to make the proposed SOR automated
database "web-enabled," to allow direct access over the
existing Bureau of State Police network to State and local
criminal justice agencies, including those of the
Penobscot Nation and Passomaquoddy Tribe.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, affirmative notification of schools and
organizations is the responsibility of  the local law
enforcement agency where the offender resides.  The
Department of Corrections also provides community
notification. 

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, the information in the Maine Registry is
based on conviction data and is therefore considered a
public record, available to citizens through a request 
to a State or local law enforcement agency. 

Internet Website:
No, as of 5/99.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP funds sought for a
"web enabled" automated database that would provide
direct access to SOR information for law enforcement
agencies and personnel and--separately--direct public
access to information on offenders designated as
predators or high risk.)




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Maryland
Responsible Agency: Maryland Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Information is made available to State criminal justice
agencies through a notation that the individual is a sex
offender placed in the Identification Index
(IDENT/INDEX) of the Maryland Criminal Justice
Information Systems (CJIS). Changes of residency are
received from parole and probation, local law
enforcement agencies, and the registrants.  The changes
are forwarded to the Sex Offender Registry Unit to
update the registry and notify the previous and the
current registering agency of the new residency.  

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
When a child sexual offender registers with a local law
enforcement agency, the agency is required to notify the
county school superintendent who then notifies school
principals.  The local law enforcement agency may also
notify--as necessary to protect the public interest--
community organizations, religious organizations, or any
organization that relates to children or youth.

Procedures for Public Access:
Written requests for the registry are mailed or faxed to
the Sex Offender Registry Unit and responded to by the
Sex Offender Registry Unit. 

Internet Website
Yes, but for information only. The Maryland Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services website
includes information on the sex offender registration
program, procedures for requesting registrant
information, and links to the legislation and other
relevant programs, but it does not include any offender-
specific information.





Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Massachusetts
Responsible Agency: Massachusetts Criminal History 
Systems Board


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR information is available statewide to law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies through the
Criminal Justice Information Systems (CJIS), which
reaches more than 600 agencies throughout the
Commonwealth.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies in accordance with guidelines from
the State Sex Offender Registry Board (which also
classifies offenders).  In general, affirmative 
notification to schools or youth serving organizations 
may be conducted for Level II (moderate risk) offenders 
and must be conducted for Level III (high risk) offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
There are three procedures by which the general public
can have access to SOR data:  1) by a written request to
the Criminal History Systems Board (CHSB) for
information on a specific individual, (2) through
Community Notification (usually reserved for high risk
offenders only), and (3) through an in-person request at
the local police department. For in-person requests, if the
questioner is 18 years of age or older and gives a reason
for the query, information can be obtained on (a) whether
a specific individual is a sex offender, (b) whether any
sex offenders live or work within 1 mile of a specific
address, or (c) whether any sex offenders live or work on
a specific street.

Internet Website:
No.



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Michigan
Responsible Agency: Michigan State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR data is accessible through the Law Enforcement
Information Network (LEIN) which is available to
criminal justice agencies statewide. The Central Registry
can notify specific agencies through LEIN, and, through
LEIN, a patrol officer initiating a query receives
automatic warning that subject may be a registered sex
offender.  The central SOR also provides all local
agencies with listings by zip code of registered 
offenders in their jurisdictions.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
No affirmative notification is made to organizations. 

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, listings by zip code of the registered
offenders within a jurisdiction are available for
inspection by the general public during normal business
hours at State Police posts, local law enforcement
agencies, and sheriff's departments. Information is 
also available through the Internet website. 

Internet Website
Yes. <www.mipsor.state.mi.us> and
<www.msp.state.mi.us> 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Minnesota
Responsible Agency: Minnesota Department of Public 
Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Offenders are registered through community corrections
probation officers in Minnesota's 87 counties or through
Department of Corrections (DOC) staff when the
offender serves a prison term. All registering officials
send the forms to the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
(BCA) of DPS which manages the SOR.  The BCA
notifies a local law enforcement agency when an
offender is moving to their jurisdiction and asks that 
they verify the offender's address.  DOC sends results 
of prerelease risk assessment to BCA and to the local
law enforcement agency.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP funds sought to
provide access to SOR data for officers inquiring into
"hot" files.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Any notification is conducted by local law enforcement
agency based on offender's risk level.  (Offender's risk
level--on offenders being released from prison only--is
assessed prior to release by expert panel convened by
DOC. Assessments are not conducted for offenders who
are put on probation, juvenile offenders, or other
offenders with nonprison sentences.) Affirmative
notification to schools, youth-serving organizations,
etc., is normally done for Level II (moderate risk)
or Level III (high risk) offenders.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Minnesota POST developed a model policy on
community notification procedures.  All law enforcement
agencies in the State are required to have a formal policy
on community notification.  In general, for Level I (low
risk) offenders, information is shared only with law
enforcement, victims and witnesses.  For Level II
(moderate risk) offenders, schools, daycare centers, or
other organizations are notified.  For Level III (high
risk) offenders, thorough community notification, 
including community meetings, is conducted.  The DOC 
provides an offender fact sheet with photo. 

Internet Website:
Yes, but not with information on offenders. Minnesota
Department of Public Safety website has the legislation,
forms, and information on the Registry program, but does
not mount information on individual offenders.  The
Department of Corrections (DOC) plans to post Level III
(absconding offenders, offenders who move frequently or
who are in violation of the registration law) on a website
on August 1, 1999.  The DOC currently has a secured
website for law enforcement and corrections with
detainer information. Agents and police may contact the
BCA Registry via E-mail: <mnregistry@state.mn.us> 
<http://dps.state.mn.us/bca/bca.html>    




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Mississippi
Responsible Agency: Mississippi Department of Public 
Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999     
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
All SOR information is open to law enforcement
agencies, and is made available by mail, fax, or phone,
but not through electronic means.     

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
As of 5/99, there is no affirmative notification required 
to schools or youth serving organizations concerning the
release or residence of a convicted sexual offender.  Law
enforcement agencies are authorized, however, to release
information necessary for public protection.     
     
Procedures for Public Access:     
Members of the general public can request access to State
registry information or to the information maintained by
the sheriff's department at the local level. Law
enforcement agencies are authorized to release SOR
information when the release is necessary for public
protection, and the law directs both local sheriffs and 
the DPS to "make available to any person upon request the
name, address, place of employment, crime for which
convicted, and date of conviction for any registrant."     
     
Internet Website:     
No.     



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Missouri
Responsible Agency: Missouri State Highway Patrol


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR offender list is available through the Missouri
Uniform Law Enforcement System (MULES) which also
contains the "hot files" for the State and has a direct
connection to the Criminal History Records System.  All
criminal justice agencies in the State have access to the
SOR lists through the MULES telecommunication
network.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Affirmative notification of schools and other youth
serving organizations is a local law enforcement
responsibility.

Procedures for Public Access:
Upon request, a local law enforcement agency will
provide a complete list of the sexual offenders 
registered within that agency's jurisdiction to any 
member of the public.

Internet Website:
No.  As of 5/99, Missouri does not have any SOR
registrants listed on a State website. However, the FY'98
NSOR-AP application states Missouri's interest in both
an Internet site and using local touch-screen Kiosks to
automate offender self-registration.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Montana
Responsible Agency: Montana Department of Justice


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The agency taking the offender's initial registration 
sends the information to the State Department of Justice
(DOJ) and to the local law enforcement agency for the
jurisdiction where the offender resides. The DOJ notifies
the local law enforcement agency of any subsequent
address changes.  Criminal justice agencies have no
direct access to SOR as of 5/99, access is planned for
9/99.  The new SOR system will be available statewide
through the enhanced Criminal Justice Information
Network (CJIN), other States may also make sex
offender queries through this transaction. 

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
All names and addresses on the Montana Sex Offender
Registry are public criminal justice information.
Affirmative organizational and community notification
is a local law enforcement responsibility. For Level 2
(moderate risk) offenders, law enforcement agencies may
notify the public, the victim, and "any agency,
organization, or group servicing persons who have
characteristics similar to those of a previous victim."  
For Level 3 (high risk) offenders, the notification is
mandatory.

Procedures for Public Access:
Community notification is conducted by local law
enforcement agencies.  It is discretionary for Level 2
offenders and mandatory for Level 3 offenders.  The
State Department of Justice (DOJ ) is currently
developing policies for public access to SOR data in
conjunction with new policies for public access to
criminal history records.

Internet Website:
No as of 5/99.  However, a website is a goal the 
Montana Department of Justice is working toward.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Nebraska
Responsible Agency: Nebraska State Patrol

                                                                      
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, Nebraska law enforcement agencies,
including those of Indian Tribes, have no direct online
access to SOR data.  They must make a specific request
for any information desired from the SOR unit. (FY'98
NSOR-AP funds sought to provide direct online access
for law enforcement personnel through a "shadow"
database linked to Nebraska Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System [NBLETS].)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Legislation passed in late Spring of 1998 directs the
Nebraska State Patrol to adopt regulations for three 
levels of notification to organizations and the general
public, based on a formal risk assessment of the sexual
offender's likelihood of becoming a repeat offender. 

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, SOR information is provided to law
enforcement, schools and daycare centers.  As of 4/98,
the notification method(s) have not yet been determined,
but face to face meetings, media releases, phone
notification and contracting with private sector are all
under discussion.

Internet Website:
No.



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Nevada
Responsible Agency: Nevada Department of Motor 
Vehicles and Public Safety Nevada Highway Patrol 
Division and Nevada Parole and Probation Division
                                   

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
When the central registry receives a registration notice,
it notifies the local law enforcement agency where the
offender will reside. When the central registry receives 
a notice of a change of address, it notifies the local law
enforcement agencies at both the new location and the
jurisdiction the registrant is leaving. As of 5/99, the 
SOR dissemination to local agencies is provided primarily
through the TRAK System, but on occasion by mail or
fax.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The local law enforcement agency where the registrant
resides conducts the notification of schools and of
religious and youth organizations likely to encounter the
offender for both Tier 2 (moderate risk) and Tier 3 (high
risk) offenders. All community notification proceeds
under guidelines developed by the State Attorney
General with input from a State Advisory Council.

Procedures for Public Access:
Citizens may submit by-name queries about individuals
to the Central SOR.  For Tier 3 (high risk) offenders, 
the law enforcement agency where the offender resides
notifies not only other law enforcement agencies,
schools, and youth organizations, but also the general
public "through means designed to reach members of the
public likely to encounter the sex offender."  
Additional provisions apply for those who committed 
sexual offenses against minors.

Internet Website:
No, not as of 5/99.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP application
describes planned website using TRAK imaging
capability to facilitate public access to the SOR.)




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New Hampshire
Responsible Agency: New Hampshire State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, the State SOR notifies local law enforcement
agencies when an offender has indicated he plans to
move into their jurisdiction or when an offender is in
noncompliant status.     
     
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
As of 5/99, New Hampshire law permits a local law
enforcement agency to notify community organizations
where an offender plans to reside only if the offender
has been convicted of aggravated sexual assault against a
child under the age of 13.  Organizations that may be
notified include schools, daycare centers, youth groups,
summer camps, libraries, and similar youth serving
groups. The New Hampshire legislature is, as of Spring
1998,  considering modifications to its statute to bring 
it into compliance with the Jacob Wetterling Act, the Pam
Lychner Act, and Megan's Law.     
     
     
Procedures for Public Access:     
As of 5/99, access to SOR data is limited by statute to
law enforcement officials and their authorized designees,
with the limited organizational notification noted in
preceding section. As noted, the New Hampshire
legislature is considering modifications to bring the
statute into compliance with Megan's Law, Jacob
Wetterling Act, and Pam Lychner Act amendments. 
Exception - a public access list is published monthly 
by SOR to local law enforcement agencies of those sex
offenders who have been convicted of the following
crimes where the victim is under the prescribed age: RSA
632-A:2 (under 13); 632-A:3(under 13); 645:1,II (under
16); 639:3,III (under 16); 649-A:3 (under 16); 169-
B:41,II (under 17); 633:1(under 18); 633:2 (under 18);
633:3 (under 18); 645:2 (under 18); 650:2,II (under 18). 
The local law enforcement agency can disseminate this
list to any member of the public that requests it.  The
information released is the offender's name, address,
crime committed, court of conviction, and date of
conviction.      

Internet Website:     
No.     




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New Jersey
Responsible Agency: New Jersey State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999     
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Sex offender registry information is maintained by the
State Police State Bureau of Identification (SBI), and 
is available to all criminal justice agencies that have 
access to the New Jersey Criminal Justice Information 
System (CJIS) and/or the FBI Interstate Identification 
Index (III) System. Registered offenders' files in the 
Master Name Index (MNI) are flagged, and an officer 
making a query can move from the MNI to the SOR files.      
     
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
Since October 1994,  notification concerning offenders
assessed as low risk has been given only to victim(s)
and law enforcement agencies likely to encounter that
offender. For offenders assessed as moderate risk,
schools and religious and youth-serving organizations
also are notified.  For offenders determined to be high
risk, community notification is required. (See following
section on Risk Assessment procedures.)     
          
Procedures for Public Access:     
Since October 1994, community notification has been
conducted for Level 3 (high risk) sexual offenders. 
Risk levels are determined through use of the
Registrant Risk Assessment Scale, developed by mental
health and legal experts, and supplemented by a detailed
manual explaining criteria and weighting and giving
examples.  For offenders assessed as high risk, the local
law enforcement agency conducts community notification, 
tailoring it to those members of the public likely to 
encounter offender.      
     
Internet Website:     
No.     




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New Mexico
Responsible Agency: New Mexico Department of Public 
Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
All law enforcement and criminal justice agencies in 
the State have access to SOR data through the State's
Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS), both in
response to a request for a specific individual's 
criminal history record or in searches of the SOR 
database.  If the central SOR unit receives notice 
from an out-of-State agency that a qualifying offender 
is moving to New Mexico, the unit staff notify 
the appropriate local law enforcement agency.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Effective July 1, 1999, sex offender information for
persons convicted of certain sex offenses that were
committed on or after July 1, 1999 will be available to
the public.

Procedures for Public Access:
Effective July 1, 1999, sex offender information for
persons convicted of certain sex offenses that were
committed on or after July 1, 1999 will be available to
the public.  

Internet Website:
No, the DPS will not have a website to provide sex
offender registration information.





Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: New York
Responsible Agency: New York Division of Criminal 
Justice Services 


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) mails
the offender's registration data and photo to the local 
law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the 
offender's residence and also to the agency that 
arrested the offender. The DCJS mails relevant agencies
notices of change of address or of any noncompliance by 
an offender.  State and local police agencies can phone
queries to the SOR unit and receive a phone response.
(FY'98 NSOR-AP funds sought to develop, on the
statewide police records management system, a tracking
component for high risk registrants.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Community notification is at the discretion of the
relevant local law enforcement agency, based on the
offender's risk assessment level (RAL).  The RAL also
determines the amount and scope of information released. 
Schools and organizations may be notified about level 2
(moderate risk) or 3 (high risk) offenders. As of 4/98,
ongoing litigation and a temporary restraining order
(TRO) stringently limit dissemination when the offense
occurred before January 21, 1996.

Procedures for Public Access:
The local law enforcement agency has discretion for
notification to any "entities with vulnerable populations"
concerning offenders at risk levels 2 and 3. The State
provides public access, regardless of risk level, through 
a 900 telephone line (with a fee of $5.00/call) and
semi-annually publishes a subdirectory of Level 3 (high
risk) offenders that is distributed to local law
enforcement agencies, and available to the public in those
local law enforcement agency offices. As of 4/98, the
900 phone line and the published subdirectory both
operate within constraints of the temporary restraining
order.

Internet Website:
Yes. <www.criminaljustice.state.ny.us> This site
provides information pertaining to access only, offender
specific information is not included.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: North Carolina
Responsible Agency: North Carolina Office of the 
Attorney General


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999
                              
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Sheriffs can enter and receive information through an
automated statewide Sex Offender and Sexual Predator
Registration File.  Local law enforcement agencies can
also search the system by name or location.  An
automated notification is sent to the resident county
sheriff's computer when a sex offender is released from
prison and whenever an offender changes residence to a
new county.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Sex offender registration information and the registry are
"public record information" and open for public
inspection. A copy of the full registry can be provided to
anyone in response to a written request and payment of a
fee.

Procedures for Public Access:
Free public access to SOR information is available on the
Internet. Citizens can also obtain a copy of the statewide
registry by making a written request to State's Division
of Criminal Information (DCI) and paying a fee, or
obtain a copy of a countywide registry by making a
written request to the appropriate sheriff and paying a
fee.

Internet Website:
Yes. <http://sbi.jus.state.nc.us/sor> 





Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: North Dakota
Responsible Agency: North Dakota Office of the 
Attorney General

                                                                      
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Registration data is sent to criminal justice agencies
throughout the State in hard copy.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP
seeks funds to make SOR information available online
through restricted Internet access a website accessible 
to law enforcement only and through NLETS network.)


To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The list of registered offenders is a confidential record 
in North Dakota.  Information from the list must be released
by local law enforcement agencies to the public as
needed for the protection of the public.  As of 5/99, local
law enforcement agencies and an ad hoc committee are
working on guidelines for organization and community
notification.


Procedures for Public Access:
The list of registered offenders is a confidential record,
but local law enforcement agencies must release
information from the list to the public if the agency
determines that the offender is a risk to the public and
disclosure is necessary for public protection.  Disclosure
of "non-registration information" (from criminal history
records) is also permitted.  As of 5/99, work is underway
to develop guidelines for risk assessment and community
notification procedures.

Internet Website:
No, not for public access, as of 5/99.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP
application proposes restricted Internet access for law
enforcement only.)
     




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Ohio
Responsible Agency: Ohio Office of the Attorney
General

               
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Ohio categorizes registrants as: sexual predators (SP),
habitual sex offenders (HSO) subject to community
notification, habitual sex offenders (HSO) not subject to
community notification, and sexually-oriented offenders
(SOO). Paper reports are sent to each sheriff: 1)quarterly
on current, in compliance registrants; 2)monthly on
SOO's and HSO's not subject to community notification
who are out-of-compliance for 21 days or more; and SP's
and HSO's subject to notification, who are out-of-
compliance for 21 days or more.     

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
For SP's or HSO's subject to notification, the local 
sheriff notifies the following organizations in writing: 
the head of the public children's service agency, the
superintendents of relevant boards of education, the
hiring officers of chartered nonpublic schools, the heads
of preschool programs, the administrators or providers of
daycare centers, and the presidents and heads of
institutions of higher education.  The specified
geographical notification area is the school district.     
     
Procedures for Public Access:     
For SP's and HSO's subject to notification, the local
sheriff notifies in writing all occupants of residences
adjacent to the offender's place of residence, and
additional neighbors within any category the Attorney
General rules a "specified geographical notification
area." Generally registration information the local sheriff
has on SP's, HSO's, subject to notification, SOO's, and
HSO's is public record open to inspection by citizens.

Internet Website:     
No.     


                                   
          
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Oklahoma
Responsible Agency: Oklahoma Department of Corrections
                                  

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information,
May 1999
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Copies of the complete SOR roster are sent by mail to all
district attorney's offices, and all State and local law
enforcement agencies at least every six months, but
generally more frequently. 
     
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
In Oklahoma, as of 5/99, affirmative notification of
organizations is limited to notice about habitual 
offenders required to register every 90 days.  It 
is carried out by local law enforcement agencies.
     
Procedures for Public Access:     
The Oklahoma SOR data is considered a public record. 
Citizens can write, phone, or fax a query about a specific
individual to the central SOR unit and get a response. 
Members of the public also can view SOR files in the
DOC's Oklahoma City office.  Since November 1, 1998,
the DOC makes hard copies of full registry available to
the public for a fee (to cover copying costs), and citizens
can view the registry files for their jurisdiction at their
local law enforcement agency.     
     
Internet Website:     
The placement of the SOR on the DOC website is
planned for late 1999, early 2000.
     



                                  
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Oregon
Responsible Agency: Oregon State Police

                    
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Records are available to law enforcement personnel
throughout the State through the Law Enforcement Data
System (LEDS), a statewide database information
system.  LEDS is searchable by name and date of birth,
but it does not contain photos or allow for parameter
searches.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP funds sought to provide
photos, fuller information, and more search 
capabilities in new registry system.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Any organizational notification is the responsibility of
the local law enforcement agency where the offender
resides in conjunction with the probation or parole
officer supervising the offender.  As of 5/99, affirmative
notification is limited to offenders classified as sexual
predators.  Legislative changes relating to public and
organizational access to SOR data are being proposed for
the 1999 legislative session.

Procedures for Public Access:
Regarding community notification, while the offender is
under supervision by a corrections agency the corrections
agency is responsible for conducting the notification,
provided the offender has been determined to be
predatory.  If the offender is off supervision then law
enforcement is responsible for notifying the community,
provided the offender has been determined to be
predatory. Legislation to increase public access is
being proposed for the 1999 Oregon legislative session.

Internet Website:
The public will have a "look only" access.  Criminal
justice agencies will be allowed to view all information
OSP has on file regarding Oregon sex offenders through
a password protected and encrypted website. The
agencies will be able to run queries to develop subsets of
offenders with like characteristics.  The agencies will be
allowed to run lists of noncompliant offenders, read
background information, view current photos, past
photos, past addresses and place the offender's current
location on area maps of the State.  OSP is also looking
into having agencies complete sex offender registrations
online and E-mail them to the SOR unit.



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Pennsylvania
Responsible Agency: Pennsylvania State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Dissemination to State and municipal police is through
Sexual Offender Fliers and via uniscope messages using
the Commonwealth Law Enforcement Assistance
Network (CLEAN).  The information is available to all
law enforcement, although the SOR database cannot be
accessed directly through CLEAN.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
State and municipal police conduct notifications for  out-
of-State offenders subject to notification.  The central
SOR unit prepares the notification fliers, and local, State,
and municipal police personnel notify qualifying child
and youth service agencies; public, private and parochial
schools; daycare centers and preschool programs; and
institutions of higher learning.  The procedures are
established by State law, State Police regulations, and
municipal police regulations.

Procedures for Public Access:
Community notification is conducted by the appropriate
State or municipal law enforcement agency for out-of-
State offenders subject to notification.  The State Police
prepare the flier, and the local State police or municipal
department notifies qualifying neighbors, and maintains
records of those notified.  Community meetings may be
held.  Individual citizens or representatives of the media
may request a specific flier by appearing in person at the
local State or municipal agency and requesting the
information.  "Blanket" requests for information on
multiple offenders are referred to the State Police SOR
unit.  [A June 30, 1999 Pennsylvania Supreme Court
decision found the Sexually Violent Predator provisions
of Pennsylvania's Megan's Law to be "...violative of the
procedural due process guarantees of the Fourteenth
Amendment." All provisions of Megan's Law pertaining
to Sexually Violent Predators were struck from the law. 
As a result of this decision, information concerning
individuals who have previously been designated as
Sexually Violent Predators will no longer be made
available to the public.  This includes child and youth
service agencies, public, private and parochial schools,
daycare centers and preschool programs, and institutions
of higher learning.]  

Internet Website:
No.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Rhode Island
Responsible Agency: Rhode Island Office of the 
Attorney General


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The SOR data is accessible statewide to law enforcement
agencies through the Rhode Island Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System (RILETS).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The Attorney General has overall responsibility for
promulgating and amending community notification
guidelines under the Administrative Procedures Act. The
Parole Board determines the level of notification based
on an assessment of the offender's risk of reoffense. The
local law enforcement agency carries out notification
based on a specific plan and is under the Attorney
General guidelines.  Organizational notification is
mandatory for Level II (moderate risk) and Level III
(high risk) offenders who are not in residential 
treatment facilities.

Procedures for Public Access:
For Risk Level II (moderate risk) offenders, schools, 
daycare, and other organizations that serve people 
whom the offender might victimize are notified. 
For schools and daycare centers, law enforcement must
notify each parent.  For Risk Level III (high risk)
offenders, the local law enforcement agency may notify
individual members of the community, establishments,
and organizations, and use a variety of methods to
achieve the result including the use of fact sheets, 
fliers, news releases, advertisements, computerized 
access to fact sheet information, and/or public access 
to fact sheets at agency offices. (Offenders subject 
to notification are so informed and have right to 
judicial review.)

Internet Website:
No.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: South Carolina
Responsible Agency: South Carolina Law Enforcement 
Division


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information is available statewide to all criminal
justice agencies with access to South Carolina Law
Enforcement Division (SLED) Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS).

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, affirmative notification is the responsibility
of the county sheriff where the offender lives and is to be
conducted in the interests of public safety and preventing
criminal activity.  Legislation effective Summer 1998
specifies that for "persons adjudicated delinquent in
family court" for certain nonviolent/less serious offenses,
information may be released only to schools and other
relevant organizations.

Procedures for Public Access
As of 5/99, local SOR information is open to public
inspection upon a request to the county sheriff. Requests
must be made in writing and include the name of the
requestor and the name or address of the person about
whom information is sought. SLED also may respond to
written requests for registry lists by zip code, county, 
or the full State.

Internet Website:               
Yes as of 5/99.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP application provides
funds for website development for the South Carolina
SOR.)  As of 9/98, the South Carolina Attorney
General's website contained text data from the SLED
Sex Offender Registry.  Currently the website contains
the names and addresses of all convicted sex offenders 
as reported by SLED.
<www.scattorneygeneral.com/public/registry.html> 





Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: South Dakota
Responsible Agency: South Dakota Office of the Attorney 
General


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
South Dakota states its registered sex offender automated
database is accessible to all criminal justice entities
nationwide instantly through standard telecommunication 
formats. Intrastate access is through the South Dakota 
Law Enforcement Telecommunication System (SDLETS), 
available to law enforcement agencies on 24-hour basis.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
No procedures for affirmative notification to
organizations are specified.  Names of school or 
child welfare employees or potential employees may 
be submitted to a law enforcement agency for a 
sexual offender records check.

Procedures for Public Access:
The Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) sexual
offender registration file is available to all law
enforcement agencies on a twenty-four hour basis, but 
is not open to inspection by the public.  However, the
registration records collected by local law enforcement
agencies and the registration lists provided to local 
law enforcement by DCI are public records and may be
viewed at local law enforcement offices.

Internet Website:
No.



Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Tennessee
Responsible State Agency: Tennessee Bureau of 
Investigation

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Text information is available to all criminal justice
agencies through the State's law enforcement
telecommunications network. The Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation (TBI) notifies the applicable local law
enforcement agency of the offender's places of residence
and employment and changes of address.  If there is
evidence of a violation (such as verification forms not
being returned), TBI notifies the district attorney of 
the jurisdiction.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The TBI or a local law enforcement agency may not 
release relevant information deemed necessary to protect
the public concerning a specific sexual offender.  This is
due to a Federal Court ruling from the Middle District of
Tennessee that prohibits the notification provisions of the
registry from taking effect, other than to law enforcement
agencies.

Procedures for Public Access:
For offenses committed prior to 7/1/97, the registry
information is confidential and is released only to law
enforcement officials.  For offenses committed on or
after 7/1/97, the registry information is by statute a 
public record.  However, the Federal Court for Middle 
District of Tennessee has held that Tennessee's provisions 
for notification violate offenders' due process rights, 
and that discretionary notification must be preceded by a 
hearing.

Internet Website
Yes. <http://www.ticic.state.tn.us/sexoffender.htm>  
The website is operated by the Tennessee Internet Crime
Information Center (TCIC), but a Federal Court Order
precludes releasing registry information on individual
offenders on the website at this time.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Texas
Responsible State Agency: Texas Department of 
Public Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Local law enforcement agencies can access the SOR
database through a specialized Texas Crime Information
Center (TCIC) inquiry issue via the Texas Law
Enforcement Telecommunication System (TLETS).  Out-
of-State law enforcement agencies have access to
information through NCIC.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The local law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction
where the offender resides provides written notice to 
the superintendent of public schools and to the
administrators of private primary and secondary schools
concerning any registered sexual offender whose victim
was under the age of 17.

Procedures for Public Access:
Registry data is public information, but the street address,
Social Security Number, phone number, driver's license
number, and photo are not released. Newspaper
notification is made on adult offenders only for
convictions or adjudications on or after 9/1/95 where the
victim was under the age of 17. Citizens may write to
their local law enforcement agency or the Texas
Department of Public Safety (DPS) requesting listings of
registered offenders.  The preparation of a CD-ROM was
under discussion as of 4/98.

Internet Website:
In January, 1999, SOR data was available (for a fee) on
the Conviction Records Database of Texas DPS website:
<http://records.txdps.state.tx.us/dps/default.htm> 




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Utah
Responsible State Agency: Utah Department of 
Corrections


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Department of Corrections (DOC) employees can access
the SOR database through a statewide Wide Area
Network.  All probation and parole offices in the State
have access to the "sex offender management I-track"
which includes the SOR database. (FY'98 NSOR-AP
application seeks support to provide for law enforcement
access to the enhanced SOR database via the Internet.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Since the creation of the Utah Sex Offender Registry in
1987, the State Office of Education has been notified of
all registered sex offenders who have reported
employment within the education system.  Effective
7/1/98, registration data became public record
information and may be used by local law enforcement in
affirmative notification to schools and youth
organizations.  However, online access to the SOR
database, through the DOC's I-Track, will be given only
to law enforcement agencies and the State Office of
Education, and that process is not yet complete.

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 7/1/98, some registry data is public information. 
Citizens may write to the DOC's SOR unit for detailed
information on registered offenders by zip code(s). 
There is a limit of two zip codes that may be queried. 
Limited information is also available on the Internet.

Internet Website:
In July 1998, SOR data for registered offenders
convicted after 4/29/96, was mounted on the DOC
website. <www.cr.ex.state.ut.us/soreg/info_ soreg.htm> 
By yearend, however, legal issues and constraints
precluded adding new offenders.




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Vermont
Responsible State Agency: Vermont Department of 
Public Safety


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, no automated links exist between the SOR
and Vermont's intrastate law enforcement network, the
NLETS, or NCIC.  All requests to the SOR for data or
dissemination are processed manually.  (FY'98 NSOR-
AP application presents plans to move SOR to the State's
upgraded law enforcement message switching computer
system and will permit adding the SOR to statewide "hot
files.")

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
Vermont registry information is confidential.  It may be
given to law enforcement agencies for law enforcement
purposes, to State or Federal agencies for confidential
background checks, and to employers and school districts
authorized to request Vermont Crime Information Center
(VCIC) data for public protection purposes, as well as to
the offender for review purposes.  Legislation to expand
community and organizational notification was
introduced in legislature in January 1999, but no action
was taken.

Procedures for Public Access:
Information contained in the registry is not accessible to
the public directly.  The registry does inform local law
enforcement agencies when a registrant moves into their
jurisdictions. The local agencies are authorized to release
registry information to the public in the interests of
public safety.  A bill to provide for community
notification was introduced into the State Legislature in
January 1999, but no action was taken.

Internet Website:
Yes, but the Vermont website provides only information
on the registry.  No data is posted on registered
offenders.  The website has a description of the VCIC
SOR, the registration requirements, and a link to the text
of the law. <www.dps.state.vt.us/cjs/s_registry.htm>




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Virginia
Responsible State Agency: Virginia State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
The Department of State Police (DSP) makes complete
sex offender registrations available via the Virginia
Criminal Information Network (VCIN) for criminal
justice purposes.  The DSP notifies the chief law
enforcement officer of a jurisdiction of any 
registrations or reregistrations in his/her 
jurisdiction.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 7/98, SOR information can be disseminated by
DSP only to public, private and parochial schools; 
child welfare agencies; daycare homes or a registered 
or unregistered small family daycare home; and for 
employment, volunteering services, public protection, 
and the protection of children in general. Effective 
1/1/99, schools and child care organizations will be 
able to request and receive automatic notification 
(electronic or U.S. mail) of all registrations and 
reregistrations in their own or contiguous zip codes. 
[Effective 7/1/99 the scope of dissemination will be 
expanded to include daycare services and child minding 
services.]

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 7/98, information regarding a specific person shall
be disseminated to citizens upon receipt of an official
request form, which may be submitted directly to the
Department of State Police or to the State Police through
a local law enforcement agency.  The official request
form shall include a statement of the reason for the
request.  Effective 1/1/99, violent sex offender records
became available through the Internet.

Internet Website:
Effective 1/1/99 an Internet website was completed and
includes information and photos of violent sex offender
registrants.<http://www.vsp.state.va.us>     




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Washington
Responsible State Agency: Washington State Patrol

               
Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
There is limited dissemination of SOR information to
local law enforcement or Indian tribal police. "Wanted"
checks made through the Washington Crime Information
Center (WACIC) return SOR flags for Department of
Corrections (DOC) registered sex offenders. Criminal
history checks through the Washington State
Identification System (WASIS) yield rap sheets with
further sex offender information. An offender's photo
and current address must be requested in writing from
Washington State Patrol (WSP). (FY'98 NSOR funds
sought for direct online access for criminal justice
agencies statewide.) [New criminal history and crime
information systems will be implemented in October
1999.  The new system greatly improves collection and
dissemination of sex offender information.]
     
To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:     
Eight months prior to release, sex offenders are 
classified for risk by a DOC committee, but the local 
law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction where the
offender resides makes the final risk determination. For
Level II and III (moderate and high risk) offenders, the
local schools, neighborhoods and community groups may
be notified under the community notification act.  A WSP
pre-employment records check, requested in writing or
through a limited access Internet site, will note if the
individual is a registered sex offender.     
     
Procedures for Public Access:     
WSP disseminates limited sex offender information to
the public and only in response to a written "public
information disclosure request."  Based on the offender's 
risk level, the local law enforcement agency has the
authority to notify neighbors and community groups for
moderate and high risk offenders, and may issue press
releases for high risk offenders.  Some local law
enforcement agencies also use Internet sites for
dissemination of information on registered offenders in
their jurisdiction.     
     
Internet Website:     
No.  As of 5/99, the only SOR data on a State website
was on a restricted access site used for employment
background checks.

     


Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: West Virginia
Responsible State Agency: West Virginia State Police


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999
     
To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
SOR data is available electronically to all criminal 
justice agencies that have access to WATCH (West 
Virginia's criminal history records system). As of 4/98, 
the State police notified the city and county law 
enforcement agencies where the offender would reside 
after an offender registered with them.  Legislation 
effective 6/98 now requires that if an offender lives in 
another State and is required to register in that State 
but works, has a vocation or goes to school in West 
Virginia they must register in West Virginia and 
abide by the laws of West Virginia.

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
As of 5/99, State Police fax notification to school
superintendents and child protective agencies of all
registered offenders in their counties. Other civic and
religious organizations can register with SOR and 
automatically receive SOR data  (FY'98 NSOR-AP
application seeks support for new computer and GIS
software to analyze offender addresses vs. vulnerable
populations.)

Procedures for Public Access:
As of 5/99, individual citizens could receive SOR
information upon application to (and approval by) the
circuit court of jurisdiction where the requestor resided. 
New legislation effective 6/15/98 makes lifetime
registrants subject to community notification.  West
Virginia began its community notification program in
September 1998.          

Internet Website:
Yes, as of 6/98.  In conjunction with community
notification, data on lifetime registrants is mounted on
State Police website.  One county was online as of
September 1998.  Two counties were online as of
November 1998.  Four counties are currently online, as
of May 1999. <http://www.wvstatepolice.com> 





Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Wisconsin
Responsible State Agency: Wisconsin Department of 
Corrections


Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
Some Sex Offender Registry Program (SORP) data is 
available through the Department of Justice (DOJ)  
online database (TIME system), which is now updated 
weekly by a batch interface between the DOJ and the 
Department of Corrections (DOC).  The DOC also 
disseminates Special Bulletins on all 2-Strike
offenders and discretionary high risk offenders 
released from custody.  (The FY'98 NSOR funds sought to
establish electronic transmission to the FBI will also
provide State law enforcement agencies with direct
access to the full SORP database. NSOR-AP funds were
also sought to automate local notification, Special
Bulletins, and to provide investigative support through
the database and a secure Internet site.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Il:
The DOC SORP provides SORP data on geographic areas to
Neighborhood Watch Groups, in response to a written
request that has been approved by the local law
enforcement agency. Affirmative notification to 
schools or other organizations is the decision and 
responsibility of the local law enforcement agency.

Procedures for Public Access:
Victims and victims' families have direct access to SORP
information related to their offender(s) via 1-800-Victim
Information Notification Everyday (VINE) and their
Victim Access number, or they may request written
notification of the offender's change of address or 
similar information.  The general public can access 
basic SORP data on a specific person, but they must 
provide the name, date of birth, and the Social Security 
Number or the driver's license number of the subject of 
their inquiry.  Affirmative community notification is the 
responsibility of the local law enforcement agency.

Internet Website:
No.  Due to a reduction in grant funds, this initiative 
was not funded.  




Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Wyoming
Responsible State Agency: Wyoming Office of the 
Attorney General
                                  

Dissemination of Sex Offender Registry Information, 
May 1999

To Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Agencies:
As of 5/99, inquiries to the SOR required that Division 
of Criminal Investigation (DCI) staff search the 
database and respond by telephone or a manually prepared
administrative teletype.  (FY'98 NSOR-AP support
sought to move the SOR to a more powerful computer 
and establish an interface with the Wyoming Criminal
Justice Information Network (WCJIN) to access the FBI
and NLETS.  That also will provide online access for
law enforcement statewide.)

To Organizations Serving Children, Elderly, and the
Mentally Ill:
The District Court determines the offender's risk of
reoffense.  For moderate and high risk offenders, the
court authorizes the local law enforcement agency to
notify community organizations including schools,
religious groups, and youth organizations.  The law in
effect in April 1998 also required an application from the
district attorney, prior notice to the offender, and an in-
camera hearing before a notification program could
begin. A bill introduced in the legislature in 1998 but not
acted upon, and expected to be reintroduced in the 1999
legislature, is reported to be compliant with all Federal
legislation.

Procedures for Public Access:
For offenders classified as being at high risk for
reoffense, the district court authorizes the local law
enforcement agency to provide public notification.  As
noted above, the law in effect in April 1998, required 
an application from the district attorney, prior notice 
to the offender, and an in-camera hearing before any
notification could begin.  A bill to be reintroduced in
1999 session of legislature is reported to be compliant
with all Federal legislation with respect to organizational
and community notification.

Internet Website:
No.

End of file
8/20/99 da


