U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Fact Sheet

Summary of State Sex Offender Registries, 
2001


March 2002, NCJ 192265


-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sssor01.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may 
be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sssor
--------------------------------------------------------

Devon B. Adams
BJS State Program Manager
         
------------------------------------------
Highlights
         
*  About 386,000 convicted sex offenders 
were registered in 49 States and the 
District of Columbia as of February 2001,
compared to 277,000 registered in April 
1998. 

*  California had the largest number of 
offenders in its registry with over 88,000 
registrants. Texas had the second largest
registry with almost 30,000 registrants.  

*  Twenty-two State SOR's indicated that 
DNA samples are collected and maintained 
as part of registration.   

*  As of February 2001, 29 States and the 
District of Columbia had publicly accessible 
websites containing information on individual 
sex offenders in a searchable format. Fifteen 
States had public websites in 1999, and 6 
States had them in 1998.
-------------------------------------------------

Background and overview

In March 1998 the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) established  the National 
Sex Offender Registry Assistance Program 
(NSOR-AP).  

As a component of the National Criminal 
History Improvement Program (NCHIP), 
NSOR-AP assists States in meeting the
requirements of the Wetterling Act (Pub. L. 
104-145, 110 Stat.1345), as amended by 
Megan's Law, and the Pam Lychner Act (Pub. 
L. 104-236, 110 Stat.3093).  The program 
also provides assistance to allow States 
to participate in the FBI's permanent 
National Sex Offender Registry (NSOR). The
congressional appropriation in 1998 was 
$25 million. Subsequent funding was
provided under the ongoing NCHIP program.  

Under NSOR-AP, a project was initiated
in April 1998 to survey the States to 
evaluate the status of State sex offender 
registries (SOR's) and to identify priority 
areas, before the awarding of funds. 
The survey findings were published in a 
web-only format and are available on the 
BJS website at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
abstract/sssorao.htm>. 

1999 update

Pursuant to section 902 of the Protection 
of Children from Sexual Predators Act of 
1998, Congress directed the Attorney
General to study the feasibility of
establishing a national hotline to access 
the FBI's sex offender registry. In support 
of this study, BJS was asked to contact the 
States a second time for an update of their 
sex offender registry dissemination procedures 
to reflect conditions as of May 1999.

BJS asked the States to provide information 
on all existing State notification systems, 
and also to describe any use of the Internet,
CD-ROM's, and hotlines to disseminate 
information to the public on registered 
sex offenders.  

Of particular interest were those procedures 
used to disseminate information on sexual 
predators, or the highest risk offenders 
in each State's registry.  

The report Summary of State Sex Offender 
Registry Dissemination Procedures, Update 
1999, a BJS Fact Sheet, was published in
August 1999 and is on the BJS website at 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/
sssordp.htm>.   

Summary of State sex offender
registries, update 2001

In February 2001, BJS contacted the States 
for a third time to obtain information on 
the operation of their sex offender registries.  
In addition to updating procedures relating 
to community notification, the States were 
asked to update information on the overall 
operation and automation of the SOR's. 
Responses were received from all 50 States 
and the District of Columbia.  Once the 
information was updated, a draft was sent 
to the States for final review.  

Location of State sex offender
registries

In 17 States, the State police (patrol or 
troopers) were responsible for operating and
maintaining the registry. The department of 
public safety (DPS) was responsible in 11 
States. The office of the attorney general
operates the registry in six States, and the 
department of corrections is responsible in 
three States.  In the remaining States some 
other defined criminal justice agency is 
responsible for the SOR. 

Number of offenders in the
registry

Several factors in the authorizing
legislation significantly influenced
the size of any particular State
registry, among them are included the 
number of different offenses requiring 
registration, the date that "triggers" 
the registration mandate, and the
duration of the registration requirement. 
(For example, California includes all 
adults convicted in a California court 
of a covered offense since 1944.)

In February 2001, there were
approximately 386,000 convicted
sex offenders registered in 49
States and the District of
Columbia.  The number of offenders 
in individual State Registries ranged 
from 473 registrants in Maine to 
88,853 registrants in California (this
represents about a 14% increase in the 
California registry in a 3-year period), 
with the registry median being 
approximately 4,100 offenders. 
 
The legal status of registries was a 
factor affecting the counts of
registered sex offenders. Massachusetts' 
information is not included in the 386,000, 
because at the time the survey was
conducted a superior court injunction was 
in place against the Sex Offender Registry 
Board (SORB), prohibiting registration
without first providing the sex offender a 
hearing.  The injunction was appealed to 
the Supreme Judicial Court.  On June
28, 2001, the court concluded that the 
SORB can require an offender to provide his 
home and work address prior to providing
the offender a hearing to determine whether 
or not the offender has to register. Under
the ruling the SORB may also transmit this 
data, and other data regarding the offender, 
to police departments.  However, the
information may not be disseminated to the 
public until the board classifies the offender
and the offender has an opportunity to 
challenge the recommended classification at an
administrative hearing. Massachusetts estimates 
that there are about 17,000 offenders
identified as qualified to register.

Comparatively, in April 1998, approximately 
277,000 convicted sex offenders were 
registered in 49 States and the District of
Columbia. (At the time the survey was 
conducted in 1998, Connecticut did not have a
centralized sex offender registry and thus did 
not provide information on the number of
registered offenders.)  

Automation status of sex offender 
registries

Extent of database automation 

In 2001 the level of the SOR automation 
varied substantially, not only across States 
but also by which data and/or linkages were
automated. All of the States reported some 
level of automation of their text database. 
It ranged from limited to full automation.
  
SOR linked to criminal history system

Twenty-six States indicated that here was 
a link from the SOR database to the criminal 
history file, (including States in which the
SOR is a part of the computerized criminal 
history file).  Five States indicated that
although the SOR is not linked to the criminal 
history file, it can be accessed through a 
separate "hot file" or through the State
identification number.  The remaining 20 
States reported no electronic link between 
the SOR database and the criminal history
file. Of these, four indicated plans to 
establish a link. 
 
DNA samples 

In 2001, 22 SOR's reported that DNA samples 
were collected and maintained by the registry 
as a requirement of registration. Ten SOR's 
indicated DNA samples were collected but were
maintained separate from registry requirements.  
Nineteen SOR's reported limited or no 
collection of DNA samples.  Of these, two had
pending legislation to include DNA samples as 
part of the SOR program. 

In 1998, 15 SOR's reported that DNA samples 
were collected in conjunction with registration
requirements.  Nine SOR's reported that DNA 
samples were collected but not as part of the
registry.  Twenty-seven SOR's indicated limited 
or no collection of DNA samples.

Dissemination procedures of
SOR information 

Community notification  

The most notable findings in this section of 
the survey involve the increasing practice of 
posting offender-specific information on
State and/or local law enforcement websites.  
A growing number of States uses the Internet 
to fulfill notification requirements under 
Megan's Law. 

Status of websites in April 1998
  
The use of websites has increased 
significantly since BJS first surveyed 
the States in 1998. Six States had publicly 
accessible websites with searchable
offender information in 1998.

Status of websites in May 1999  

By 1999 the number of websites had 
increased to 15 State sex offender 
registries that maintained a website 
with offender-specific information
available to the general public.  

Status of websites in February
2001  

As of February 2001, 29 States
and the District of Columbia had
publicly accessible Internet sites
containing searchable information
on individual sex offenders.  Eight
States reported having a website
limited to information regarding
sex offender laws and registry
requirements and/or restricted to
use by law enforcement agencies.  
Six States were developing a website 
or are planning to develop one.  And
seven States reported having no website 
and provided no further information about 
whether one was planned.

Methodology/data collection
efforts

The information, for the initial
survey in 1998, was obtained on
these State registries in several
ways: 

*  Review of State applications for
BJS NSOR-AP funding 
*  Review of State legislation on
sex offender registries and
registration programs 
*  Information obtained from prior
published reports on State registries 
*  Phone interviews with registry
directors and staff 
*  Online research.   

After the information was collected and 
organized into a uniform template for 
each State, it was sent to the designated
SOR agency for review, comment, and 
verification. The subsequent updates used 
the basic template established in 1998 and 
requested the designated contact at the 
State registry update the information for
May 1999 and then again in February 2001.  
The State changes were incorporated into
the update and sent out to the State for 
verification.

Each State summary presented information 
on the agency (or agencies) responsible for 
the management and operation of the sex 
offender registry.

The summaries were organized into 
four main topical areas:

*  Who is in the registry?
*  How is the registry automated?
*  What is the general operation
of the registry?  
*  How is sex offender registry
information disseminated?

Under the heading of "Who Is in
the Registry" the survey asked
about --

*  covered offenses that require
registration 

*  who was mandated to register
(this can be based on date of
the offender's conviction, his
release into the community or
other stipulations imposed by
the State)

*  the duration for which the
offender must remain on the
registry and continue to register
(ranging from 10 years to lifetime 
or an indefinite period of time)

*  the number of offenders held
by the State central registry.  

Under the second heading, BJS
collected information on the
automation level of the Sex
Offender Registry which includes 
the following:  

*  the extent to which the SOR
database is automated 

*  whether the SOR database is
linked to the State's criminal
history system 

*  whether the SOR transmits
data electronically to the FBI's
Sex Offender Registry

*  the capability of the SOR to
store and transmit fingerprints
and mugshots to the FBI and to
other criminal justice agencies
within the State.    

Under the third heading, BJS collected 
information on the overall operation of 
the Sex Offender Registry in each State. 
Information was collected on the
following:

*  The sources of initial
information on offender --
whether the local law
enforcement agency, the court
of conviction, department of
corrections, local jails or the
offender himself provides the
initial registration information

*  Whether a DNA sample was a
requirement of registration

*  What procedures were implemented 
for validation and re-registration 
of current registrants. This includes
whether or not the SOR proactively 
notified the registrant of the 
requirement to reregister;
whether this notification is
automated, and what are the
penalties for noncompliance
with the registration procedures. 

The fourth heading covered in the
survey is the dissemination of
Sex Offender Registry Information.  
BJS collected information from the 
States regarding --

*  dissemination of SOR data to
law enforcement and criminal
justice agencies

*  how registrant information is
disseminated to organizations
serving children, the elderly, and
the mentally ill 

*  what procedures, if any, exist
for disseminating SOR information to 
the general public

*  whether SOR data are disseminated 
over the Internet through a public 
access website maintained by the SOR 
agency.  
 
Appendix tables

Organizational locus of State
SOR's

Number of offenders in State
registries

DNA sample collected and 
maintained in connection with
sex offender registries, 2001

Sex offender registry
information:  Dissemination and
community notification, 2001

To view detailed individual State
summaries visit the BJS website
at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs>.

------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice. 
Lawrence A. Greenfeld is acting
director.

Devon B. Adams of BJS wrote
this Fact Sheet under the
supervision of Carol G. Kaplan,
chief, National Criminal History
Improvement Program.  Tina
Dorsey and Tom Hester produced and 
edited it. Jayne Robinson prepared 
the report for printing.

March 2002, NCJ 192265
------------------------------------------

End of file
03/28/02 ih
