U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Summary of State Sex Offender Registry Dissemination
Procedures

Factsheet 
August 1999 NCJ 177620

By Devon B. Adams
BJS Program Assistant

This report is one of a series.  Previous editions are available and
more recent editions may be available.  To view a list of all in the
series go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#registries.


This report updates the "Dissemination of Sex Offender
Registry Data" section  of the Summary of State Sex
Offender Registries: Automation and Operation 1998. NCJ  177621


--------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights
--------------

* Over two-thirds of the States indicated full or partial
electronic dissemination of State Sex Offender Registry (SOR)
information to local law enforcement or other agencies
responsible for offender supervision.

*Over half of all States have or plan to have an Internet site
devoted to some aspect of SOR: 

-- 15 States have publicly accessible Internet sites con- taining
information on individual sex offenders in a searchable format. 

-- 10 States have Internet sites accessible only to law
enforcement agencies or containing information that pertains
only to the registry and not to individual offenders.  

-- 5  States without a SOR Internet site are planning 
to develop one.  

-- The remaining 20 States and the District of Columbia indicated
that they did not currently have an Internet site with SOR
information and provided no information as to whether one was
planned.



* California, Florida, New York, and Wisconsin are the only
States to have a Sex Offender Information Hotline.    California
is the only State to provide a CD-ROM of  registered sex 
offenders for public inspection.  

* Over 60% of the States reported that citizens may make
requests (usually written) to receive information 
on a specific offender or list of offenders or may view 
the registry at the discretion of local law enforcement
agencies.  In many of these States, citizens had to demonstrate
a need to know.

* In at least four States, litigation has limited public
dissemination of some or all individual sex offender 
information.
---------------------------------------------------------


As part of the National Sex Offender Registry Assistance Program
(NSOR-AP), the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) prepared
Summary of State Sex Offender Registries: Automation and
Operation: 1998 (NCJ 177621).  The  report presents the status 
of sex offender registries in the 50 States and the District of 
Columbia as of April 1, 1998, prior to the award of Federal 
funds under NSOR-AP.

The report is available on the BJS website at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ssxor.htm.

BJS contacted the States for an update of their sex offender
registry dissemination procedures to reflect conditions as of
May 1, 1999.  Copies of the original survey responses were sent
to each State.  The designated official was requested 
to review, sign, and return the information to BJS.

States were asked for information on existing State notification
systems, use of the Internet, CD-ROMs, and hotlines.  Of
particular interest were those procedures used to disseminate
information on sexual predators or the high 
risk offenders in each State's registry.  Responses were
received from all 50 States and the District of Columbia.  
Follow-up telephone contacts were made to gather further
information when responses were unclear.  A draft was 

then sent to the States for final review.  

States were asked to review and update the four categories of
dissemination procedures outlined on page 2.  Responses to these
categories are summarized in the table  Sex Offender Registry
information: Dissemination and community notification, 1999. 
All data shown in the summaries are current as of May 1, 1999.

Additional information for each State will be presented on the
BJS website.   


Dissemination to law enforcement and criminal 
justice agencies 

States summarized how sex offender information is transmitted
from the registry to local law enforcement agencies.  Responses
ranged from extensive electronic transmission to all local law
enforcement agencies by the State SOR  to hard copies mailed to
local agencies by request only. 


Dissemination procedures to organizations serving children, the
elderly, and the mentally ill

The States reported numerous methods of dissemination and
notification from the local law enforcement agencies to schools
and other child welfare and youth serving organizations. 


Dissemination procedures to the general public 

Scope:  Community notification is open to a variety of
interpretation by the States.  In over half the States,
community notification is permitted for specific types of
offenders, such as high risk offenders, violent or habitual offenders,
sexual predators, and child sexual offenders, and sexual
predators.  Information on sex offenders other than those listed
above is generally provided to local law enforcement agencies,
victims, and schools and other youth service organizations.  In
other States local law enforcement is given significant latitude
when it comes to releasing offender specific information to
communities and the general public. 

Method of disclosure (other than Internet sites):  The   States
reported a wide variety of methods for disseminating SOR
information to the community and general public.  Methods
include the following: sending or posting fliers in the
offender's residential district; law enforcement officers
conducting door-to-door notification; community meetings;
placing newspaper ads; and so on.


Internet website 

The States indicated whether a website had been established,
whether it contained information on specific offenders, and
whether it was accessible to the public. 

The State-by-State Summary is contained in a separate file which
is available at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/ascii/pub/ascii/sssorst.txt.

END OF FILE
pm/da 8/20/99