U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported 
by Youth, 2008-09 

January 2010   NCJ 228416

------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2113.

------------------------------------------------------------

Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., Paige M. Harrison, 
and Paul Guerino, BJS Statisticians

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79) (PREA)
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out
a comprehensive statistical review and analysis of the
incidents and effects of prison rape for each calendar year.
This report fulfills the requirement under Sec.4(c)(2)(B)(ii)
of the Act to provide a list of juvenile correctional
facilities according to the prevalence of sexual
victimization.

Between June 2008 and April 2009, BJS completed the first
National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) of 166 state-owned
or operated facilities and 29 locally or privately operated
facilities. The survey, conducted by Westat (Rockville, MD),
was restricted to juvenile confinement facilities that held
adjudicated youth for at least 90 days. Facilities were
excluded if fewer than 25% of the youth in the facility had
been adjudicated, the facility held fewer than 10 adjudicated
youth, or if the facility was locally or privately operated
and held fewer than 105 youth. All state facilities holding
90 or more youth were included. State facilities with fewer
than 90 youth were sampled proportionate to the number of
adjudicated youth held, based on the 2006 Census of Juveniles
in Residential Placement. Non-state (locally or privately
operated) juvenile facilities holding 105 or more youth were
initially included, but during the course of the survey, this
criterion was increased to 150. At least one facility in each
state and the District of Columbia was selected to
participate in the survey. (See Methodology for sample
description.)

Highlights

*This report presents findings from the first National Survey
of Youth in Custody (NSYC), representing approximately 26,550
adjudicated youth held nationwide in state operated and large
locally or privately operated juvenile facilities. Overall,
91% of youth in these facilities were male; 9% were female.

*An estimated 12% of youth in state juvenile facilities and
large non-state facilities (representing 3,220 youth
nationwide) reported experiencing one or more incidents of
sexual victimization by another youth or facility staff in
the past 12 months or since admission, if less than 12
months.

*About 2.6% of youth (700 nationwide) reported an incident
involving another youth, and 10.3% (2,730) reported an
incident involving facility staff.

*About 4.3% of youth (1,150) reported having sex or other
sexual contact with facility staff as a result of some type
of force; 6.4% of youth (1,710) reported sexual contact with
facility staff without any force, threat, or other explicit
form of coercion.

*Approximately 95% of all youth reporting staff sexual
misconduct said they had been victimized by female staff. In
2008, 42% of staff in state juvenile facilities were female.

*Thirteen facilities were identified as "high rate" based on
the lower bound of the 95%-confidence interval of at least
35% higher than the average rate among facilities by type of
consent. Six facilities had victimization rates of 30% or
more; 4 had rates between 25% and 30%; and 3 had rates
between 20% and 25%.

*Eleven facilities were identified as "low rate" based on a
low rate of youth reporting sexual victimization and a low
upper bound for the 95%-confidence interval around the rate.
Among these facilities, 5 had no reported incidents of sexual
victimization.

*Rates of reported sexual victimization varied among youth:

-10.8% of males and 4.7% of females reported sexual activity
with facility staff.
-9.1% of females and 2.0% of males reported unwanted sexual
activity with other youth.
-Youth with a sexual orientation other than heterosexual
reported significantly higher rates of sexual victimization
by another youth (12.5%) compared to heterosexual youth
(1.3%).
-Youth who had experienced any prior sexual assault were more
than twice as likely to report sexual victimization in the
current facility (24.1%), compared to those with no sexual
assault history (10.1%).

*Among youth victimized by another youth, 20% said they had
been physically injured; 5% reported they had sought medical
attention for their injuries. Among youth victimized by
staff, 5% reported a physical injury; fewer than 1% had
sought medical attention.

The NSYC is part of the Prison Rape Statistical Program. The
program collects administrative records of reported sexual
violence, as well as allegations of sexual victimization
directly from victims through surveys of adult inmates in
prisons and jails and surveys of youth held in juvenile
correctional facilities. Administrative records have been
collected annually since 2004. BJS has published two reports
on sexual victimization in juvenile facilities Sexual
Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004 (NCJ
210333) and Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional
Authorities, 2005-06 (NCJ 215337). BJS has also published an
overview of all of its prison rape collections PREA Data
Collection Activities, 2009 (NCJ 227377). These reports are
available online at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1153>;<ht
tp://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1218> and
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1596>
(last accessed December 17, 2009).

First national survey of youth completed to meet PREA
requirements

The 2008-09 NSYC survey consisted of an audio
computer-assisted self-interview (ACASI) in which youth,
using a touch-screen, interacted with a computerized
questionnaire and followed audio instructions delivered via
headphones. The NSYC utilized self-administered procedures to
ensure the confidentiality of the reporting youths and to
encourage fuller reporting of victimization. The survey made
use of audio technology to provide assistance to youth with
varying levels of literacy and language skills. Approximately
98% of the interviews were conducted in English; 2% in
Spanish.

Administrators in each state, county, and private facility
determined the type of consent required for youths to be
eligible for participation. Administrators provided in loco
parentis (ILP) consent in 63 facilities. In loco parentis is
when administrators provide consent "in the place of the
parent" to contact youth. In the remaining 132 facilities,
administrators required consent from the youths' parents or
guardians (PGC). Youth in all facilities also had to assent
to participate in the interview. (See Methodology for
additional details on the process of consent.)

In each sampled PGC facility, administrators were asked 8
weeks prior to data collection to provide a roster of all
adjudicated youth assigned a bed; in ILP facilities a roster
was provided 4 weeks prior to data collection. 

All youth were sampled in ILP facilities and in PGC
facilities with 240 or fewer youth on the roster. In larger
PGC facilities, all females and a random sample of males were
selected. In both PGC and ILP facilities all incoming youth
were added to the sample up to 4 weeks prior to the survey.
Youth who had been present in the facility at least 4 weeks
prior to the survey and were present at the time of the
survey were considered eligible. 

The result of this process yielded a sample representing
26,551 adjudicated youth held nationwide in state operated
and large locally or privately operated juvenile
facilities.***Footnote 1 Adjudication is the court process
that determines whether the youth committed the offense,
including delinquency and status offenses.*** A total of
10,263 youth participated in the survey. Of these, 1,065
received an alternative survey on drug and alcohol use and
treatment, and 9,198 youth participated in the survey of
sexual victimization.

The NSYC collects only allegations of sexual victimization.
Because participation in the survey is anonymous and reports
are confidential, the NSYC does not permit any follow-up
investigation or substantiation through review of official
records. Some allegations in the NSYC may be untrue. At the
same time, some youth may remain silent about any sexual
victimization experience in the facility. To address concerns
of false reporting by youth, reports of victimization were
checked for consistency across survey items. Interviews that
contained response patterns considered to be extreme or
highly inconsistent were excluded from the calculations of
victimization rates. (See box on page 6 for details.)

About 12% of youth in state-operated juvenile facilities and
large non-state facilities reported one or more incidents of
sexual victimization

Among the 9,198 youth participating in the 2008-09 survey,
1,199 reported experiencing one or more incidents of sexual
victimization. Because the NSYC is a sample survey, weights
were applied for sampled facilities and youth within
facilities to produce national-level and facility-level
estimates. The estimated number of adjudicated youth who
reported experiencing sexual violence totaled 3,220 (or 12.1%
of the 26,551 estimated adjudicated youth held in
state-operated or large non-state facilities covered by the
survey) (table 1).

About 2.6% of adjudicated youth (an estimated 700 nationwide)
reported an incident involving another youth, and 10.3%
reported an incident involving facility staff. Some youth
(0.8%) reported sexual victimization by both another youth
and facility staff. Sexual acts or contacts between youth in
which there was no report of force were excluded from all
measures of sexual victimization.

The NSYC screened for specific sexual activities in which
youth may have been involved during the past 12 months or
since admission to the facility, if less than 12 months.
Youth were asked to report which of these activities involved
another youth and which involved staff at the facility.
Additionally, youth were asked if any of these activities
happened because they were forced, threatened with force,
pressured in another way, or offered money, favors, special
protection or other special treatment. (See pages 20 - 22 for
specific survey questions.) Reports of unwilling
youth-on-youth sexual activity were classified as either
nonconsensual acts or other sexual contacts only. 

Approximately 2.0% of youths (530 nationwide) said they had
nonconsensual sex with another youth, including giving or
receiving sexual gratification, and oral, anal, or vaginal
penetration. An estimated 0.5% (140) of surveyed adjudicated
youth said they had experienced one or more other unwilling
sexual contacts only with other youth, such as looking at
private body parts, unwanted kissing on the lips or another
part of the body, and other unwanted touching of specific
body parts in a sexual way.

Reports of staff sexual misconduct with youth were classified
separately depending on whether the misconduct involved any
force, threat, pressure, or offers of special favors or
privileges. An estimated 4.3% of youth (1,150 nationwide)
reported that they had sex or other sexual contact with
facility staff as a result of force. An estimated 6.4%
(1,710) of youth said they had sexual contact with facility
staff without any force, threat, or other explicit form of
coercion.

Thirteen facilities were identified as high rate after taking
into account statistical variation and type of consent

Of the 195 juvenile facilities in the 2008-09 NSYC, 13 had an
overall victimization rate that could be identified as "high
rate" (table 2). Though other measures may be considered when
comparing facilities, the overall victimization rate is a
measure of prevalence that includes all reports of unwilling
sexual activity between youth and all reports of staff sexual
misconduct, regardless of the level of coercion and type of
sexual activity.***Footnote 2 Facility-level rates are based
on the reports of adjudicated youth who were in the facility
at least 4 weeks prior to the time of the interview. The
experiences of non-adjudicated youth and youth held in the
facility in the past 12 months, but who were not in the
facility when the interviews were conducted, were not
included in the survey***.


The NSYC is statistically unable to provide an exact ranking
for all facilities as required under the Prison Rape
Elimination Act. As with any survey, the NSYC estimates are
subject to error associated with sampling. Facilities holding
few youth or facilities with few youth completing the 
survey will have greater variance around the point estimate,
making it especially important to recognize that the survey
estimates may vary. 

A common way to express the sampling variability is to
construct a 95%-confidence interval around each survey
estimate. Typically, multiplying the standard error by 1.96
and then adding or subtracting the result from the estimate
produces the confidence interval. This interval expresses the
range of values that could result among 95% of the different
samples that could be drawn.

For small samples and estimates close to 0% or 100%, as is
the case with the NSYC, the use of the standard error to
construct the 95%-confidence interval may not be reliable. An
alternative developed by Wilson has been shown to perform
better than the traditional method when constructing a
confidence interval.*** Footnote 3 See Brown, L.D., Cai, T.
and DasGupta, A. (2001) Interval Estimation for a Binomial
Proportion, Statistical Science, 16 (2), 101-138, and Wilson,
E.B. (1927) Probable Inference, the Law of Succession, and
Statistical Inference, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 22, 209-212***.  When applied to  large samples,
the traditional and the Wilson confidence intervals are
virtually identical. 

Consequently, the tables in this report containing
facility-level estimates provide confidence intervals based
on Wilson's methodology (tables 2 through 6 and all appendix
tables). Table 1 and tables 7 through 12 contain national
estimates and are based on traditional standard error
calculations. (See Methodology for details.)

Among the 13 high-rate facilities, 5 were ILP facilities (in
which facility administrators provided consent for the
majority of the selected youth) and 8 were PGC facilities (in
which administrators required consent from the youths'
parents or guardians). These facilities were identified as
high because the lower bound of the 95%-confidence interval
was at least 35% higher than the average rate among ILP
facilities (14.3%) and PGC facilities (10.9%). ***Footnote 4
The criterion of at least 35% higher than the average rate
was established to identify a small group of facilities that
would be considered as having high rates. Other criteria
reflecting variation in the estimates would have identified a
smaller or larger number of facilities***.

Although the NSYC cannot uniquely identify the facility with
the highest victimization rate, 6 facilities had rates of 30%
or greater. Among ILP facilities, Pendleton Juvenile
Correctional Facility (Indiana) recorded an overall rate of
36.2% and Corsicana Residential Treatment Center (Texas)
recorded a rate of 32.4%. Among PGC facilities, Backbone
Mountain Youth Center, Swanton (Maryland) had a rate of
36.4%; Samarkand Youth Development Center (North Carolina)
and Cresson Secure Treatment Unit (Pennsylvania) had rates of
33.3%; and Culpeper Juvenile Correctional Center-Long Term
(Virginia) had a rate of 30.0%. 

While each of the 13 facilities had high rates, some
facilities not classified as having high rates were not
statistically different from the 13 high rate facilities due
to sampling error. 

Thirty-six facilities had no reported incidents; 11
facilities were identified as low-rate for sexual
victimization

Thirty-six of the juvenile facilities (18%) had no reported
incidents of sexual victimization (see appendix table 2).
However, the NSYC is unable to provide an exact
identification of the facilities with the lowest rates of
sexual victimization. Rates in each of the 36 facilities are
subject to sampling error, depending on which youth were
selected and the number of surveys actually completed by
youth within the facility. Although in each facility the
lower bound of the confidence interval was 0%, the upper
bound varied depending on the number of completed interviews.
 
Among the 195 surveyed facilities, 11 were identified as "low
rate" facilities for sexual victimization based on the low
percentages of youth who reported incidents and the upper
bounds of the 95%-confidence intervals that were less than
half the average rate among ILP and PGC facilities (table 3).
Five of these facilities had no reported incidents of sexual
victimization; 6 had at least one youth who reported a sexual
victimization.
                         
Interviews checked for extreme and inconsistent response
patterns 

As with any survey, the NSYC is subject to measurement error.
To reduce this error, the survey incorporated several design
features, including the use of an audio-assisted
questionnaire delivered via headphones to address low levels
of literacy; the use of "hotwords," highlighted in a
different color, which youth could access if they were
uncertain about their definition; range checks for selected
questions to guard against unrealistic values; and logic
checks that asked youth to verify their responses. To assist
youth having difficulty with the interview, the computer
flagged those who spent a long period in particular sections
of the interview and prompted the youth to obtain assistance
from an interviewer. While these measures and others helped
to reduce error, they did not prevent it from occurring.

Once the interviews were completed, individual response
patterns were assessed to identify interviews having extreme
or internally inconsistent responses. Three response patterns
were considered extreme and indicative of an unreliable
interview overall. These patterns were--

*a youth completed the survey in less than 10 minutes. Based
on internal testing, it was determined to be extremely
difficult for a respondent to seriously complete the
interview in less than 10 minutes.

*the reported number of forced sexual contacts with other
youth exceeded 1.5 incidents per day for every day since
admission to the facility. 

*the reported number of forced sexual contacts with facility
staff exceeded 1.5 incidents per day for every day since
admission.

Out of 9,362 completed interviews, 89 had at least one of the
extreme response patterns. These interviews were excluded
from the calculations of sexual victimization.

An additional list of 25 indicators was developed to assess
whether a youth showed signs that he or she did not fully
understand the survey items, whether the youth did not
consistently report the details of events, or if the youth
provided inconsistent responses. One indicator was if the
youth provided unrealistic dates or personal information;
another indicator was if the youth reported in a debriefing
item that questions on sexual activity were hard to
understand. Other indicators compared responses in one
section of the survey with responses in other sections. (See
page 23 for a full listing of the indicators.)

The outcomes of these 25 indicators were combined into a
count of the total number for each youth. While 89.6% of
youth did not record any inconsistent responses, 8.0%
reported one that was inconsistent, 1.5% reported two, and
0.9% reported three or more. For purposes of estimating
sexual victimization rates, an additional 75 interviews were
excluded based on a count of 3 or more indicators of
inconsistent responses. 

Because many of the indicators rely on checking the
consistency of reports of sexual victimization, deletion of
extreme or inconsistent responses from the estimates has the
effect of lowering the overall victimization rate. Without
deleting any interviews, the estimate for the overall sexual
victimization rate would have been 13.1%. After deleting 164
interviews with at least one extreme response or 3 or more
inconsistent responses, the rate dropped to 12.1%. If
interviews with 2 or more inconsistent responses were
deleted, then the rate would have dropped to approximately
11.0%; had interviews with 1 or more been deleted, the rate
would have been approximately 7.5%. The 3 or more
inconsistent response cutoff was selected in recognition that
youth could legitimately report some inconsistent information
without invalidating their entire interview.
 
Fort Bellefontaine Campus (Missouri) and Camp Florence
(Oregon), with no youth reporting sexual victimization, had
confidence intervals with the lowest upper bounds (2.4% and
3.3%, respectively) among ILP facilities. Desoto Juvenile
Residential Facility (Florida) and Green Hill School
(Washington) with reported sexual victimization rates of 1.0%
had confidence intervals with the lowest upper bounds (3.8%
and 4.2%, respectively) among PGC facilities. 

Youth in high-rate facilities reported high rates of
nonconsensual sexual activity 

Among the 13 high-rate facilities, most reports of sexual
victimization involved nonconsensual sexual acts with another
youth and serious sexual acts with facility staff excluding
touching (table 4). When rates of sexual victimization were
limited to the most serious nonconsensual acts (excluding
touching only, kissing on the lips or other body parts, and
engaging in other less serious acts), the percentages of
youth reporting one or more incidents remained high (between
20.3% and 36.4%).

Among the ILP facilities, Pendleton Juvenile Correctional
Facility (Indiana) had a rate of sexual victimization
excluding touching only (34.1%) and a confidence interval
with a lower bound (28.6%) that were more than double the
national average. Among the PGC facilities, Samarkand Youth
Development Center (North Carolina) had a 29.2% sexual
victimization rate excluding touching only and a confidence
interval with the highest lower bound (21.7%).

Of the 13 high-rate facilities, 4 had rates of youth-on-youth
sexual victimization that exceeded 10% (table 5). In 4
facilities, none of the interviewed youth reported any sexual
victimization by other youth in the facility.

High percentages of youth reported staff sexual misconduct in
which no force, threat, or other forms of coercion were
involved. Eleven of the 13 high-rate facilities had rates of
staff sexual misconduct (with no report of force) that were
more than twice the national average (6.4%) (table 6). Five
of the 13 facilities had a confidence interval around the
rate of staff sexual misconduct (with no force) with a lower
bound that exceeded 10%.

Few differences in sexual victimization rates were associated
with basic facility characteristics

An initial examination of available facility characteristics
revealed few measurable differences at the 95%-level of
statistical confidence--

*Rates of staff sexual misconduct with youth were higher in
state operated facilities (10.9%) than in non-state
facilities (7.9%). Reports of unwanted sexual activity
between youth did not differ between state (2.7%) and
non-state (2.6%) juvenile facilities (table 7).

*Female-only facilities had the highest rates of
youth-on-youth sexual victimization (11.0%); male-only
facilities had the highest rates of staff sexual misconduct
(11.3%).

*Small facilities (those holding between 10 and 25
adjudicated youth) had the lowest overall rates of sexual
victimization (6.3%), largely due to low rates of staff
sexual misconduct (2.7%).

*Facilities in which youth were held an average of less than
5 months had the lowest rates of sexual victimization (7.4%),
compared to facilities in which youth were held for longer
periods (12.7% in facilities with an average of 5 to 6 months
and 14.2% in facilities with an average of 7 to 12 months).

Rates of sexual victimization were strongly related to
specific youth characteristics

Rates of sexual victimization varied among youth--

*Males were more likely than females to report sexual
activity with facility staff. An estimated 10.8% of males,
compared to 4.7% of females, said they had experienced one or
more incidents of sexual activity with staff (table 8).

*Females were more likely than males to report forced sexual
activity with other youth. About 9.1% of females and 2.0% of
males reported forced sexual activity with another youth at
the facility.

*White youth (4.4%) were more likely than black youth (2.1%)
and Hispanic youth (0.9%) to report sexual victimization by
another youth.

*Black youth (11.9%) reported slightly higher rates of sexual
victimization by facility staff than white youth (9.7%) and
Hispanic youth (8.1%).

*Reports of staff-on-youth sexual victimization increased
with the length of time a youth had been in the facility. An
estimated 14.6% of youth who had been in the facility 12
months or more, compared to 8.3% of youth who had been in the
facility for less than 6 months, said they had sexual contact
with facility staff.

*Youth with a sexual orientation other than heterosexual
reported significantly higher rates of sexual victimization
by another youth (12.5%) compared to heterosexual youth
(1.3%).

*Youth who had experienced any prior sexual assault were at
least twice as likely to report sexual victimization in the
current facility (24.1%), compared to those with no sexual
assault history (10.1%).

*Among youth who had been previously sexually assaulted at
another correctional facility, two-thirds (65.0%) reported
having been victimized at the current facility within the
last 12 months or since admission, if less than 12 months.

Most youth-on-youth victims (81%) reported more than one
incident; 43% reported more than one perpetrator

In the NSYC victims were also asked to provide information
about the circumstances surrounding their victimization,
including the number of times it had happened,
characteristics of the perpetrators, the type of pressure or
physical force, when and where the incidents had occurred,
and whether or not they had been injured.

Data provided by youth who reported sexual victimization by
another youth revealed that--

*About 81% had been victimized more than once; 32% had been
victimized more than 10 times (table 9).
 
*An estimated 43% of youth-on-youth victims had been
victimized by more than one perpetrator.

*More than half (59%) of the victims said that they had been
victimized by another youth who was white; 75% said they had
been victimized by a youth who was black; 39% of victims said
they had been victimized by another youth who was
Hispanic/Latino. (In comparison, 34% of all adjudicated youth
held in the sampled facilities were white, 42% were black,
and 19% were Hispanic.)

*Almost two-thirds of the victims (63%) said they had been
victimized at least once by a youth known to be in a gang.

*Nearly half of the victims (46%) reported they had
experienced physical force or threat of force, 30% had been
offered favors or protection, and 17% had been given drugs or
alcohol to engage in the sexual act or other sexual contact
(table 10).

Youth-on-youth sexual victimizations occurred in areas
throughout the facilities

Among youth who reported unwanted sexual activity with
another youth, 43% said they had been victimized at least
once in their room or sleeping area, and 33% said they had
been victimized at least once in the room or sleeping area of
another youth. Additionally, 45% reported at least one
incident had occurred in a shower or bathroom, and 34% said
they had been victimized in a recreation area. Nearly
two-thirds of the victims (65%) said at least one incident
had occurred in another common area, such as a classroom,
library, kitchen, office, closet, or supply room.

Youth-on-youth sexual victimization was more common in the
evening (between 6 p.m. and midnight) than at any other time.
An estimated 60% of the youth who reported unwanted sexual
activity with another youth said at least one of the
incidents occurred during those hours. 

Most youth victimized by another youth (80%) said they had
not been physically injured. Of those injured, approximately
5% reported being knocked unconscious, 9% reported being
stabbed or cut, 5% reported broken bones, 7% reported
internal injuries, and 5% reported that teeth had been
chipped or knocked out. Additionally, 17% reported minor
injuries, such as bruises, a black eye, cuts, scratches,
swelling, or welts. (Not shown in table.) 

Among all youth victimized by another youth, 6% said they had
received two or more serious injuries. Approximately 5%
reported they had sought medical attention for their
injuries. 

Most perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct were female

Approximately 95% of all youth reporting staff sexual
misconduct said they had been victimized by female facility
staff (table 11). Among the estimated 2,730 adjudicated
youths who had been victimized, 92% were males reporting
sexual activity with female staff; an additional 2.5% were
males reporting sexual activity with both female and male
staff.  In comparison, 91% of all adjudicated youth held in
the sampled facilities were male. In 2008, 42% of staff in
juvenile facilities under state jurisdiction were female.
(Staff data for only sampled facilities were not available).

Physical force, threat of force, and other forms of pressure
and coercion by facility staff were reported by an estimated
1,150 youths. Among these victims, 14% reported a male staff
member as the perpetrator (including those victimized by both
male and female staff). 

Male staff members made up a smaller percentage of
perpetrators among youth reporting staff sexual misconduct
that did not involve any force. Among the estimated 1,710
youths who experienced staff sexual misconduct without force,
nearly 4% reported the involvement of a male staff member.

Data provided by youth who had been sexually victimized by
facility staff revealed that--

*An estimated 88% had been victimized more than once by the
staff; 27% had been victimized more than 10 times (table 12). 

*A third (33%) said they had been victimized by more than one
staff member.

*One in 7 (14%) reported they had experienced physical force
or threat of force, 11% had been offered favors or
protection, and 18% had been given drugs or alcohol to engage
in the sexual act or other sexual contact.

*Most youth victimized by staff (95%) said they had not been
physically injured. An estimated 2% reported 2 or more
serious injuries; fewer than 1% said they sought medical
attention (not shown in table).

*Nearly 80% of the victims said at least one incident had
occurred in a common area, such as a classroom, library,
kitchen, office, closet, or supply room. Half (51%) of the
victims said at least one incident had occurred in a shower
or bathroom; half (54%) also said they had been victimized by
staff in the youth's room or sleeping area.

*Reports of staff sexual misconduct were more common between
6 p.m. and midnight (59%) than any other time.

Methodology

The National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) was conducted
in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, by Westat
(Rockville, MD), under a cooperative agreement with the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Data collection was
conducted in 195 juvenile facilities between June 2008 and
April 2009.    

Interviewing juveniles in residential facilities on such
sensitive topics required extensive preparations with agency
and facility administrators prior to the interview. These
preparations ranged from methods to obtain consent,
procedures to file mandatory reports of child abuse or
neglect, arrangements for counseling in case a youth became
upset, and logistical support to actually carry out the
interviewing. The specific procedures that had to be
negotiated with state and local authorities were:

*Consent to interview minors--two options for consent were
available: in loco parentis consent provided by the state
agency acting as the guardian or active consent by
parents/guardians. Twenty states and the District of Columbia
provided consent in loco parentis. In 10 states either verbal
or written parent/guardian consent was permitted. Written
parent/guardian consent was required in 18 states. Two states
required a mixture of in loco parentis and written parental
consent.

*Mandatory reporting of abuse or neglect--all survey staff
who had direct contact with youths had to comply with state
and local reporting requirements when a youth made a verbal
statement suggesting abuse or neglect. Jurisdictions provided
contact information and instructions for submitting reports
to an agency outside of the facility (e.g., local Child
Protective Services). 

*Counseling services--jurisdictions were asked to identify
both facility-based and external resources for counseling
services in the event a youth would become emotionally upset
during the interview or make a specific request to the
interviewer for such services. 

The NSYC comprised two questionnaires-a survey of sexual
victimization and a survey of past drug and alcohol use and
abuse. Youth were randomly assigned one of the questionnaires
so that, at the time of the interview, the content of the
survey remained unknown to facility staff and the survey
interviewers. The interviews averaged about 30 minutes in
length and used automated collection methods. Youth
interacted with the computer-administered questionnaires
using a touch-screen and synchronized audio instructions
delivered through headphones. Youth could choose to take the
interview in either English or Spanish. Youth completed the
interview in private, with the interviewer remaining in the
room but in a position that did not offer a view of the
computer screen. Approximately 10,400 youth completed one of
the two NSYC questionnaires.

Sampling of facilities 

The universe for the survey was all adjudicated youth
residing in state operated facilities or large non-state
facilities, locally or privately operated. The universe was
restricted to facilities that house youth for at least 90
days. This restriction was imposed to allow sufficient time
to obtain parental consent.

A multistage stratified sample design was used. At the first
stage of selection, a total of 284 facilities was selected
from the over 500 eligible facilities in the United States.
Eligible juvenile facilities included state-owned or operated
juvenile facilities and non-state facilities with 105 or more
adjudicated youth. 

Selection of facilities was completed using the 2006 Census
of Juveniles in Residential Placement (CJRP), conducted by
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Based on a complete enumeration, 548 facilities were
determined to be eligible for selection. A small number of
facilities were later determined to be out-of-scope.
Facilities were out-of-scope if the sampled facility 1) had
closed, 2) was a non-state facility housing fewer than 105
youth, or 3) did not house youth for more than 90 days. The
facility sampling rates ranged from a low of about 1 in 10
for the smallest facilities to certainty among the largest
facilities. 

For sample selection purposes, a measure of size equal to the
number of adjudicated youth (according to the 2006 CJRP) was
assigned to each facility in the frame. Two hundred-and-one
facilities were included in the sample with certainty. These
certainty facilities were state facilities with at least 90
youth or non-state facilities with at least 105 youth. 

Next, one state facility was randomly selected from a
designated substratum within each of the 9 states that did
not contain a certainty facility. The designated substratum
consisted of the largest facilities in the state. Within each
of the designated substrata, one facility was selected with
probability proportionate to the size of facility. 

An additional 74 state facilities were selected for the study
from the remaining facilities. Facilities were assigned to
strata defined by gender of youths held in the facility,
percent of youths who were female, facility size, region, and
state. Within each stratum, between 2 and 5 facilities were
selected with probabilities proportionate to size of
facility.

In the interest of completing data collection activities by
April 2009, the size criterion for the non-state facilities
was increased to 150. This eliminated 32 facilities from the
original sample. 

Of the 252 selected juvenile facilities--

*26 were determined to be ineligible due to an average length
of stay of less than 90 days or some other constraint that
precluded obtaining consent of parent or guardian. 

*18 had closed.

*6 housed pre-adjudicated youth only or too few adjudicated
youth to permit interviewing.

*2 had merged with another participating facility.

*2 participated but yielded no usable interviews from the
sexual victimization survey.

Of the remaining 198 eligible juvenile facilities, 3
privately operated facilities refused to participate in the
survey:

Glen Mills School, Glen Mills, PA

Northwestern Academy, Coal Township, PA

Gulf Coast Trade Center, New Waverly, TX

Selection of youth

Rosters of adjudicated youth were provided by facilities
granting in loco parentis (ILP) 4 weeks prior to data
collection and by facilities requiring parental/guardian
consent (PGC) 8 weeks prior to data collection. All youth
were sampled in ILP facilities and in PGC facilities that had
240 or fewer youth on the roster. In PGC facilities that
exceeded 240 youth, an initial sample of 240 was selected.
Additionally, all females among those not selected were
included with certainty.
 
The initial sample was supplemented by youth who were
admitted to the facility between the 8th and 4th weeks prior
to data collection. In ILP facilities and PGC facilities with
at least 240 adjudicated youth, everyone was selected. In PGC
facilities with more than 240, incoming youth were selected
at the same rate as the initial sample.

Prior to the start of data collection, interviewing capacity
at each facility was assessed based on the number of
available days, interviewing rooms, and interviewers. In
facilities in which the NSYC team had the capacity to
complete all of the interviews, all youths for whom consent
had been given were selected. In other facilities, youth were
randomly sub-sampled so the number of youth did not exceed
interviewing capacity.

A total of 25,939 youth were selected. Among these
individuals, 7,175 left prior to the interviewing team
arriving at the facility. After restricting the sample to
those assigned to the sexual assault interview, 54% of the
youth responded to the interview. Approximately 33% of the
youth did not participate because parental/guardian consent
could not be obtained; 6% refused to complete the interview;
and 7% were non-respondents for other reasons (e.g., they did
not complete the entire interview, they were not at the
facility at the time of visit, the facility denied access, or
they were excluded due to extreme or inconsistent response
patterns). 

As a result of sampling and consent protocols, youth who
completed the NSYC were somewhat older and had committed more
serious offenses than other youth in residential placement.
Nearly twice as many youth in the NSYC were age 18 or older
(26%), compared to adjudicated and non-adjudicated youth who
had been enumerated in the 2006 CJRP (14%). Considerably more
youth in the NSYC had been placed because of a violent
offense (46%) than all youth in residential placement (34%). 

Weighting and non-response adjustments

The survey data were weighted to provide facility-level and
national-level estimates. To generate facility estimates, an
initial weight was assigned to each youth corresponding to
the inverse of the probability of selection within each
facility. A series of adjustments were applied to the initial
weight to compensate for non-response. These adjustments were
completed in three steps:

1. Adjustment cells were constructed based on the number of
locked doors the youth had to go through to leave the
facility, offense, race/Hispanic origin, age, gender, and the
number of days the youth had been in facility. 

2. An adjustment required a minimum non-response cell size of
10 responding youth. In many facilities, this resulted in no
non-response adjustment, as either the facility had too few
interviews (less than 20) to create multiple cells or the
differences between respondents and non-respondents were not
significant. In facilities where significant differences were
observed, 2 to 4 non-response cells were created.

3. After an initial non-response adjustment, the weights
within a facility were examined. If the highest weight was 4
times greater than the lowest weight in the facility, the
highest weights were trimmed and the difference in weighted
counts distributed to the remaining youth, so that after
trimming the high-to-low ratio in the final weight would be
equal to 4.

To generate national estimates, the facility weights were
adjusted to reflect each facility's probability of selection
into the sample and then were adjusted for facility
non-response. The steps in creating the national weight
adjustments were the same as those described for
facility-level weights.

Calculating facility-level response rates

Within each facility a base weight was created for each youth
in the sexual victimization survey by taking the inverse of
each youth's probability of selection. In most facilities
youth selection probabilities were the same. However, in some
sampled facilities (e.g. where females were oversampled and
where rosters contained duplicate records) selection
probabilities varied. 

An initial facility response rate was calculated by summing
the base weights for all youth completing the sexual
victimization survey and dividing it by the sum of the base
weights for all sampled youth (minus ineligible youth) in
each facility.

A final response rate was calculated to account for the
deletion of interviews containing extreme or inconsistent
responses. (See discussion on page 6.) This was achieved by
multiplying the initial facility response rate by an
adjustment ratio. In each facility this ratio represented the
sum of final weights for all interviewed youth excluding
those with extreme or inconsistent responses divided by the
sum of final weights for all interviewed youth including
those with extreme or inconsistent responses. This final
adjusted response rate was then multiplied by 100.

Calculations for Mt. Meigs Campus (Alabama) illustrate the
calculation of these weighted facility-level response rates.
The facility listed 278 youth on its roster. Of these listed,
193 were sub-sampled. Thirteen of the sampled youth were
roster errors (and were excluded from the sample). Of the
remaining 180 sampled youth, 32 were discharged prior to the
visit, leaving 132 sampled for the sexual victimization
survey and 16 for supplemental survey. Of the 132 eligible
youth, 121 completed the NSYC survey. After adjusting for the
probability of selection for each youth, the 121 youth who
completed the sexual victimization survey represented 208
youth (or 91.7% of the 227 eligible youth in the facility).
Three of the youth provided extreme or 3 or more inconsistent
responses and were excluded. After adjusting for the
probability of selection for each youth, a ratio adjustment
of.974 was applied to the initial response rate, resulting in
an overall facility response rate of 89.3% (.974 times.917
times 100%). 

Standard errors and confidence intervals

Survey estimates are subject to sampling error arising from
the fact that the estimates are based on a sample rather than
a complete enumeration. Within each facility, the estimated
sampling error varies by the size of the estimate, the number
of completed interviews, and the size of the facility.
Because of the relatively small samples within many of the
selected facilities, it is especially important to consider
the possibility of sampling error when interpreting the
survey results.

Estimates of the standard errors for selected measures of
sexual victimization are presented in tables that provide
national-level estimates. These estimates may be used to
construct confidence intervals around the survey estimates
(e.g., numbers, percents, and rates), as well as to test for
significant differences between the estimates. 

For example, the 95%-confidence interval around the percent
of male youth reporting sexual victimizations by another
youth is approximately 2.0% plus or minus 1.96 times 0.2% (or
1.6% to 2.4%). Based on similarly conducted samples, 95% of
the intervals would be expected to contain the true (but
unknown) percentage.

The standard errors may also be used to construct confidence
intervals around differences in the estimates. The
95%-confidence interval comparing the percent of male youths
(2.0%) and female youths (9.1%) reporting sexual
victimization may be calculated. The confidence interval
around the difference of 7.1% is approximately plus or minus
1.96 times 2.2% (the square root of the pooled variance
estimate, 4.9%). The pooled variance estimate is calculated
by taking the square root of the sum of each standard error
squared, e.g., the square root of (0.2)2 plus (2.2)2. Since
the interval (2.8% to 11.4%) does not include zero, the
difference between male youth and female youth is considered
statistically significant.

To express the possible variation due to sampling associated
with facility-level estimates, tables in this report provide
lower and upper bounds of the related 95%-confidence
intervals. Because many facility samples are small and the
estimates are close to 0%, confidence intervals were
constructed using an alternative method developed by Wilson.
Computationally, this method produces an asymmetrical
confidence interval around the facility estimates, in which
the lower bound is constrained to be greater than or equal to
0% and the upper bound is less than or equal to 100%. It also
provides confidence intervals for facilities in which the
survey estimates are zero (but other similarly conducted
surveys could yield non-zero estimates). 

Exposure period

For purposes of calculating comparative rates of sexual
victimization, the facility provided the most recent date of
admission to the current facility. If the date of admission
was at least 12 months prior to the date of the survey, youth
were asked questions related to their experiences during the
last 12 months. If the admission date was less than 12 months
prior to the interview, youth were asked about their
experiences since they arrived at the facility.

The average exposure period for sexual victimization among
sampled youth was 6.9 months in ILP facilities and 6.0 months
in PGC facilities. Overall, the average exposure period was
6.3 months. Ten of the 13 high rate facilities had longer
average exposure periods (ranging from 6.9 months to 10.6
months). Three of the 11 low rate facilities had average
exposure periods shorter than 6.3 months (not shown in
tables). 

Measuring sexual victimization

The NSYC relied on the reporting of direct experience of each
youth, rather than youth reporting on the experience of other
youth. The strategy was to first ask if the youth had engaged
in any type of sexual activity at the facility within the
last 12 months or since they entered the facility, if they
had been in the facility for less than 12 months. These
questions were not specific to the perpetrator or whether the
sexual activity was coerced. 

The initial series of questions differed by the age of the
youth. Youth ages 15 or older were administered questions
related to the touching of body parts in a sexual way,
involving oral, anal, or vaginal sex. Youth ages 14 or
younger, were asked less detailed questions about sexual
activity. Rather than referring to explicit body parts and
acts, the items had less explicit language (i.e., "private
parts"). This was done to avoid exposing younger respondents
to explicit sexual references. (See pages 20-21 for specific
survey items.)

Youth who reported sexual activity were then asked if the
activities occurred with other youth or with staff. They were
next asked questions about the presence and nature of
coercion (including use of physical force or threat of
physical force; other type of force or pressure; or return
for money, favors, protection, or other special treatment)
associated with the youth-on-youth activities. A separate but
identical set of questions was asked about coercion
associated with staff-on-youth activities. (See page 22 for
specific survey items.)

If the respondent did not report any sexual contact in the
initial screening items, the ACASI survey administered a
series of questions that asked if the youth had been coerced
to engage in sexual activity. If a youth answered
affirmatively, he/she was asked if the event occurred with
another youth or with a staff member. Follow-up questions,
comparable to the initial screener questions, were asked of
those who reported victimization.

The ACASI survey presented additional questions related to
both youth-on-youth and staff-on-youth sexual victimization.
These questions collected further information on the
characteristics of the victimization, such as time and
location, number, race/Hispanic origin, and gender of
perpetrators; injuries sustained and medical care received by
the youth as a result of the assault; and reporting of the
assault to authorities and action taken by them after the
assault.

The entire ACASI questionnaires (listed as National Survey of
Youth in Custody) are available on the BJS web site at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=321>
(last accessed December 22, 2009).

Definition of terms

Sexual victimization--includes any forced sexual activity
with another youth (nonconsensual  sexual acts and other
sexual contacts) and all sexual activity with facility staff 
(staff sexual  misconduct and staff sexual misconduct
excluding touching). 

Nonconsensual sexual acts--includes forced sexual acts with
another youth and all sexual acts with facility staff
involving contact with the penis and the vagina or penis and
the anus; contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or
anus; penetration of the anal or vaginal opening of another
person by a hand, finger, or other object; and rubbing of
another person's penis or vagina by a hand. 

Other sexual contacts only--includes kissing on the lips or
other part of the body, looking at private body parts, being
shown something sexual like pictures or a movie, and engaging
in some other sexual act that did not involve touching. 

Staff sexual misconduct--includes all sexual activity with
facility staff including contact with the penis and the
vagina or the penis and the anus; contact between the mouth
and the penis, vagina, or anus; penetration of the anal or
vaginal opening of another person by a hand, finger, or other
object; rubbing of another person's penis or vagina by a
hand; kissing on the lips or other part of the body; looking
at private body parts; being shown something sexual like
pictures or a movie; and engaging in some other sexual act
that did not involve touching. 

Staff sexual misconduct excluding touching--includes sexual
activity with facility staff involving contact with the penis
and the vagina or the penis and the anus; contact between the
mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus; penetration of the anal
or vaginal opening of another person by a hand, finger, or
other object; and rubbing of another person's penis or vagina
by a hand. 

Forced sexual activity--includes sexual activity between
youth and facility staff as a result of physical force or
threat of physical force; force or pressure of some other
type (e.g. threatening with harm, threatening to get the
youth in trouble, pressuring the youth, or forcing or
pressuring in some other way); and in return for money,
favors, protection, or other special treatment. 

Survey items measuring sexual activity within the facility
during the past 12 months or since entering the facility if
less 12 months

Males, ages 15 and older

C11. During the past 12 months, have you rubbed another
person's penis with your hand or has someone rubbed your
penis with their hand? 

C12. During the past 12 months, have you rubbed another
person's vagina with your hand? 

C13. During the past 12 months, have you put your mouth on
another person's penis or has someone put their mouth on your
penis? 

C14. During the past 12 months, have you put your mouth on
someone's vagina? 

C15. During the past 12 months, have you put your penis,
finger, or something else inside someone else's rear end or
has someone put their penis, finger, or something else inside
your rear end? 

C16. During the past 12 months, have you put your penis,
finger, or something else inside someone's vagina?

C17. During the past 12 months, have you had any other kind
of sexual contact with someone at this facility?

C17a.What kind of sexual contact was that? CHECK ALL THAT
APPLY.

Kissing on the lips          . . ....1

Kissing other parts of the body   .     ...2

Looking at private parts    . ..  . . ....3

Showing something sexual, like pictures or a
movie  .              . ....4

Something else that did not involve touching  . 5

Something else that did involve touching   .....6

Females, ages 15 and older

C18. During the past 12 months, have you rubbed another
person's penis with your hand? 

C19. During the past 12 months, have you rubbed someone
else's vagina with your hand or has someone else rubbed your
vagina with their hand? 

C20. During the past 12 months, have you put your mouth on
another person's penis? 

C21. During the past 12 months, have you put your mouth on
someone else's vagina, or has someone put their mouth on your
vagina? 

C22. During the past 12 months, have you put your finger or
something else inside someone else's rear end or has someone
put their penis, finger, or something else inside your rear
end? 

C23. During the past 12 months, have you put your finger or
something else inside someone else's vagina or has someone
put their penis, finger, or something else inside your
vagina?

C24. During the past 12 months, have you had any other kind
of sexual contact with someone at this facility?

C24a.What kind of sexual contact was that? CHECK ALL THAT
APPLY.

Kissing on the lips          . .. .1

Kissing other parts of the body   .     .2

Looking at private parts    . .  . .. . 3

Showing something sexual, like pictures or a
movie  .              .. .4

Something else that did not involve touching  ...5

Something else that did involve touching   ..6

Survey items measuring sexual activity within the facility
during the past 12 months or since entering the facility if
less 12 months (cont.)

All youth ages 14 or younger

C1. The next questions are about sexual contacts that happen
in this facility.
 
Sexual contacts are when someone touches your private parts
or you touch someone else's private parts in a sexual way. 

By private parts, we mean any part of the body that would   
be covered by a bathing suit.

C11. During the past 12 months, have you rubbed anyone's
private parts with your hand or has anyone rubbed your
private parts with their hand?

C12. During the past 12 months, have you put your mouth on
anyone's private parts or has anyone put their mouth on your
private parts?

C13. During the past 12 months, have you put any part of your
body inside anyone else's private parts? 

C13a. During the past 12 months, has anyone put part of their
body inside your private parts? 

C14. During the past 12 months, have you had any other kind
of sexual contact with someone at this facility?

C14a.What kind of sexual contact was that? CHECK ALL THAT
APPLY.

Kissing on the lips          . . ..1

Kissing other parts of the body   .    ......2

Looking at private parts    . ..  .  .. 3

Showing something sexual, like pictures or a
movie  .              . ..4

Something else that did not involve touching  . .5

Something else that did involve touching  . .6

Survey items measuring with whom the sexual activity occurred

C25. You've said that since you have been at this facility,
you [list of specific activities]

C26. Did (this/any of these) happen with a youth at this
facility?

C27. During the past 12 months, which ones happened with a
youth at this facility? [list of specific activities]

C28. You've said that since you have been at this facility,
you [list of specific activities]

Did (this/any of these) happen with a member of the facility
staff?

C30. During the past 12 months, which ones happened with a
youth at this facility? [list of specific activities]

Survey items measuring pressure or nature of coercion

For incidents with youth

C31. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen because a youth at this facility used physical force
or threat of physical force?

C34. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen because a youth at this facility forced or pressured
you in some other way to do it? 

C34a. How were you forced or pressured in some other way?
CHECK ALL THAT APPLY.


Another youth threatened you with harm  ..  ..1

Another youth threatened to get you in trouble with other
youth                 . ... . . .2

Another youth threatened to get you trouble with the staff
                 ..  .. . . . .3

Another youth kept asking you to do it    . . 4

Another youth forced or pressured you in some other way
                 . ..............5

C36. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen with a youth at this facility in return for money,
favors, protection, or other special treatment?

For incidents with staff

C45. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen because a staff member used physical force or threat
of physical force?

C48. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen because a staff member forced or pressured you in some
other way to do it?

C48a. How were you forced or pressured in some other way?
CHECK ALL THAT APPLY.

A staff member threatened you with harm  . . ..1

A staff member threatened to get you in trouble with other
youth   ..              2

A staff member threatened to get you trouble with the
staff..                 ....  3

A staff member kept asking you to do it    .. . 4

A staff member forced or pressured you in some other way
    .             .  ...5

C50. During the past 12 months, did (this/any of these) ever
happen with a staff member in return for money, favors,
protection, or other special treatment?

Items checked for extreme and inconsistent response patterns 

Items unrelated to reports of sexual victimization

1. Reported one of the following:

*being admitted to the facility before turning 8 years old;

*being admitted to the facility in the future;

*being 8 feet tall or taller;

*weighing 500 pounds or more; or

*having a Body Mass Index of either less than 15 or 50 or
greater.

2. Youth "strongly agreed" with the statement "that some of
the questions about sexual activity were hard to understand".

3. Youth reported being sexual assaulted prior to admission
to the facility but when asked "how many times" reported "0".

4. Youth reported being physically assaulted by staff more
than 3 times per day.

5. Youth reported being physically assaulted by youth more
than 3 times per day.

6. Youth reported being physically assaulted by staff but
when asked "how many times" responded with "0".

7. Youth reported being physically assaulted by youth but
when asked "how many times" responded with "0".

8. Youth reported being injured by staff but when asked "how
many times" responded with "0".

9. Youth reported being injured by youth but when asked "how
many times" responded with "0".

Items related to reports of sexual victimization

10. Youth reported sexual contact with a staff member, but
the type of activity was not consistent with the gender of
the perpetrator reported during the interview.

11. Youth reported sexual assault by another youth, but the
type of activity was not consistent with the gender of the
perpetrator reported during the interview.

12. Reports of injury resulting from sexual assault by staff
were not consistently reported in different sections of the
questionnaire.

13. Reports of injury resulting from sexual assault by youth
were not consistently reported in different sections of the
questionnaire.

14. Responses about reporting a sexual assault by staff to
the facility administrators were not consistent across
different questions of the questionnaire.

15. Responses about reporting a sexual assault by a youth to
the facility administrators were not consistent across
different questions of the questionnaire.

16. Youth reported forced sexual contact by staff in one
section but did not report specific types of coercion in
another section of the questionnaire.

17. Youth reported forced sexual contact by youth in one
section but did not report specific types of coercion in
another section of the questionnaire.

18. Youth reported having sexual contact with staff but did
not provide the specific type of activity that occurred.

19. Youth reported having forced sexual contact with a youth
but did not provide the specific type of activity that
occurred.

20. Youth did not provide details about a report of injury
resulting from forced sexual contact with staff.

21. Youth did not provide details about a report of injury
resulting from forced sexual contact with youth.

22. Youth reported sexual penetration by staff in one section
of the questionnaire but not in another section.

23. Youth reported sexual penetration by another youth in one
section of the questionnaire but not in another section.

24. Youth reported having sexual contact with staff but when
asked "how many times" responded with "0".

25. Youth reported having sexual contact with a youth but
when asked "how many times" responded with "0".

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.                                          

This Special Report was written by Allen J. Beck, Paige M.
Harrison, and Paul Guerino, BJS Statisticians. Paige M.
Harrison and Paul Guerino verified the report.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina
Dorsey produced the report and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

Westat (Rockville, MD), under a co-operative agreement and in
collaboration with BJS staff, designed the survey, developed
the questionnaires, coordinated logistical arrangements
related to interviewing, collected and processed the data,
and assisted in table development. The project team included
David Cantor and Andrea Sedlak, Co-Principal Investigators;
Tim Smith and John Hartge, Co-Project Directors; Gary
Shapiro, Senior Sampling Statistician; Greg Norman, Sampling
Statistician; Alfred Bishop, Computer Systems;  Debbie
Alexander, Director of Recruitment/Consent Operations; Sherry
Sanborne, Field Director; and an extensive project team of
researchers, analysts, and programmers. 

January 2010, NCJ 228416

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2113.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation . Partnerships . Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
                         
1/5/2009/ JER 9:12 am
