U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003
--------------------------------------------------------------
Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 2007
June 2008, NCJ 221946
--------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svljri07.htm

--------------------------------------------------------------

By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D.
and Paige M. Harrison,
BJS Statisticians

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79)
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out
a comprehensive statistical review and analysis of the
incidence and effects of prison rape for each calendar year.
This report fulfills the requirement under Sec.
4(c)(2)(B)(ii) of the Act to provide a list of local jails
according to the prevalence of sexual victimization.

In December 2007, BJS published Sexual Victimization in State
and Federal Prison Reported by Inmates, 2007 (NCJ 219414),
which details the findings from 23,398 inmates held in 146
sampled prisons in the National Inmate Survey (NIS). This
report presents the findings for the 282 local jails in the
NIS sample. The survey on sexual victimization, conducted by
RTI International (Research Triangle Park, NC), was
administered to 40,419 jail inmates between April and
December 2007. (See Methodology for sample description.)

The NIS is part of the National Prison Rape Statistical
Program, which collects administrative records of reported
sexual violence as well as collecting allegations of sexual
violence directly from victims through surveys of current and
former inmates. Administrative records have been collected
annually since 2004. Data collections from former inmates
under active supervision and youth held in state and locally
operated juvenile facilities are underway. 

The 2007 NIS survey consisted of an audio computer-assisted
self interview (ACASI) in which inmates, using a
touch-screen, interacted with a computer-assisted
questionnaire and followed audio instructions delivered via
headphones. A small number of jail inmates (223) completed a
short paper form. These were primarily inmates housed in
administrative or disciplinary segregation or considered too
violent to be interviewed.

The NIS is a self-administered survey designed to encourage
reporting by providing anonymity to respondents.
Computer-assisted technologies provide uniform conditions
under which inmates complete the survey. In each facility,
respondents are randomly selected. Before the interview,
inmates are informed verbally and in writing that
participation is voluntary and that all information will be
held in confidence. Overall, two-thirds (67%) of eligible
sampled jail inmates participated in the survey. 

To provide reliable facility-level estimates of sexual
violence, the NIS limited reporting of sexual victimization
to incidents that occurred at the sampled jail facilities
during the 6 months prior to the date of the interview.
Inmates who had served less than 6 months were asked about
their experiences since admission to the facility.

The NIS collects only allegations of sexual victimization.
Because participation in the survey is anonymous and reports
are confidential, the NIS does not permit any follow-up
investigation or substantiation through review of official
records. Some allegations in the NIS may be untrue. At the
same time, some inmates may remain silent about sexual
victimization experienced in the facility, despite efforts of
survey staff to assure inmates that their survey responses
would be kept confidential. Although the effects may be
offsetting, the relative extent of underreporting and false
reporting in the NIS is unknown. 
------------------------------------------------------------
Detailed information is available in appendix tables 
in the online version of this report on the BJS Website at 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/svljri07.pdf>.
-------------------------------------------------------------

3.2% of jail inmates reported experiencing one or more
incidents of sexual victimization

Among the 40,419 jail inmates participating in the 2007
survey, 1,330 reported experiencing one or more incidents of
sexual victimization. Because the NIS is a sample survey,
weights were applied for sampled facilities and inmates
within facilities to produce national-level and
facility-level estimates. The estimated number of local jail
inmates experiencing sexual violence totaled 24,700 (or 3.2%
of all jail inmates, nationwide).

About 1.6% of inmates (12,100, nationwide) reported an
incident involving another inmate, and 2.0% (15,200) reported
an incident involving staff. Some inmates (0.4%) said they
had been sexually victimized by both other inmates and staff
(table 1).

The NIS screened for specific sexual activities, then asked 
respondents if they were forced or pressured to engage in 
these activities by another inmate or staff. (See appendices 
7 through 9 for specific survey questions.) Reports of 
inmate-on-inmate sexual violence were classified as either 
nonconsensual sexual acts or abusive sexual contacts. Approximately 
0.7% of jail inmates (5,200)said they had nonconsensual sex with 
another inmate, including giving or receiving sexual gratification, 
and oral, anal, or vaginal penetration. An additional 0.9% of jail
inmates (6,900) said they had experienced one or more abusive
sexual contacts only, that is, unwanted touching of specific
body parts in a sexual way by another inmate. 

An estimated 1.3% of all inmates (10,400) reported that they
had sex or sexual contact unwillingly with staff as a result
of physical force, pressure, or offers of special favors or
privileges. An estimated 1.1% of all inmates (8,400) reported
they willingly had sex or sexual contact with staff. Regardless 
of whether an inmate reported being willing or unwilling, any
sexual contact between jail inmates and staff is illegal;
however, the difference may be informative when addressing
issues of staff training, prevention, and 
follow-up. 

18 jails had prevalence rates of at least twice the national
average of 3.2%

Of the 282 jail facilities in the 2007 NIS, 18 had an overall
victimization rate of at least twice the national average of
3.2% (table 2). The overall victimization rate is a measure
of prevalence that includes all experiences, regardless of
the level of coercion and type of sexual activity. 

Statistically, the NIS is unable to identify the facility
with the highest prevalence rate. Because the estimates are
based on a sample of inmates rather than a complete
enumeration, the estimates are subject to sampling error. The
precision of each facility estimate can be calculated based
on the estimated standard error. For example, the
victimization rate of 13.4% recorded for the Torrance County
Detention Facility (New Mexico) has a precision of plus or
minus 8.0% with a 95% confidence level. This precision, based
on the standard error of 4.1% multiplied by 1.96, indicates a
95% confidence that the true prevalence rate in the Torrance
County Detention Facility is between 5.4% and 21.4%.

Within each facility, the estimated standard error varies 
by the size of the estimate, the number of completed
interviews, and the size of the facility. Although the
sampling procedures are designed to produce the same level of 
precision within all facilities (a standard error of 1.75%),
the actual standard errors varied depending on the response
rate and characteristics of the responding inmates. (See
Methodology for further discussion of standard errors.)

As a consequence of sampling error, the NIS cannot provide an
exact ranking for all facilities as required under the Prison
Rape Elimination Act. However, detailed tabulations of the
survey results are presented by facility and state in
appendix tables 1 through 6.***Facility level information and 
estimates are provided for all sampled jails in appendix 
tables 1 and 2. Appendix tables 3 through 6 exclude those 
jails with no reported incidents of sexual victimization and 
rates not statistically different from zero. Facility 
prevalence rates vary*** by level and type of victimization, 
and observed differences between facilities will not always be 
statistically significant. Consequently, these measures cannot 
be used to reliably rank facilities from 1 (the highest) to 282 
(the lowest). 

Unlike the results of the 2007 NIS in state and federal
prisons, the NIS in local jails does not provide a
statistical basis for identifying a small group of facilities
with the highest rates of sexual victimization. Based on the
large confidence interval around the Torrance County
Detention Facility (13.4% plus or minus 8.0%), 38 other
facilities would be included in the interval, but these
facilities also have estimated rates and confidence
intervals.
 
By constructing 95% confidence intervals around the
differences between facility estimates, we can determine the
number of facilities with statistically similar rates of
victimization. For example, the confidence interval around
the observed difference between the Torrance County Detention
Facility and the Polk County Jail (Iowa) is 8.6% plus or
minus 9.5%. Since the interval includes zero, these
facilities are considered to be statistically similar.
Overall, 53 jail facilities are statistically similar to the
Torrance County Detention Facility. 

Facilities with rates lower than the 4.8% in the Polk County
Jail are statistically different from Torrance County.
Terrebonne Parish Jail (Louisiana) had the next highest rate,
4.7%. Since the 95% confidence interval around the observed
difference with Torrance County (8.7% plus or minus 8.4%)
does not include zero, the Terrebonne Parish Jail is
considered statistically different. (See Methodology for
calculation of confidence intervals comparing facilities.)

Nearly a third of all facilities had rates indistinguishable
from zero 

Eighteen jail facilities had no reported incidents of sexual
victimization (table 3). Cameron County Jail (Texas) was the
largest jail (1,368 inmates) with no reported incidents,
followed by Northwest Ohio Regional Correctional Center
(Ohio), with 662 inmates, and Orange County Work Release
Center (Florida), with 300 inmates.

An additional 69 facilities had rates that were not
statistically different from zero at the 95% confidence
level. Thirty-seven of these facilities had rates below 1.5%
(not shown), and 21 were large facilities with more than
1,000 inmates in custody. The Bexar County Adult Detention
Center (Texas), with 4,179 inmates in custody, was the
largest facility surveyed that had a rate of sexual
victimization indistinguishable from zero (1.6% plus or minus
1.8%).

Identification of the facilities with the highest rates of
sexual victimization depends on non-statistical judgments

Of the 18 facilities that had the highest overall prevalence
rates of sexual victimization, 3 facilities were consistently
high on measures restricted to the most serious forms of
sexual victimization (table 4). The Torrance County Detention
Facility (New Mexico) had the highest rate--10.1% when
sexual victimization excluded willing activity with staff and
8.9% when victimization excluded abusive sexual contacts
(allegations of touching only). The Southeastern Ohio
Regional Jail and the Bernalillo County Metropolitan
Detention Center (New Mexico) were also among the top five
facilities on each of these more serious measures of sexual
victimization. 

Of the 282 sampled facilities, 19 jails had statistically
significant rates of injury related to sexual victimization
(table 5). Overall, 0.6% of all jail inmates reported an
injury related to sexual victimization. The Riverside County
Robert Presley Detention Center (California) had the highest
observed rate with 4.6% of inmates reporting an injury,
followed by Garfield County Jail (Colorado) with 4.0%, and
San Diego County George F. Bailey Detention Facility
(California) with 3.6%.
 
The Brevard County Detention Center (Florida), with an injury
rate of 3.1%, and the Southeastern Ohio Regional Jail (Ohio),
with an injury rate of 2.5%, were also among the 5 facilities
recording the highest overall rates of sexual victimization
and the highest rates of nonconsensual sexual activity.

Most victims of sexual violence in jails did not report an
injury. Nationwide, approximately 20% of the estimated 24,700
victims said they had been injured as a result of the sexual
victimization. The majority of injured victims reported minor
injuries, such as bruises, cuts, or scratches (16%). Most
injured victims (85%) also reported at least one more serious
injury. Among all victims, 8% reported being knocked
unconscious, 6% reported anal or rectal tearing, 6% internal
injuries, 3% broken bones, and 2% knife or stab wounds.

Rates of sexual victimization were unrelated to basic
facility characteristics

Data collected in the 2005 Census of Jail Inmates and the
2006 Census of Jail Facilities were analyzed in conjunction
with the NIS data to determine whether any facility
characteristics were associated with higher rates of sexual
victimization (table 6). An initial examination of selected
facility characteristics revealed few measurable differences
at the 95% level of statistical confidence.

*Inmates in long-term facilities (those with the authority to
house inmates convicted of felonies with sentences of more
than a year) had an overall sexual victimization rate (3.4%)
that was similar to the rates reported by inmates in
short-term facilities (3.5%) and in detention-only facilities
(3.0%).

*Victimization rates in female-only facilities were the
highest (5.0%), largely due to incidents of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization (3.9%). Women in coed facilities had
similar rates (5.0%). Therefore, the rate appears to reflect
higher overall rates reported by women, regardless of the
type of facility (not shown in a table).

*Sexual victimization was reported at slightly lower levels
(2.1%) in small facilities (those holding fewer than 100
inmates). Because of the small number of inmates in these
facilities, comparisons with other facilities were not
statistically significant.

*Though crowding is often assumed to be linked to prison
violence, the highest rates of sexual victimization (3.7%)
were reported in facilities that were the least crowded
(operating at less than 90% of capacity). As with other
comparisons, these differences were not statistically
significant.

*Inmates in facilities that had opened or been renovated in
the last 5 years reported lower rates of sexual victimization
(3.2%) than inmates in other facilities. Again, differences
in these rates were not statistically significant.
 
Rates of sexual victimization were more strongly related to
inmate characteristics than to facility characteristics

Rates of sexual assault among inmates varied across
demographic categories:

*Female inmates were more likely than male inmates to report a
sexual victimization (table 7). An estimated 5.1% of female
inmates, compared to 2.9% of male inmates, said they had
experienced one or more incidents of sexual victimization.
 
*Persons of two or more races reported higher rates of sexual
assault in jails (4.2%), compared to white (2.9%), black
(3.2%), and Hispanic inmates (3.2%).

*About 4.6% of inmates ages 18 to 24 reported being sexually
assaulted, compared to 2.4% of inmates age 25 and older.
Inmates with a college education reported higher rates of
sexual assault (4.6%) than inmates with less than a high
school degree (2.8%).

The largest differences in sexual victimization rates were
found among inmates based on their sexual preference and past
sexual experiences:

*Inmates with a sexual orientation other than heterosexual
reported significantly higher rates of sexual victimization.
An estimated 2.7% of heterosexual inmates alleged an
incident, compared to 18.5% of homosexual inmates, and 9.8%
of bisexual inmates or inmates indicating "other" as an
orientation.

*Inmates with 21 or more sexual partners prior to admission
reported the highest rates of victimization (4.1%); inmates
with 1 or no prior sexual partners reported the lowest rates 
(2.4%).

*Inmates who had experienced a prior sexual assault were about
6 times more likely to report a sexual victimization in jail
(11.8%), compared to those with no sexual assault history
(1.9%). 

*Among inmates who reported having been sexually assaulted at
another prison or jail in the past, a third reported having
been sexually victimized at the current facility.

Inmate-on-inmate victimization occurred most often in the
victim's cell; staff-on-inmate victimization occurred in a
closet, office, or other locked room

Circumstances varied between inmate-on-inmate and
staff-on-inmate incidents. An estimated 48% of
inmate-on-inmate incidents occurred between 6 p.m. and
midnight, while 47% of staff-on-inmate incidents occurred
from midnight to 6 a.m. (table 8). Over half of
inmate-on-inmate victimizations took place in the victim's
cell or room (56%), while a closet, office, or other locked
room was the most common location for staff-on-inmate
victimizations (47%).

Inmate-on-inmate sexual assault victims most often reported
being threatened with harm or a weapon (44%) or "persuaded or
talked into it" (41%). Staff-on-inmate sexual assault victims
were most often "given a bribe or blackmailed" (52%).
Two-thirds (67%) of inmate-on-inmate incidents involved one
perpetrator, compared to 80% of staff-on-inmate incidents.

About half of the victims of inmate-on-inmate sexual assault
said the most serious incidents (nonconsensual sexual acts)
had occurred only once. One in 7 victims said they had been a
victim of a nonconsensual sexual act 
11 times or more. Among victims of staff-on-inmate sexual
misconduct, 34% said they had unwilling sexual contact  once;
15% reported 11 times or more.

One in 4 victims of an inmate-on-inmate assault told someone
else within or outside the facility about the incident; about
1 in 7 victims of staff-on-inmate incidents said they
reported the incident to someone.

Nearly 62% of all reported incidents of staff sexual
misconduct involved female staff with male inmates; 8%
involved male staff with female inmates. Female staff were
involved in 48% of incidents reported by male inmates who
said they were unwilling and in 79% of incidents with male
inmates who said they were willing. In an effort to better
understand the allegations of staff sexual misconduct, the
2008 NIS will include questions to determine how often sexual
contact reported as unwilling occurred in the course of pat
downs or strip searches.
 
Methodology 

The National Inmate Survey (NIS) was conducted in 282 local
jails between April and December 2007, by RTI International
under a cooperative agreement with the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS). The NIS comprised two questionnaires--a
survey of sexual victimization and a survey of past drug and
alcohol use and abuse. Inmates were randomly assigned one of
the questionnaires so that, at the time of the interview, the
content of the survey remained unknown to facility staff and
the survey interviewers.
 
The interviews, which averaged 26 minutes in length, used
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) and audio
computer-assisted self interviewing (ACASI) collection
methods. For approximately the first five minutes, survey
interviewers conducted a personal interview using CAPI to
obtain background data, date of admission, conviction status,
and current offense. For the remainder of the interview,
respondents interacted with a computer-administered
questionnaire using a touch-screen and synchronized audio
instructions delivered through headphones. Respondents
completed the ACASI portion of the interview in private, with
the interviewer either leaving the room or moving away from
the computer.

A shorter paper questionnaire was available for inmates who
were unable to come to the private interviewing room. The
paper form was completed by 223 inmates (0.6% of all sexual
violence interviews), primarily those housed in
administrative or disciplinary segregation or considered too
violent to be interviewed.

Before the interview, inmates were informed verbally and in
writing that participation was voluntary and that all
information provided would be held in confidence. Interviews
were conducted in English (94%) or Spanish (6%).
 
Selection of local jail facilities

A sample of 303 local jails was drawn to produce a 10% sample
of the 3,002 local jail facilities identified in the 2005
Census of Jail Inmates. The 2005 census was a complete
enumeration of all jail jurisdictions, including all publicly
operated and privately operated facilities under contract to
local jail authorities. The 2007 NIS was restricted to jails
that had more than five inmates on June 30, 2005. Based on
estimates from the 2007 Annual Survey of Jails, these jails
held an estimated 772,800 inmates age 18 or older on June 29,
2007.

Local jail facilities were systematically sampled to ensure
that at least one jail was selected in each state, except in
Alaska (with 14 facilities operated by local municipalities)
and in Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and
Vermont, in which there were no jails. In these states,
facilities with jail functions were state-operated and were
included in the 2007 NIS prison collection. 

All jail facilities were selected in a three-step process.
First, jails on the sampling frame were sorted by region and
state. Jails in six states were determined to lack a
sufficient total number of inmates statewide to meet the one
facility-per-state requirement. These facilities were grouped
to form separate strata. One facility from each stratum was
selected with probability proportionate to size. Overall, six
jails in these small states were selected.

Second, 294 jails in the remaining 44 large states and the
District of Columbia were selected. Thirty-two were selected
with certainty, in that their large population yielded a
probability of selection equal to 1.0. After ordering the
remaining facilities by region and state, 262 facilities were
selected based on their size relative to the total number of
inmates in all noncertainty facilities.

Third, two of the selected jails were determined to be
multi-facility jail jurisdictions (New York City and Cook
County, IL). Initial size measures for these jurisdictions
included all facilities. As a result, jail facilities in
these jurisdictions were enumerated and then sampled three in
New York City and two in Cook County with probabilities
proportionate to the number of inmates in the facility
relative to the total reported for the jurisdiction.

Of the 303 selected jails, 21 facilities were excluded from
the survey (table 9). Five facilities refused to participate
in the survey. Eight facilities were determined to be
ineligible, because more than 90% of inmates in each were
pre-arraigned or held for Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) or the U.S. Marshals Service or because the facility
was a community-based facility. (The 2008 NIS will include
all inmates held for ICE and U.S. Marshals Service.) Eight
facilities were unable to participate due to lack of space or
staffing or because the jail was being renovated. All expect
to be included in the 2008 NIS. All other selected jails
participated fully in the survey.

Selection of inmates

The number of inmates sampled in each facility varied based
on 5 criteria:

*an expected prevalence rate of sexual victimization of 4%

*a desired level of precision based on a standard error of
1.75%

*a projected 70% response rate among selected inmates

*a 10% chance among participating inmates of not receiving the
sexual victimization questionnaire

*a pre-arraignment adjustment factor equal to 1 in facilities
where the status was known for all inmates, and less than 1
in facilities where only the overall proportion of
prearraigned was known.

An initial roster of inmates was obtained in the week prior
to the start of interviewing at each facility. Inmates under
age 18 and inmates who had not been arraigned were deleted
from the roster. Each eligible inmate was assigned a random
number and sorted in ascending order. Inmates were selected
from the list up to the expected number of inmates determined
by the sampling criteria.
 
Due to the dynamic nature of jail populations, a second
roster of inmates was obtained on the first day of data
collection. Eligible inmates on the second roster who were
not on the initial roster were identified. These inmates had
either been arraigned since the initial roster was created or
were newly admitted to the facility and arraigned. A random
sample of these new inmates was selected using the same
probability of selection derived from the first roster.

A total of 74,713 inmates were selected. (See appendix table
1 for the number of inmates sampled in each facility.) After
selection, an additional 7,314 ineligible inmates were
excluded   6,549 were transferred to another facility before
interviewing began, 676 were mentally or physically unable to
be interviewed, and 89 were under age 18.

Overall, 45,414 inmates participated in the survey, yielding
a response rate of 67%. Approximately 90% of the
participating inmates (40,419) received the sexual assault
survey. Of all selected inmates, 18% refused to participate
in the survey; 4% were not available to be interviewed (e.g.,
in court, in medical segregation, determined by the facility
to be too violent to be interviewed, or restricted from
participation by another legal jurisdiction); and 11% were
not interviewed due to survey logistics (e.g., language
barriers and transfers to another facility after interviewing
began).

Weighting and non-response adjustments

Responses from sampled interviewed inmates were weighted to
provide national-level and facility-level estimates. Each
interviewed inmate was assigned an initial weight
corresponding to the inverse of the probability of selection
within each sampled facility. A series of adjustment factors
were applied to the initial weight to minimize potential bias
due to non-response and to provide national estimates.

Bias occurs when the estimated prevalence is different from
the actual prevalence for a given facility. In each facility,
bias could result if the random sample of inmates did not
accurately represent the facility population. Bias could also
result if the non-respondents were different from the
respondents. Post-stratification and non-response adjustments
were made to the data to compensate for these two
possibilities. These adjustments included:

*calibration of the weights of the responding inmates within
each facility so that the estimates accurately reflected the
facility's entire population in terms of known demographic
characteristics. (These characteristics included
distributions by inmate age, gender, race, date of admission,
and sentence length.) This adjustment ensures that the
estimates accurately reflect the entire population of the
facility and not just the inmates who were randomly sampled.

*calibration of the weights so that the weight from a
non-responding inmate is assigned to a responding inmate with
similar demographic characteristics. This adjustment ensures
that the estimates accurately reflect the full sample, rather
than only the inmates who responded.

For each inmate, these adjustments were based on a
generalized exponential model, developed by Folsom and Singh,
and applied to the sexual assault survey respondents.
***2R.E. Folsom, Jr., and A.C. Singh, (2002), "The Generalized
Exponential Model for Sampling Weight Calibration for Extreme
Values, Nonresponse, and Poststratification," Proceedings of
the American Statistical Association, Section on Survey
Research Methods, 598-603.***

A final ratio adjustment to each inmate weight was made to
provide national-level estimates for the total number of
inmates held in jails with an average daily population of
more than six inmates at midyear 2007. These ratios
represented the estimated number of inmates by gender in the
survey estimates and accuracy of the 2007 Annual Survey of
Jails divided by the number of inmates by gender in the 2007
NIS after calibration for sampling and non-response.

Survey estimates and accuracy

Survey estimates are subject to sampling error arising from
the fact that the estimates are based on a sample rather than
a complete enumeration. Within each facility, the estimated
sampling error varies by the size of the estimate, the number
of completed interviews, and the size of the facility.

Estimates of the standard errors for selected measures of
sexual victimization are presented in tables 10 and 11 and in
appendix tables 2 through 5.

These standard errors may be used to construct confidence
intervals around survey estimates (that is, numbers,
percents, and rates), as well as around differences in these
estimates.

For example, the 95% confidence interval around the percent
of inmates reporting sexual victimization in the Torrance
County Detention Facility (New Mexico) is approximately 13.4%
plus or minus 1.96 times 4.1% (or 5.4% to 21.4%). Based on
similarly constructed samples, 95% of the intervals would be
expected to contain the true (but unknown) percentage.

The standard errors may also be used to construct confidence
intervals around differences between facility estimates. For
example, the 95% confidence interval comparing the percent of
inmates reporting sexual victimization in the Riverside
County Robert Presley Detention Center (California), 6.4%,
with the Torrance County Detention Facility (New Mexico),
13.4%, may be calculated. The confidence interval around the
difference of 7.0% is approximately 1.96 times 4.7% (the
square root of the pooled variance estimate, 21.7%). The
pooled variance estimate is calculated by taking the square
root of the sum of each standard error squared, i.e., the
square root of (2.22) plus (4.12). Since the interval (-2.2%
to 16.2%) contains zero, the difference between the Riverside
County facility and the Torrance County facility is not
statistically significant.

Exposure period

For purposes of calculating comparative rates of sexual
victimization, respondents were asked to provide the most
recent date of admission to the current facility. If the date
of admission was at least 6 months prior to the date of the
interview, inmates were asked questions related to their
experiences during the past 6 months. If the admission date
was less than 6 months prior to the interview, inmates were
asked about their experiences since they had arrived at the
facility. 

Overall, the average exposure period for sexual victimization
among sampled jail inmates was 2.6 months. Among sampled
inmates, approximately 20% had been in jail for 2 weeks or
less; 15% between 2 weeks and a month; 17% between 1 and 2
months; 30% between 2 and 6 months; and 18% more than 6
months. 

Measuring sexual victimization

The survey of sexual victimization relied on the reporting of
the direct experience of each inmate, rather than on the
reporting on the experience of other inmates. Questions 
asked related to inmate-on-inmate sexual activity were asked
separately from questions related to staff sexual misconduct.
(For specific survey questions see appendices 7 and 8.) 

The ACASI survey began with a series of questions that
screened for specific sexual activities, without restriction,
including both wanted and unwanted sex or sexual contacts
with other inmates. As a means to fully measure all sexual
activities, questions related to the touching of body parts
in a sexual way were followed by questions related to
explicit giving or receiving of sexual gratification and
questions related to acts involving oral, anal, or vaginal
sex. The nature of coercion (including use of physical force,
pressure, or other forms of coercion) was measured for each
type of reported sexual activity. 

ACASI survey items related to staff sexual misconduct were
asked in a different order. Inmates were first asked about
being pressured or being made to feel they had to have sex or
sexual contact with the staff and then asked about being
physically forced. In addition, inmates were asked if any
facility staff had offered favors or special privileges in
exchange for sex. Finally, inmates were asked if they
willingly had sex or sexual contact with staff. All reports
of sex or sexual contact between an inmate and facility
staff, regardless of the level of coercion, were classified
as staff sexual misconduct. 

The ACASI survey included additional questions related to
both inmate-on-inmate and staff-on-inmate sexual
victimization. These questions, known as latent class
measures, were included to assess the reliability of the
survey questionnaire. After being asked detailed questions,
all inmates were asked a series of general questions to
determine if they had experienced any type of unwanted sex or
sexual contact with another inmate or had any sex or sexual
contact with staff. (See appendix 9.)

The entire ACASI questionnaire (listed as National Inmate
Survey) and the shorter paper and pencil survey form (PAPI)
are available on the BJS web site at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm#Programs>.

Definition of terms 

Sexual victimization--all types of sexual activity, e.g.,
oral, anal, or vaginal penetration; handjobs; touching of the
inmate's buttocks, thighs, penis, breasts, or vagina in a
sexual way; abusive sexual contacts; and both willing and
unwilling sexual activity with staff.

Nonconsensual sexual acts--unwanted contacts with another
inmate or any contacts with staff that involved oral, anal,
vaginal penetration, handjobs, and other sexual acts.

Abusive sexual contacts only--unwanted contacts with another
inmate or any contacts with staff that involved touching of
the inmate's buttocks, thigh, penis, breasts, or vagina in a
sexual way.

Unwilling activity--incidents of unwanted sexual contacts
with another inmate or staff.

Willing activity--incidents of willing sexual contacts with
staff. These contacts are characterized by the reporting
inmates as willing; however, all sexual contacts between
inmates and staff are legally nonconsensual.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Jeffrey Sedgwick is the Director. 
Allen J. Beck and Paige M. Harrison wrote this report. 
The statistical unit of RTI, under Marcus Berzofsky, produced 
the appendix tables. Allen J. Beck, Paige M. Harrison, Paul Guerino, 
and RTI staff provided statistical review and verification. 
Tina Dorsey produced the report, Catherine Bird edited it, 
and Jayne E.Robinson prepared the report for publication, under 
the supervision of Doris J. James.

Paige M. Harrison, under the supervision of Allen J. Beck, was 
project manager for the National Inmate Survey. RTI, International 
staff, under a cooperative agreement and in collaboration with BJS, 
designed the survey, developed the questionnaires, and monitored data 
collection and data processing, including Rachel Caspar, Principal 
Investigator/Instrumentation Task Leader; Christopher Krebs, 
Co-principal Investigator; Ellen Stutts, Co-principal Investigator 
and Data Collection Task Leader; Susan Brumbaugh, Logistics Task 
Leader; Jamia Bachrach, Human Subjects Task Leader; David Forvendel, 
Research Computing Task Leader; Ralph Folsom, Senior Statistician; 
and Marcus Berzofsky, Statistics Task Leader.

June 2008  NCJ 221946


This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its 
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS 
World Wide Web Internet site: 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svljri07.htm>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

6/24/08   JER
 
