U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics
 
Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by
Inmates, 2008-09 

Allen J. Beck, PhD, and Paige M. Harrison, 
BJS Statisticians 

Marcus Berzofsky, Rachel Caspar, and Christopher Krebs, PhD, 
RTI International 

August 2010, NCJ 231169


-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2202

This report is associated with the PREA Data Collection.
For a list of related publications 
go to http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=278
------------------------------------------------------------

Bureau of Justice Statistics 

James P. Lynch 
Director 

BJS Website: 
www.bjs.usdoj.gov 


The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director. 

This compendium was written by Allen J. Beck, PhD, and Paige
M. Harrison, BJS Statisticians, and Marcus Berzofsky, 
Rachel Caspar, and Christopher Krebs, 
PhD, RTI International. 

Paige M. Harrison, under the supervision of Allen J. Beck,
was the project manager for the NIS-2. RTI, International 
staff, under a cooperative agreement and in collaboration
with BJS, designed the survey, developed the questionnaires, 
and monitored the data collection and processing, including
Rachel Caspar, Principal Investigator/ Instrumentation 
Task Leader; Christopher Krebs, Co-principal Investigator;
Ellen Stutts, Co-principal Investigator and Data Collection
Task Leader; Susan Brumbaugh, Logistics Task Leader; 
Jamia Bachrach, Human Subjects Task Leader; David Forvendel,
Research Computing Task Leader; Ralph Folsom, Senior
Statistician; and Marcus Berzofsky, Statistics Task Leader. 

Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara Quinn designed and
produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the report
for final printing under the supervision of Doris J. James. 

August 2010, NCJ 231169 

Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by
Inmates, 2008-09 

National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 

Federal and State Prisons Local Jails 

Allen J. Beck, PhD, and Paige M. Harrison, 
BJS Statisticians 

Marcus Berzofsky, Rachel Caspar, and Christopher Krebs, PhD, 
RTI International 

August 2010, NCJ 231169       

BJS

Contents

Highlights - 5

National Inmate Survey-2 - 6

Incidents of Sexual Victimization - 6

Facility Level Rates - 7

Demographic Characteristics - 12

Sexual History and Orientation - 14

Criminal Justice Status - 16

Predicted Victimization Rates - 18
  
Inmate-on-Inmate Victimization - 21 

Staff Sexual Misconduct - 23 

Appendix 1. Survey items related to inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 25 

Appendix 2. Survey items related to staff sexual misconduct,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 26

Appendix 3. Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no
sexual activity, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 26
 
Methodology - 27

List of Tables
 
Table 1. Inmates reporting sexual victimization, by type of
facility and incident, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 7 

Table 2. Facilities with high rates of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization, by type of facility, National Inmate
Survey, 2008-09 - 8 

Table 3. Facilities with high rates of staff sexual
misconduct, by type of facility, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 9 

Table 4. Facilities with low rates of any type of sexual
victimization, by type of facility, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 10 

Table 5. Rates of sexual victimization in special
correctional facilities, by type of incident and facility,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 11 

Table 6. Prevalence of sexual victimization, by type of
incident and demographic inmate characteristic, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 12 

Table 7. Multivariate logistic regression models of sexual
victimization, by inmate demographic characteristic, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 13 

Table 8 Prevalence of sexual victimization, by type of
incident and sexual history, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09
- 14 

Table 9. Multivariate logistic models of sexual
victimization, by sexual history, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 15 

Table 10. Prevalence of sexual victimization, by type of
incident and criminal justice status, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 16 

Table 11. Multivariate logistic models of sexual
victimization, by criminal justice status and history,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 17 

Table 12. Final multivariate logistic models of sexual
victimization in prisons and jails, by type of incident,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 18 

Table 13. Estimated and predicted rates of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization in high-rate prisons and jails, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 20 

Table 14. Estimated and predicted rates of staff sexual
misconduct in high-rate prisons and jails, National Inmate
Survey, 2008-09 - 20 

Table 15. Experiences of victims of inmate-on-inmate victims
of sexual victimization, by type of facility and sex,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 21 

Table 16. Circumstances surrounding inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization, by type of facility and sex, National Inmate
Survey, 2008-09 - 22 

Table 17. Circumstances surrounding incidents of staff sexual
misconduct, by type of facility and sex of victim, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 23 

Table 18. Sex of perpetrator of staff sexual misconduct, by
facility type and sex of victim, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 24 

Table 19. Sexual touching between inmates and staff during
and not during strip searches and pat downs, by sex of
victim, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 24 

List of Appendix Tables
 
Appendix Table 1. Characteristics of state and federal
prisons and prevalence of sexual victimization, by facility,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 34 

Appendix Table 2. Percent of prison inmates reporting sexual
victimization, by type of incident and facility, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 41 

Appendix Table 3. Percent of prison inmates reporting sexual
victimization by level of coercion, by facility, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 47 

Appendix Table 4. Percent of prison inmates reporting
nonconsensual sexual acts and abusive sexual contacts, by
facility, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 53 

Appendix Table 5. Characteristics of jails and prevalence of
sexual victimization, by facility, National Inmate Survey,
2008-09 - 59 

Appendix Table 6. Percent of jail inmates reporting
victimization, by type of incident and facility, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 67 

Appendix Table 7. Percent of jail inmates reporting sexual
victimization, by level of coercion, and facility, National
Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 75 

Appendix Table 8. Percent of jail inmates reporting
nonconsensual sexual acts and abusive sexual contacts, by
facility, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 83 

Appendix Table 9. Characteristics of special correctional
facilities and prevalence of sexual victimization, by
facility, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 91 

Appendix Table 10. Wald F statistics for inmate risk
characteristics in the final multivariate logistic models of
sexual victimization in prisons and jails, by type of
incident, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 - 92

August 2010 

Highlights 
 
Prevalence of sexual victimization 

* An estimated 4.4% of prison inmates and 3.1% of jail
inmates reported experiencing one or more incidents of sexual
victimization by another inmate or facility staff in the past
12 months or since admission to the facility, if less than 12
months. Nationwide, these percentages suggest that
approximately 88,500 adults held in prisons and jails at the
time of the survey had been sexually victimized. 

* About 2.1% of prison inmates and 1.5% of jail inmates
reported an incident involving another inmate. An estimated
1.0% of prison inmates and 0.8% of jail inmates said they had
nonconsensual sex with another inmate (the most serious type
of acts), including unwilling manual stimulation and oral,
anal, or vaginal penetration. 

* About 2.8% of prison inmates and 2.0% of jail inmates
reported having had sex or sexual contact with staff. At
least half of the inmates who experienced staff sexual
misconduct (1.8% in prison and 1.1% in jail) said that they
willingly had sex or sexual contact with staff. 

Facility rankings 

* Eight male prisons, 2 female prisons, and 6 jails were
identified as "high rate" facilities based on the prevalence
of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization; 4 male prisons, 2
female prisons, and 5 jails were identified as "high rate"
based on the prevalence of staff sexual misconduct. Each of
these facilities had a lower bound of the 95%-confidence
interval that was at least 55% higher than the average rate
among comparable facilities. 

* Seven male prisons, 4 female prisons, and 9 jails were
identified as "low rate" facilities based on a small
percentages of inmates reporting any sexual victimization by
another inmate or staff and a low upper bound for the
95%-confidence interval around the rate.  Among the 167
prisons and 286 jails in the survey, 6 prisons and 28 jails
had no reported incidents of sexual victimization. 

* Except for a 6.0% rate of sexual victimization in the U.S.
Disciplinary Barracks (Leavenworth, KS), rates in the 5
surveyed facilities operated by ICE, 3 operated by the U.S.
Military, and 2 facilities in Indian country were lower than
average rates in state and federal prisons (4.4%) and jails
(3.1%). 

Variations in victimization rates 

* Rates of reported sexual victimization varied among
inmates: 

  * Female inmates in prison (4.7%) or jail (3.1%) were more
than twice as likely as male inmates in prison (1.9%) or jail
(1.3%) to report experiencing inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization. 

  * Sexual activity with facility staff was reported by 2.9%
of male prisoners and 2.1% of male jail inmates, compared to
2.1% of female prisoners and 1.5% of female jail inmates.
 
  * Rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization in prisons
and jails were significantly higher among inmates who were
white or multi-racial compared to blacks, inmates with a
college degree or more (compared to those who had not
completed high school), a sexual orientation other than
heterosexual compared to heterosexual, and who had
experienced a sexual victimization before coming to the
facility compared to those who had not.
 
  * After controlling for multiple inmate characteristics,
rates of reported staff sexual misconduct were lower among
white inmates (compared to black inmates), lower among
inmates ages 25 or older (compared to inmates ages 20 to 24),
higher among inmates with a college degree (compared to those
who had not completed high school), and higher among inmates
who had experienced sexual victimization before coming to the
facility (compared to those who had not).
 
Circumstances surrounding victimization 

* Among inmates who reported inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization, 13% of male prison inmates and 19% of male
jail inmates said they were victimized within the first 24
hours after admission, compared to 4% of female inmates in
prison and jail. 

* Inmate-on-inmate victimization in prisons and jails was
most commonly reported to have occurred between 6 pm and
midnight: more than 40% of victims reported this time period. 

* Most victims of staff sexual misconduct were males; most
perpetrators were females. Among male victims of staff sexual
misconduct, 69% of those in prison and 64% of those in jails
reported sexual activity with female staff. An additional 16%
of prison inmates and 18% of jail inmates reported sexual
activity with both female and male staff. 

Among inmates who reported staff sexual misconduct, nearly
16% of male victims in prison and 30% of male victims in jail
said they were victimized by staff within the first 24 hours,
compared to 5% of female victims in prison and 4% of female
victims in jail. 

Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by
Inmates, 2008 09 

National Inmate Survey-2 

Between October 2008 and December 2009, BJS completed the
second National Inmate Survey (NIS-2) in 167 state and
federal prisons, 286 jails, and 10 special confinement
facilities operated by Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE), the U.S. Military, and correctional authorities in
Indian country. The survey, conducted by RTI International
(Research Triangle Park, NC), was administered to 81,566
inmates ages 18 or older, including 32,029 inmates in state
and federal prisons, 48,066 in jails, 957 in ICE facilities,
399 in military facilities, and 115 in Indian country jails. 

The NIS-2 is part of the National Prison Rape Statistics
Program, which collects administrative records of reported
sexual violence, and allegations of sexual victimization
directly from victims, through surveys of adult inmates in
prisons and jails and surveys of youth held in juvenile
correctional facilities. Administrative records have been
collected annually since 2004. Reports by victims of sexual
victimization have been collected since 2007. 

The NIS-2 survey consisted of an audio computer-assisted
self-interview (ACASI) in which inmates, using a
touch-screen, interacted with a computer-assisted
questionnaire and followed audio instructions delivered via
headphones. Some inmates (726) completed a short paper form.
Most of these inmates were housed in administrative or
disciplinary segregation or were considered too violent to be
interviewed. 

The NIS-2 collects only allegations of sexual victimization.
Because participation in the survey is anonymous and reports
are confidential, the survey does not permit any follow-up
investigation or substantiation of reported incidents through
review. Some allegations in the NIS-2 may be untrue. At the
same time, some inmates may remain silent about sexual
victimization experienced in the facility, despite efforts of
survey staff to assure inmates that their responses 
would be kept confidential. Although the effects may be
offsetting, the relative extent of under reporting and false
reporting in the NIS-2 is unknown. 

Incidents of Sexual Victimization 

4.4% of prison inmates and 3.1% of jail inmates reported one
or more incidents of sexual victimization 

Among the 76,459 inmates participating in the NIS-2 sexual
victimization survey, 2,861 reported experiencing one or more
incidents of sexual victimization in the past 12 months, or
since admission to the facility, if less than 12 months.
Because the NIS-2 is a sample survey, weights were applied
for sampled facilities and inmates within facilities to
produce national-level and facility-level estimates. The
estimated number of prison and jail inmates experiencing
sexual victimization totaled 88,500 (or 4.4% of all prison
inmates and 3.1% of jail inmates, nationwide) (table 1). 

Among all state and federal inmates, 2.1% (or an estimated
30,100 prisoners) reported an incident involving another
inmate, and 2.8% (41,200) reported an incident involving
facility staff. Some prisoners (0.5%) reported sexual
victimization by both another inmate and facility staff. 

About 1.5% of jail inmates (11,600) reported an incident with
another inmate, and 2.0% (15,800) reported an incident with
staff. Approximately 0.4% of jail inmates (3,400) reported
being sexually victimized by both other inmates and staff. 

The NIS-2 screened for specific sexual activities in which
inmates may have been involved during the past 12 months or
since admission to the facility, if less than 12 months.
Inmates were then asked if they were forced or pressured to
engage in these activities by another inmate or staff. (See
appendices 1 through 3 for specific survey questions.)
Reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were
classified as either nonconsensual sexual acts or abusive
sexual contacts. 

Approximately 1.0% of prisoners and 0.8% of jail inmates said
they were forced or pressured to have nonconsensual sex with
another inmate, including manual stimulation and oral, anal,
or vaginal penetration. An additional 1.0% of prison inmates
and 0.7% of jail inmates said they had experienced one or
more abusive sexual contacts only, or unwanted touching of
specific body parts in a sexual way by another inmate. (See
page 7 for definition of terms.) 

An estimated 1.7% of prison inmates and 1.5% of jail inmates
reported that they had sex or sexual contact unwillingly with
staff as a result of physical force, pressure, or offers of
special favors or privileges. An estimated 1.8% of all prison
inmates and 1.1% of jail inmates reported they willingly had
sex or sexual contact with staff. Regardless of whether an
inmate reported being willing or unwilling, any sexual
contact between inmates and staff is illegal; however, the
difference may be informative when addressing issues of staff
training, prevention, and investigation. 

Facility Level Rates 

NIS-2 provides a basis for identifying high rate and low rate
facilities 

As required under the Prison Rape Elimination Act, the NIS-2
provides facility-level estimates of inmateon-inmate sexual
victimization and staff sexual misconduct. Since these
estimates are based on a sample of inmates rather than a
complete enumeration, they are subject to sampling error.
(See Methodology for description of sampling procedures.) 

The precision of each of the facility-level estimates can be
calculated based on the estimated standard error. Typically,
a 95%-confidence interval around each survey estimate is
calculated by multiplying the standard error by 1.96 and then
adding and subtracting the result from the sample estimate to
create an upper and lower bound. This interval expresses the
range of values that could result among 95% of the different
samples that could be drawn. 

For small samples and estimates close to 0%, as is the case
with facility-level estimates of sexual victimization by type
of incident, the use of the standard error to construct the
95%-confidence interval may not be reliable. An alternative
method developed by Wilson has been shown to perform better
than the traditional method. ***Footnote 1 Brown, L.D., Cai,
T., and DasGupta, A. (2001). Interval Estimation for a
Binomial Proportion. Statistical Science, 16(2), pp. 101-138. 
Wilson, E.B. (1927). Probable Inference, the Law of
Succession, and Statistical Inference. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 22, pp. 209-212***. This
method provides asymmetrical confidence intervals for
facilities in which the lower bound is constrained to be no
less than 0%.  It also provides confidence intervals for
facilities in which the survey estimates are 0% (but other
similarly conducted samples could yield non-zero estimates). 

Definition of terms 

Sexual victimization--all types of sexual activity, e.g.,
oral, anal, or vaginal penetration; hand jobs; touching of
the inmate's buttocks, thighs, penis, breasts, or vagina in a
sexual way; abusive sexual contacts; and both willing and
unwilling sexual activity with staff. 

Nonconsensual sexual acts--unwanted contacts with another
inmate or any contacts with staff that involved oral, anal,
vaginal penetration, hand jobs, and other sexual acts. 

Abusive sexual contacts only--unwanted contacts with another
inmate or any contacts with staff that involved touching of
the inmate's buttocks, thigh, penis, breasts, or vagina in a
sexual way. 

Unwilling activity--incidents of unwanted sexual contacts
with another inmate or staff. 

Willing activity--incidents of willing sexual contacts with
staff. These contacts are characterized by the reporting
inmates as willing; however, all sexual contacts between
inmates and staff are legally nonconsensual. 

Staff sexual misconduct--includes all incidents of willing
and unwilling sexual contact with facility staff and all
incidents of sexual activity that involved oral, anal,
vaginal penetration, hand jobs, blow jobs, and other sexual
acts with facility staff. 

Although the NIS-2 provides facility-level estimates and
measures of precision, it cannot provide an exact ranking for
all facilities as required under PREA. Rates of
inmate-oninmate sexual victimization and staff sexual
misconduct differ across facilities, but the observed
differences are not always statistically significant. To
address PREA requirements, facilities have been categorized
as having high rates or low rates based on criteria applied
to the lower and upper bounds of the 95%-confidence interval
for each facility. 

The criterion that the lower bound of the confidence interval
be at least 55% higher than the average rate for comparable
facilities was used to identify high rate male prisons,
female prisons, and jails. The criterion that the upper bound
of the confidence interval be lower than 65% of the average
rate for comparable facilities was used to identify low rate
facilities. 

To better identify variations among correctional facilities
in rates of sexual victimization, prisons and jails are
compared separately by type of sexual victimization. Though
informative, an analysis of a single, overall prevalence rate
of sexual victimization for each sampled facility would
confound differing risk factors, circumstances, and
underlying causes of victimization. For the same reasons,
prisons are compared separately by the sex of inmates housed. 

The NIS-2 sample was designed to ensure a sufficient number
of female-only prison facilities (35 facilities participated)
and a sufficient number of female respondents (6,279
completed the survey) to allow for valid comparisons among
female prisons. Only 2 of the 286 participating jails in
NIS-2 housed only females; as a result, rates of sexual
victimization in jails could not be compared separately by
sex of inmate housed. 

Eight male prisons, 2 female prisons, and 6 jails were
identified as having high rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization 

Among the 167 prisons and 286 jails surveyed in NIS-2, 8 male
prisons, 2 female prisons, and 6 jails were designated as
high rate facilities based on reports of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization (table 2). Each of these facilities had
a rate of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization that was at
least twice the national rate of 1.9% for male prisons, 4.8%
for female prisons, and 1.5% for jails. Each had a
95%-confidence interval with a lower bound that was at least
55% higher than the average rate among comparable facilities. 

Selection of slightly lower criteria would have had only a
minor impact on the list of facilities with high rates of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization. Lowering the criteria
of the lower bound to at least 50% higher than the average
comparable rate would not have increased the number of high
rate facilities (16); lowering the criteria to 35% would have
increased the number to 22 (including 10 male prisons, 2
female prisons, and 10 jails). 

Among male prisons, Hughes Unit (Texas) recorded an
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization rate of 8.6%, and
Allred Unit (Texas) recorded a rate of 7.6%. Among female
prisons, Taycheedah Correctional Institution (Wisconsin) had
a rate of 11.9%, and Fluvanna Correctional Center (Virginia)
had a rate of 11.4%. 

Orleans Parish -- South White Street Jail (Louisiana), a
female-only facility, recorded an inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization rate of 7.5%, which was 5 times the average
rate among jails nationwide. Madison County Detention
Facility (Alabama) reported a rate of 5.5%. 

Four male prisons, 2 female prisons, and 5 jails were
identified as having high rates of staff sexual misconduct 

Eleven facilities were identified as high rate facilities
based on reports of staff sexual misconduct -- 4 male
prisons, 2 female prisons, and 5 jails (table 3). Each had a
confidence interval with a lower bound that was at least 55%
higher than the national rate of male prisons (2.9%), female
prisons (2.2%), and jails (2.0%). 

Selection of slightly lower criteria would have had only a
minor impact on the list of facilities with high rates of
staff sexual misconduct. Lowering the criteria of the lower
bound to at least 50% higher than the average comparable rate
would have increased the number of high rate facilities from
11 to 14 (including 5 male prisons, 2 female prisons, and 7
jails); lowering the criteria to 35% would have increased the
number to 20 (including 6 male prisons, 2 female prisons, and
12 jails). 

In 3 state prisons, at least 8% of surveyed inmates reported
incidents of staff sexual misconduct, including 8.2% of males
in Crossroads Correctional Facility (Missouri), 8.1% of males
in Attica Correctional Facility (New York), and 11.5% of
females in Bayview Correctional Facility (New York). Two
jails, Caroline County Jail (Maryland) with 10.0% and Eastern
Shore Regional Jail (Virginia) with 9.9%, had rates of
reported staff sexual misconduct that exceeded 8%. 

The reported use or threat of physical force to engage in
sexual activity with staff was generally low among all prison
and jail inmates (1.0%); however, at least 5% of the inmates
in 2 state prisons and 2 jails said that they had been
physically forced or threatened with force. Caroline County
Jail (Maryland), with 10%, had the highest percentage of
inmates reporting physical force or threat force by staff,
followed by Bayview Correctional Facility (New York) and
Attica Correctional Facility (New York), with 6.5% and 6.4%,
respectively. 

An estimated 1.6% of prison inmates and 1.3% of jail inmates
also reported being coerced by facility staff without any use
or threat of force, including being pressured or made to feel
they had to have sex or sexual contact. In 6 of the 11
facilities with high rates of staff sexual misconduct, at
least 5% of the inmates reported such pressure by staff.
Among state prisoners, the highest rates were reported by
female inmates (10.8%) in the Bayview Correctional Facility
(New York) and by male inmates (7.1%) in the Elmira
Correctional Facility (New York). Among jail inmates, the
highest rates were reported by inmates in the Caroline County
Jail (7.9%). 

Seven male prisons, 4 female prisons, and 9 jails were
identified as "low rate" for sexual victimization overall 

Six prisons and 28 jails had no reported incidents of sexual
victimization of any kind. (See appendix tables 1 and 5.)
However, estimates of the number of inmates who experienced a
sexual victimization in each of these facilities are also
subject to sampling error and could vary if a different group
of inmates had been interviewed. Although the lower bound of
the 95%-confidence interval in each of these facilities is
0%, the upper bound varies depending on the number of
completed interviews in each facility. 

Combining reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization
and staff sexual misconduct, 7 male prisons and 4 female
prisons were designated as low rate facilities. These
designations were based on their low rate of sexual
victimization overall and the upper bound of their
95%-confidence interval that was less than 65% of the average
rate among male and female prisons (table 4). Four of these
facilities had no reported incidents of sexual victimization;
7 had at least one inmate who reported a sexual
victimization. 

C. Moore Transfer Facility (Texas), with a reported sexual
victimization rate of 0.4%, had a confidence interval with
the lowest upper bound (1.9%) among male prisons. Halbert
Substance Abuse Felony Punishment Facility (Texas), with
reported sexual rate of 0.9%, had a confidence interval with
the lowest upper bound (2.5%) among female prisons. 

Nine jails were designated as low rate facilities based on
the upper bound of the 95%-confidence interval that was less
than 65% of the average for jails nation-wide. Hinds County
Penal Farm (Mississippi) and Lake County - Adult Maximum
Security Detention Center (Ohio), both with a 0.5% overall
sexual victimization rate, had confidence intervals with the
lowest upper bounds (1.6%). 

Low rates of sexual victimization were reported in military,
Indian country, and ICE facilities 

The NIS-2 also surveyed 10 special confinement facilities
including 5 ICE facilities, 3 military facilities, and 2
Indian country jails. (See Methodology for sample
description.) Except for a 6.0% overall rate of sexual
victimization in the U.S. Disciplinary Barracks (Leavenworth,
KS), rates in these facilities were lower than the average
rates in state and federal prisons (4.4%) and jails (3.1%).
(Not shown. See appendix table 9.) 

Reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were highest
in the El Paso Processing Center (Texas), operated by ICE;
however, its rate of 2.1% equaled the average rate among
prisoners nationwide (table 5). The U.S. Disciplinary
Barracks, which is operated by the U.S. Army and holds the
most serious offenders under military jurisdiction, had a
rate of staff sexual misconduct (5.6%) that was double the
average of prisons nationwide (2.8%). Gila River Department
of Corrections and Rehabilitation (Arizona), the largest jail
in Indian country, had no reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization and one report of staff sexual misconduct (1%).
 
Demographic Characteristics 

Rates of reported sexual victimization varied across
demographic categories of prison and jail inmates 

* Rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization among prison
inmates were higher among females (4.7%) than males (1.9%),
higher among whites (3.0%) or multi-racial (4.4%) than among
blacks (1.3%), higher among inmates with a college degree
(3.4%) than among inmates who had not completed high school
(2.0%), and lower among currently married inmates (1.3%) than
among inmates who never married or who were widowed,
divorced, or separated (2.2%) (table 6). 

* Similar patterns of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization
were reported by jail inmates. Females (3.1%), whites (1.5%),
and inmates with a college degree reported higher rates of
victimization (2.9%) than males (1.3%), blacks (1.2%), and
inmates who had not completed high school (1.3%). 

* Rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were
unrelated to age among state and federal prisoners, but were
lower among jail inmates in older age categories (ages 35 to
44, 45 to 54, and 55 or older) than among inmates ages 20 to
24. 

* Patterns of staff sexual misconduct were different--with
reports of staff sexual misconduct being higher among males
in prisons (2.9%) and jails (2.1%) than among females in
prisons (2.1%) and jails (1.5%), and higher among black
inmates in prisons (3.2%) and jails (2.4%) than among white
inmates in prisons (2.3%) and jails (1.5%). 

* In both prisons and jails, rates of reported staff sexual
misconduct were lower among inmates in the oldest age
categories (ages 45 to 54 and ages 55 or older) compared to
inmates ages 20 to 24. 

These variations in rates of sexual victimization among
demographic groups are statistically independent and largely
unexplained by covariation with other demographic
characteristics. Multivariate logistic regression was used to
determine which demographic characteristics are statistically
significant for predicting a sexual victimization, while
simultaneously controlling for the effects of other inmate
demographic characteristics. (See Methodology for 
discussion of logistic regression.) 

Results are displayed in terms of their conditional predicted
probability, which represents the probability that an inmate
with a particular characteristic has experienced a given
sexual victimization outcome conditional on the inmate having
the mean value for all other predictors in the model (table
7). For example, based on models with demographic
characteristics only, a female prison inmate has a 3.8%
chance of being sexually victimized by another inmate, while
a male inmate has a 1.6% chance (given that the inmates are
at the mean of the joint distribution of race or Hispanic
origin, education level, and marital status).***Footnote 2
These estimates represent the expected risk of victimization
for an inmate, conditional on the inmate belonging to a
particular group (defined by each characteristic in the final
model) and having the mean value on all of the other
characteristics in the model. For characteristics that are
categorical (which is the case for every variable in the
NIS-2 logistic regression models), the mean value is a
weighted value of the joint distribution of all other
characteristics in the respective model. See Research 
Triangle Institute (2008). SUDAAN Language Manual Release
10.0. Research Triangle Park, NC, Section 4.8.3, pp. 209-211
***

Based on four separate models, each representing the type of
sexual victimization in prison and jail, variations by sex,
race, Hispanic origin, and education remain statistically
significant. Except for reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization in prison, older inmates (ages 45 and older in
prison and ages 35 and older in jails) still have lower rates
of sexual victimization, after controlling for the effects of
the other demographic characteristics. Among prison inmates,
never married inmates remain somewhat more likely than
married inmates to report sexual victimization; however,
among jail inmates, there are no differences by marital
status. 

Sexual History and Orientation
 
Large differences in sexual victimization were found among
inmates based on their sexual orientation and past sexual
experiences

Inmates with a sexual orientation other than heterosexual
reported significantly higher rates of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization and staff sexual misconduct: 

* Among heterosexual state and federal prisoners, an
estimated 1.3% reported being sexually victimized by another
inmate, and 2.5% reported being victimized by staff (table
8). In contrast, among prison inmates with a sexual
orientation other than heterosexual (including bisexual,
homosexual, gay or lesbian, or other), 11.2% reported being
sexually victimized by another inmate, and 6.6% reported
being sexually victimized by staff. 

* Similar differences were reported among jail inmates, with
heterosexual inmates reporting lower rates of
inmate-on-inmate victimization (1.1%) and staff sexual
misconduct (1.9%) than non-heterosexual inmates (7.2% and
3.5%, respectively). 

* Inmates who had experienced sexual victimization before
coming to the facility were also more likely than inmates
with no sexual victimization history to report incidents of
sexual victimization involving other inmates and staff. Among
inmates who had experienced sexual victimization before
coming to the facility, 11.0% of prisoners and 7.4% of jail
inmates reported having been sexually assaulted by another
inmate at the current facility. An estimated 8.7% of 
prisoners and 6.1% of jail inmates who had experienced sexual
victimization before coming to the facility reported sexual
activity with staff. 

* Prison and jail inmates with 21 or more sexual partners
prior to coming to the current facility reported higher rates
of staff sexual misconduct than inmates with 1 or no prior
sexual partners. 

Variations in rates of sexual victimization among groups of
inmates based on their sexual orientation and past sexual
experiences overlapped somewhat. After simultaneously
controlling for the effects of these characteristics, the
regression models reveal that variations in inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization remain associated with sexual
orientation and prior sexual victimization, but are not
associated with the number of past sexual partners (table 9).
Except for reports of staff sexual misconduct in jails, an
inmate's sexual orientation remained an important predictor
of victimization. In all models, inmates who had experienced
sexual victimization before coming to the facility were more
likely than inmates with no sexual victimization history to
report incidents of sexual victimization. 

Criminal Justice Status 

Inmates held for a violent sexual offense reported higher
rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization than inmates
held for other offenses 

An estimated 4.6% of violent sex offenders in prison and 3.9%
of violentsex offenders in jail reported being sexually
victimized by another inmate in the last 12 months or since
admission to the facility, if less than 12 months (table 10).
These rates were higher than those reported by inmates held
for other offenses. Among state and federal prisoners, rates
of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were-- 

* higher among prison inmates serving a long sentence (2.9%
with a sentence of 20 or more years and 3.8% with a sentence
to life or death) than among inmates serving a sentence of 1
to 5 years (1.5%). 

* higher among prison inmates who had served 5 years or more
in prison prior to coming to the current facility (2.6%) than
among inmates who had not served any prior time (1.6%). 

*  higher among prison inmates who had been at their current
facility for 5 years or more (3.3%) than among inmates who
had been admitted in the last month (1.4%). 

Among jail inmates, rates of inmateon-inmate sexual
victimization-- 

* were higher among first time offenders (2.0%) than among
those who had been arrested 2 to 3 times in the past (1.3%)
or 4 to 10 times in the past (1.4%). 

* increased with the length of time served in the current
facility, rising from 0.9% among inmates who had been at the
facility for less than a month to 1.7% among inmates in jail
for 1 to 5 months, to 2.0% among inmates in jail for 6 to 11
months, and to 2.3% among those in jail for 1 to 5 years. 

Rates of staff sexual misconduct also varied among inmates
based on their criminal justice status and history 

* Among state and federal prisoners, inmates with a long
sentence, inmates who had served 5 years or more in prison
prior to coming to the current facility, and inmates who had
served 5 years or more at the current facility were more
likely to report experiencing staff sexual misconduct than
inmates with a sentence of 1 to 5 years, inmates who had not
served any prior time, and inmates who had been admitted in
the last month. 

* Among jail inmates, the rates of reported staff misconduct
increased with time served in the current facility and were
higher among inmates who had previously served time in a
correctional facility for 1 year or more. 

Based on controls for the criminal justice status variables
and past history variables, the regression models reveal that
rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization remain higher
for violent sex offenders in prison and jail. A violent sex
offender has a 4.4% chance of experiencing sexual
victimization by another inmate in prison and 3.1% chance of
being sexually victimized by another inmate in jail.
Inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization rates for inmates held
for other offenses are significantly lower (table 11). 

In each of the regression models for jails, rates of sexual
victimization remain associated with an inmate's time since
admission and prior time served in a correctional facility.
Jail inmates who had served longer (i.e., 6 months to 5 years
in the current facility and 6 months or more in other
facilities) had statistically significant higher rates of
staff sexual misconduct than jail inmates who had served less
time (i.e., less than one month in the current facility and
no time in other facilities in the past). 

Predicted Victimization Rates 

Sexual victimization among high rate facilities only
partially explained by variations in risk among inmates held 

The variations in rates of sexual victimization among inmates
grouped by demographic characteristics, sexual orientation
and history, and criminal justice status and history provide
a basis for predicting the probability of victimization for
each inmate. The final multivariate logistic regression
models summarize the net contribution of each characteristic
to the predicted probability of victimization, by type of
victimization in prison and jail (table 12). 

Because the effects of each characteristic overlap, the
estimated conditional probabilities are smaller than those in
previous regression models. However, the net effects of
sexual orientation and prior sexual victimization remain the
largest among all characteristics in predicting
inmate-on-inmate victimization in prison and jail. An
inmate's race (black), age (ages 20 through 24), and
education (college degree or more) are found to increase the
probability of experiencing staff sexual misconduct,
controlling for other factors. 

Taking into account the effects of sexual history and
orientation and criminal justice status and history, female
inmates have lower rates of sexual victimization than male
inmates in both prison and jail and for both types of
victimization. 

Predicted rates of sexual victimization at the facility level
have been calculated by combining all of the inmate-level
characteristics into a final logistic regression model for
each type of sexual victimization. Based on the predicted
conditional probabilities of victimization of each inmate
(derived from the multivariate logistic regression models)
and the distribution of inmates in each facility, predicted
rates of sexual victimization have been calculated for each
of the high rate facilities. 

These predicted rates take into account the underlying inmate
risk factors and the variations in the distribution of
inmates within each of the facilities. At the facility level,
the difference between the predicted rate and observed rate
represents the percent not accounted for by variations in
inmate characteristics. (See Methodology for facility-level
calculations.) 


-----------------------------------------------------------
Logistic regression models Multivariate logistic regression
estimation is a modeling technique used to determine what
characteristics are statistically significant for predicting
a dichotomous outcome (e.g., victimized or not victimized)
while controlling for all the other characteristics in the
model. NIS-2 used this technique to determine what
inmate-level characteristics were significant predictors of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization and staff sexual
misconduct. In each of the logistic regression models, the
conditional predicted probability represents the probability
that an inmate with a particular characteristic has
experienced sexual victimization (by type) conditional on the
inmate having the mean value for all other predictors in the
model. For example, based on demographic characteristics
only, a female prison inmate has a 3.8% chance of being
victimized by another inmate given that she was at the mean
of the joint distribution of race or Hispanic origin,
education level, and marital status. (See table 7 and 
note 2 on page 13.) (See Methodology for full discussion on
logistic regression models.) 
-----------------------------------------------------------

Among high rate male prisons, the observed rate of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization was 6.7%, while the
predicted rate was 3.6% (table 13). Among high rate female
prisons, observed rate was 11.6%, while the the predicted
rate was 8.0%. Among high rate jails, the observed rate was
4.9%, while the predicted rate was 1.9%. 

Similar patterns are found for rates of staff sexual
misconduct among high rate facilities. In the 4 high rate
male prisons, the observed rate of staff sexual misconduct
was 7.8%, while the the predicted rate was 4.1% (table 14).In
the 2 high rate female prisons, the observed rate was 8.1%,
while the predicted rate was 2.6%. In the 5 high rate jails,
the observed rates of 7.4%, while predicted rate was 2.6%.

These data suggest that rates among the 16 facilities  with
high rates of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization and in 
11 facilities with high rates staff sexual misconduct are
only partially explained by variation in inmate demographic
characteristics, sexual orientation and past sexual
experience,and criminal justice status and history.

Differences between the observed and predicted rates were
statistically significant at the 95% level of confidence in
only 3 of 16 facilities with high rates of inmates-on-inmate
sexual victimization and in 1 of the 11 facilities with high
rates of staff sexual misconduct. However the for tests for
statistical significance within each facility were limited by
the small number of surveyed inmates for whom the predicted
and observed rates of victimization differed. When the number
of inmates in all high rate male prisons, female prisons, and
jails were combined, the differences were found to be
statistically significant. With the exception of 2
facilities--the Michael Unit (in Texas) and Maine State
Prison - Warren--the differences between the observed and
predicted rates were large relative to the average rates of
sexual victimization among male prisons, female prisons, and
jails nationwide. 

Inmate on-Inmate Victimization 

Reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization differed
among males and females by type of facility 

Among inmates who reported inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization in state and federal prisons-- 

* Males (16%) were more likely than females (6%) to have been
victimized 11 or more times in the last 12 months, or since
admission if less than 12 months (table 15). 

* Males were more likely than females to report having been
bribed or blackmailed to take part in the sexual activity
(42% compared to 26%), offered protection (39% compared to
19%), or threatened with harm or a weapon (48% compared to
30%). 

* Males were more likely than females to report more than one
perpetrator (25% compared to 11%), that the perpetrator was
of Hispanic or Latino origin (24% compared to 16%), and that
one or more incidents were initiated by a gang (20% compared
to 4%). 

Among victims of inmate-oninmate sexual violence in jails--
 
* Females were more likely than males to have been victimized
only once (56% compared to 36%) and less likely to have been
victimized 11 or more times (9% compared to 20%). 

* Males were more likely than females to report all forms of
pressure or force (except for being persuaded or talked into
it). 

* Males were more likely than females to report more than one
perpetrator (43% compared to 16%), that the perpetrator was
of Hispanic or Latino origin (37% compared to 17%), and that
one or more incidents were initiated by a gang (36% compared
to 6%). 

Inmate-on-inmate victimization occurred most often in the
victim's cell between 6 pm and midnight 

* Among inmates who reported inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization, males were much more likely than females to
experience sexual victimization by another inmate within the
first 24 hours after admission. Among inmates reporting
victimization by another inmate, 13% of male prison inmates
and 19% of male jail inmates said they were victimized within
the first 24 hours, compared to 4% of female inmates in
prison and jail (table 16). 

* In both prisons and jails inmate-on-inmate victimization
was most commonly reported to have occurred between 6 pm and
midnight. More than 40% of male and female victims reported
this time period. 

* In both prisons and jails inmate-on-inmate victimization
was most commonly reported to have occurred in the victim's
cell or sleeping area. Among victims in prison, more than
half of the male and female victims reported an incident in
their cell. Among victims in jail, 63% of male victims and
43% of female victims reported at least one incident occurred
in their cell or sleeping 
area. 

* Among inmates who reported inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization in jail, 37% of males reported being injured,
compared to 8% of females. In prison, males and females were
almost equally as likely to report being injured (21% and
17%, respectively) during the sexual victimization. 

* Male and female inmates who experienced inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization in prisons and jails most commonly
reported sustaining bruises, scratches, cuts, and other minor
injuries. Among victims in prison, anal or vaginal tearing
was reported by nearly 10% of males and 6% of females. Among
victims in jails, anal or vaginal tearing was reported by 21%
of males and 3% of females. 

Staff Sexual Misconduct 

Most victims of staff sexual misconduct in prisons and jails
reported at least one incident that involved pressure, force,
or threat of force 

* Among victims in prison, male victims of staff sexual
misconduct (64%) were more likely than female victims (30%)
to report incidents that involved no pressure or force (table
17). A similar pattern was reported by victims in jail, with
an estimated 56% of male victims and 31% of female victims
reporting one or more incidents that involved no pressure or
force by staff. 

* Nearly 82% of the female victims in prison said they were
pressured by staff to engage in sexual activity, compared to
55% of male victims in prison. 

* In both prisons and jails, male victims were more likely
than female victims to report that the first incident of
staff sexual misconduct occurred within the first 24 hours
following admission to the facility. Nearly 16% of male
victims in prison and 30% of the male victims in jail said
they were victimized within the first 24 hours, compared to
5% of the female victims in prison and 4% of female victims
in jail. 

* In prisons, both male and female victims reported that the
staff sexual misconduct was most likely to have occurred in a
closet or locked office, the victim's cell or sleeping area,
or the shower or bathroom area.

* In jails, 45% of male victims and 24% of female victims
identified a closet or locked office as the most common area
in which the staff sexual misconduct occurred. 

* Among victims of staff sexual misconduct in jail, 17% of
male victims and 8% of female victims reported they had been
injured during the incident. 

* Among victims of staff sexual been injured by staff;
however, misconduct in prison, 9% of males the difference was
not statistically and 19% of females said they had
significant. 

Most victims and perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct were
of the opposite sex 

Among the 39,121 male prison inmates who had been victims of
staff sexual misconduct, 69% reported sexual activity with
female staff; an additional 16% reported sexual activity with
both female and male staff (table 18). In comparison, among
the 2,123 female prison inmates who had been victimized, 72%
reported that the staff perpetrator was male; an additional
19% reported both male and female staff. 

Similar patterns of staff sexual misconduct were reported by
jail inmates. Nearly two-thirds of the male jail inmates who
had been victimized said the staff perpetrator was female
(64%). About the same percentage (63%) of female victims said
the perpetrator was a male staff member at the jail. 

Reports of staff sexual misconduct were linked to strip
searches and pat downs 

Victims of staff sexual misconduct were asked if they touched
a facility staff person's body or had their body touched in a
sexual way. Regardless of whether they had wanted it to occur
or not, nearly two-thirds of all victims of staff sexual
misconduct in prison and jail reported at least one incident
of sexual touching. An estimated 38,270 inmates reported such
touching in the last 12 months or since admission to the
facility, if less than 12 months (table 19). At least 4 of
every 10 of these victims said that this had happened at
least once as part of a strip search or a pat down. Among
victims of sexual touching, male inmates (43%) were as likely
as female inmates (40%) to report staff sexual misconduct as
part of a strip search or pat down. 

The majority of victims said they had also touched staff or
been touched by staff in a sexual way outside of a strip
search or pat down. An estimated 86% of male victims and 91%
of female victims in prisons and jails said that this had
happened at least once outside of a strip search or pat down. 

Appendix 1. Survey items related to inmate on-inmate sexual
victimization, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 

Males 

E16. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to touch your butt, thighs, or penis in a 
sexual way? 

E17. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to let them touch your butt, thighs, or penis in a sexual
way? 

E22. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive a hand job? 

E23. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive a hand job? 

E26. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive oral sex or a blow
job? 

E27. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive oral sex or a blow job? 

E32. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have anal sex? 

E33. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have anal sex? 

E34. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have any type of sex or sexual
contact other than sexual touching, hand jobs, oral sex or
blow jobs, or anal sex? 

E35. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have any type of sex or sexual contact other than
sexual touching, hand jobs, oral sex or blow jobs, or anal
sex? 

Females 

E18. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to touch your butt, thighs, breasts, or vagina
in a sexual way? 

E19. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to let them touch your butt, thighs, breasts, or vagina
in a sexual way? 

E24. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive oral sex? 

E25. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive oral sex? 

E28. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have vaginal sex? 

E29. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have vaginal sex? 

E32. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have anal sex? 

E33. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have anal sex? 

E34. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have any type of sex or sexual
contact other than sexual touching, oral sex, vaginal sex, or
anal sex? 

E35. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have any type of sex or sexual contact other than
sexual touching, oral sex, vaginal sex, or anal sex? 

Appendix 2. Survey items related to staff sexual misconduct,
National Inmate Survey, 2008-09

These next questions are about the behavior of staff at this
facility during the last 12 months. By staff we mean the
employees of this facility and anybody who works as a
volunteer in this facility. 

G4. During the last 12 months, have any facility staff
pressured you or made you feel that you had to let them have
sex or sexual contact with you? 

G5. During the last 12 months, have you been physically
forced by any facility staff to have sex or sexual contact? 

G7. During the last 12 months, have any facility staff
offered you favors or special privileges in exchange for sex
or sexual contact? 

G2. During the last 12 months, have you willingly had sex or
sexual contact with any facility staff? 

G11. [IF G2 OR G4 OR G5 OR G7 = Yes] During the last 12
months, which of the following types of sex or sexual contact
did you have with a facility staff person? 

G11a. You touched a facility staff person's body or had your
body touched in a sexual way. 

G11b. You gave or received a hand job. 

G11c. You gave or received oral sex or a blow job.
 
G11d. You had vaginal sex.
 
G11e. You had anal sex. 

Appendix 3. Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no
sexual activity, National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 

Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no sexual activity
in the screener questions for sexual activity with inmates: 

LCM1. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force, pressure you, or make you feel that you had
to have any type of sex or sexual contact? 

LCM2. How long has it been since another inmate in this
facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you feel
that you had to have any type of sex or sexual contact? 

1. Within the past 7 days 
2. More than 7 days ago but within the past 30 days 
3. More than 30 days ago but within the past 12 months 
4. More than 12 months ago 
5. This has not happened to me at this facility 

LCM3. 
[If Male] During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force, pressure you, or make you feel that you had
to have oral or anal sex? 

[If Female] During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force, pressure you, or make you feel that you had
to have oral, vaginal, or anal sex? 

LCM4.
 [If Male] How long has it been since another inmate in this
facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you feel
that you had to have oral or anal sex? 

[If Female] How long has it been since another inmate in this
facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you feel
that you had to have oral, vaginal, or anal sex? 

Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no sexual activity
in the screener questions for sexual activity with staff: 

LCM5. During the last 12 months, have you had any sex or
sexual contact with staff in this facility whether you wanted
to have it or not? 

LCM6. How long has it been since you had any sex or sexual
contact with staff in this facility whether you wanted to or
not? 

1. Within the past 7 days 
2. More than 7 days ago but within the past 30 days 
3. More than 30 days ago but within the past 12 months 
4. More than 12 months ago 
5. This has not happened to me at this facility 

LCM7. 
[If Male]In the last 12 months, did you have oral, vaginal,
or anal sex with any staff at this facility whether you
wanted to or not? 

[If Female] In the last 12 months, did you have oral,
vaginal, or anal sex with any staff at this facility whether
you wanted to or not? 

LCM8. 
[If Male] How long has it been since you had oral, vaginal,
or anal sex with any staff at this facility whether you
wanted to or not? 

[If Female] How long has it been since you had oral, vaginal,
or anal sex with any staff at this facility whether you
wanted to or not? 

Methodology 

The National Inmate Survey, 2008-09 (NIS-2) was conducted in
167 state and federal prisons between October 13, 2008, and
March 11, 2009; 286 jails between January 20, 2009, and
August 13, 2009; and 10 special (military, Indian country,
and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)) facilities
between May 11, 2009, and December 17, 2009. The data were
collected by RTI International under a cooperative agreement
with the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NIS-2
comprised two questionnaires--a survey of sexual
victimization and a survey of past drug and alcohol use and
treatment. Inmates were randomly assigned to receive one of
the questionnaires so that at the time of the interview the
content of the survey remained unknown to facility staff and
the interviewers. A total of 81,566 inmates participated in
the survey, including 32,029 inmates in state and federal
prisons, 48,066 inmates in jails, 399 inmates in military
facilities, 115 inmates in Indian country jails, and 957
inmates in facilities operated by ICE. 

The interviews, which averaged 25 minutes in length, used
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) and audio
computer-assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) data collection
methods. For approximately the first two minutes, survey
interviewers conducted a personal interview using CAPI to
obtain background information and date of admission to the
facility. For the remainder of the interview, respondents
interacted with a computer-administered questionnaire using a
touch-screen and synchronized audio instructions delivered
via headphones. Respondents completed the ACASI portion of
the interview in private, with the interviewer either leaving
the room or moving away from the computer. 

A shorter paper questionnaire was made available for inmates
who were unable to come to the private interviewing room or
interact with the computer. The paper form was completed by
496 prison inmates (or 1.5% of all prison interviews), 226
jail inmates (0.5%), and 4 military inmates (1%). Most of
these inmates were housed in administrative or disciplinary
segregation or were considered too violent to be interviewed.
No inmates in Indian country or ICE 
facilities completed the paper questionnaire. 

Before the interview, inmates were informed verbally and in
writing that participation was voluntary and that all
information provided would be held in confidence. Interviews
were conducted in either English (98% in prisons, 95% in
jails, 40% in ICE facilities, and 100% in military and Indian
country facilities) or Spanish (2% in prisons, 5% in jails,
and 60% in ICE facilities). 

Selection of state and federal prisons 

A sample of 171 state and federal prisons was drawn to
produce a sample representing approximately 10% of the 1,260
state and 192 federal adult confinement facilities identified
in the 2005 Census of State and Federal Adult Correctional
Facilities. The 2005 census was a complete enumeration of
state prisons, including all publicly operated and privately
operated facilities under contract to state correctional
authorities. The NIS-2 was restricted to confinement 
facilities--institutions in which fewer than 50% of the
inmates were regularly permitted to leave, unaccompanied by
staff, for work, study, or treatment. Such facilities
included prisons, penitentiaries, prison hospitals, prison
farms, boot camps, and centers for reception, classification,
or alcohol and drug treatment. The NIS-2 excluded
community-based facilities, such as halfway houses, group
homes, and work release centers. Based on estimates from 
2008 National Prisoner Statistics, the prisons in the study
universe held an estimated 1,267,400 state and 190,300
federal inmates age 18 or older on June 30, 2008. 

State and federal confinement facilities were sequentially
sampled with probabilities of selection proportionate to size
(as measured by the number of inmates held in state prisons
on December 30, 2005, and in federal prisons on September 28,
2006). Facilities on the sampling frame were stratified by
gender of inmates housed. The measures of size for facilities
that participated in NIS-1 in 2007 were reduced to lower
their probability of selection in NIS-2. 
(See page 32 for a listing of NIS-1 reports.) Within each
stratum, facilities on the sampling frame were first sorted
by region, state, and public or private operation. The sample
size for facilities housing only female inmates was set to 36
facilities to ensure a sufficient number of women and allow
for meaningful analyses of sexual victimization by gender.
Facilities were sampled ensuring that at least one facility
in every state was selected. Federal facilities were grouped
together and treated like a state for sampling purposes. The
remaining facilities were selected from each region with
probabilities proportionate to size. 

Of the 171 selected prison facilities, 4 were deemed
ineligible and excluded from the survey for the following
reasons: 

* Albion Correctional Facility (NY)--Ongoing litigation. 
* Robert Scott Correctional Facility (MI)--Ongoing
litigation. 
* Dinwiddie Correctional Unit (VA)--Closed prior to the start
of data collection. 
* Waseca FCI (BOP)-Transitioned from holding males to females
during the data collection period (treated as a closed
facility). 

All other selected prison facilities participated fully in
the survey. 

Selection of inmates within prisons 

The number of inmates sampled in each facility varied based
on 6 criteria: 
* an expected sexual victimization prevalence rate of 4%. 
* a desired level of precision based on a standard error of
1.75%. 
* a projected 70% response rate among selected inmates. 
* a 5% chance among participating inmates of not receiving
the sexual victimization questionnaire. 
* an adjustment factor of 1.75 to account for the complex
survey design. 
* the size of the facility. 

A roster of inmates was obtained just prior to the start of
interviewing at each facility. Inmates under age 18 and
inmates expected to be released prior to data collection were
deleted from the roster. Each eligible inmate was assigned a
random number and sorted in ascending order. Inmates were
selected from the list up to the expected number of inmates
determined by the sampling criteria. 

A total of 46,189 prison inmates were selected. After
selection, 1,302 ineligible inmates were excluded--936 (2%)
were released or transferred to another facility before
interviewing began, 246 (0.5%) were mentally or physically
unable to be interviewed, 13 (0.02%) were under age 18 or
their age could not be obtained during the interview process,
11 (0.02%) were selected in error (i.e., an inmate was
incorrectly listed on the facility roster), and 96 (0.2%)
were on unsupervised work release or only served time on
weekends. 

Of all selected eligible prison inmates, 23% refused to
participate in the survey, 2% were not available to be
interviewed (e.g., in court, in medical segregation,
determined by the facility to be too violent to be
interviewed, or restricted from participation by another
legal jurisdiction), and 2% were not interviewed due to
survey logistics (e.g., language barriers, releases, or
transfers to another facility after interviewing began). 

Overall, 32,029 prison inmates participated in the survey,
yielding a response rate of 71%. Approximately 95% of the
participating inmates (29,954) received the sexual assault
survey. (See appendix table 1 for the number of participating
inmates in each prison facility.) 

Selection of jail facilities 

A sample of 320 jails was drawn to represent approximately
10% of the 3,007 jail facilities identified in the Census of
Jail Inmates, 2005. The 2005 census was a complete 
enumeration of all jail jurisdictions, including all publicly
operated and privately operated facilities under contract to
jail authorities. The NIS-2 was restricted to jails that had
five or more inmates on June 30, 2005. Based on estimates
from the Annual Survey of Jails, 2008, these jails held an
estimated 777,200 inmates age 18 or older on June 30, 2008. 

Jail facilities were sequentially sampled with probabilities
of selection proportionate to size (as measured by the number
of inmates held on June 30, 2005). Eight facilities that were
unable to participate in NIS-1 were selected with certainty,
while the measures of size of facilities that participated in
NIS-1 were reduced to give them a lower probability of
selection. The remaining facilities were stratified such that
facilities in each of the 10 largest jail jurisdictions were
placed into strata; all other facilities were placed in a
single stratum. Within the large jurisdiction stratum, 3
facilities were selected from the 5 largest jurisdictions
with probability proportionate to size, and 2 facilities were
selected from the next 5 largest jurisdictions with
probability proportion to size. Facilities in the second
stratum were first sorted by region, state, and public or
private operation. Facilities were sampled to ensure that at
least one jail facility in every state was selected. The
remaining jail facilities were selected from each region with
probabilities proportionate to size. 

Of the 320 selected jails in NIS-2, 10 facilities refused to
participate: 

* Baldwin Co. Corrections Center (AL) 
* Marengo Co. Detention Center (AL) 
* Merced Co. Jail (CA) 
* Columbia Co. Detention Center (FL) 
* Pike Co. Law Enforcement Center (IN) 
* Flathead Co. Detention Center (MT) 
* Rutherford Co. Jail (NC) 
* Monmouth Co. Correctional Institution (NJ) 
* Hildalgo Co. Detention Center (TX) 
* Kenosha Co. Jail (WI). 

Nine facilities were unable to participate due to lack of
space, staffing shortages, or construction, but expect to be
included in NIS-3 (to be conducted in 2011). Fifteen
facilities were determined to be ineligible: 7 had closed, 4
were community-based facilities, 2 had fewer than 5 inmates,
and 2 were prisons. All other selected jail facilities
participated fully in the survey. 

Selection of inmates within jails 

The number of inmates sampled in each facility varied based
on 6 criteria: 

* an expected prevalence rate of sexual victimization of 3%. 
* a desired level of precision based on a standard error of
1.4%. 
* a projected 65% response rate among selected inmates. 
* a 5% chance among participating inmates of not receiving
the sexual victimization questionnaire. 
* an adjustment factor of 1.75 to account for the complex
survey design. 
* a pre-arraignment adjustment factor equal to 1 in
facilities where the status was known for all inmates and
less than 1 in facilities where only the overall proportion
of inmates who were pre-arraigned was known.

A roster of inmates was obtained just prior to the start of
interviewing at each facility. Inmates under age 18 and
inmates who had not been arraigned were removed from the
roster. Each eligible inmate was assigned a random number and
sorted in ascending order. Inmates were selected from the
list up to the expected number of inmates determined by the
sampling criteria. Due to the dynamic nature of jail
populations, a second roster of inmates was obtained on the
first day of data collection. Eligible inmates who appeared
on the second roster but who had not appeared on the initial
roster were identified. These inmates had been arraigned
since the initial roster was created or were newly admitted
to the facility and arraigned. A random sample of these new
inmates was chosen using the same probability of selection
used to sample from the first roster. 

A total of 81,306 jail inmates was selected. After selection,
an additional 9,490 ineligible inmates were excluded-7,844
(9.7%) were released or transferred to another facility
before interviewing began, 455 (0.6%) were mentally or
physically unable to be interviewed, 144 (0.2%) were under
age 18 or their age could not be obtained during the
interview process, 308 (0.4%) were selected in error (i.e.,
an inmate was incorrectly listed on the facility roster), and
739 (0.9%) were on unsupervised work release or only served
time on weekends. 

Of all selected inmates, 17% refused to participate in the
survey, 4% were not available to be interviewed (e.g., in
court, in medical segregation, etermined by the facility to
be too violent to be interviewed, or restricted from
participation by another legal jurisdiction), and 8% were not
interviewed due to survey logistics (e.g., language barriers,
releases, and transfers to another facility after
interviewing began). 

Overall, 48,066 jail inmates participated in the survey,
yielding a response rate of 68%. Approximately 95% of the
participating inmates (45,126) received the sexual assault
survey. (See appendix table 5 for the number of participating
inmates in each jail facility.) 

Selection of special confinement facilities 

A sample of 11 special facilities was drawn to represent the
inmate populations in military, Indian country, and ICE
facilities. Three military, 3 Indian country, and 5 ICE
facilities were included. The selected military facilities
were the largest Army, Navy, and Marine facilities, including
the U.S. Disciplinary Barracks (Leavenworth, KS), the Naval
Consolidated Brig. (Miramar, CA), and the Marine Corps Base
Brig. (Camp Pendleton, CA). 

The selected Indian country facilities were the three largest
facilities identified in the 2007 Survey of Jails in Indian
Country. One facility, Tohono O'odham Detention Center (AZ)
was undergoing major renovations to accommodate increased
capacity and could not participate in the survey during the
data collection period. This facility will be included in the
NIS-3 data collection. The Navajo Department of Corrections
Window Rock (AZ), participated in the survey but held fewer
inmates in 2009 (14) than reported in the 2007 survey (99). 

The 5 ICE facilities were sequentially sampled from the 22
facilities run by ICE with probabilities of selection
proportionate to size (as measured by the number of persons
held at yearend 2008). Facilities were sorted by region     
and state. 

Selection of inmates in special confinement facilities 

For purposes of inmate selection, military facilities were
treated as prisons, and Indian country and ICE facilities
were treated like jails. The assumptions used to determine
the sample size within a prison or jail and the corresponding
selection procedures were used. However, in ICE facilities, a
second sample of newly admitted inmates was not drawn due to
an inability to identify new inmates on the ICE rosters. In
addition, inmates in ICE facilities who did not speak English
or Spanish were defined as ineligible for the study. 

Overall, 2,494 inmates were selected, including 546 in
military facilities, 161 in Indian country facilities, and
1,787 in ICE facilities. After selection, 409 ineligible
inmates were excluded 225 (9%) were released or transferred
to another facility before interviewing began, 10 (0.4%) were
mentally or sysically unable to be interviewed, 4 (0.2%) were
on unsupervised work release, and 170 (7%) in ICE facilities
did not speak English or Spanish. A total of 16 inmates were
excluded in military facilities, 15 in Indian country
facilities, and 378 in ICE facilities. 

Of all selected inmates in special facilities, 16% refused to
participate in the survey, 0.2% were not available to be
interviewed (e.g., in court, in medical segregation,
determined by the facility to be too violent to be
interviewed, or restricted from participation by another
legal jurisdiction), and 7% were not interviewed due to
survey logistics (e.g., language barriers, releases, and
transfers to another facility after interviewing began). 

Overall, 1,471 inmates participated in the survey (399 in
military, 115 in Indian country, and 957 in ICE facilities),
yielding a response rate of 71% (75% in military, 79% in
Indian country, and 68% in ICE facilities). Approximately 95%
of the participating inmates (1,379) received the sexual
assault survey (379 in military, 107 in Indian country, and
893 in ICE facilities). (See appendix table 9 for the number
of participating inmates in each special confinement
facility.) 

Weighting and non-response adjustments 

Responses from interviewed inmates were weighted to provide
national-level and facility-level estimates. Each interviewed
inmate was assigned an initial weight corresponding to the
inverse of the probability of selection within each sampled
facility. A series of adjustment factors was applied to the
initial weight to minimize potential bias due to non-response
and to provide national estimates. 

Bias occurs when the estimated prevalence is different from
the actual prevalence for a given facility. In each facility,
bias could result if the random sample of inmates did not
accurately represent the facility population. Bias could also
result if the non-respondents were different from the
respondents. Post-stratification and non-response adjustments
were made to the data to compensate for these two
possibilities. These adjustments included--

1. calibration of the weights of the responding inmates
within each facility so that the estimates accurately
reflected the facility's entire population in terms of known
demographic characteristics. These characteristics included
distributions by inmate age, sex, race, time since 
admission, and sentence length. This adjustment ensures that
the estimates better reflect the entire population of the
facility and not just the inmates who were randomly sampled. 

2. calibration of the weights so that the weight from a
non-responding inmate is assigned to a responding inmate with
similar demographic characteristics. This adjustment ensures
that the estimates accurately reflect the full sample, rather
than only the inmates who responded. 

For each inmate, these adjustments were based on a
generalized exponential model, developed by Folsom and Singh,
and applied to the sexual assault survey respondents.***
Footnote 3 3Folsom, Jr., R.E., and A.C. Singh, (2002). "The
Generalized Exponential Model for Sampling Weight Calibration
for Extreme Values, Nonresponse, and Poststratification,"
Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Section 
on Survey Research Methods, pp. 598-603.***

A final ratio adjustment to each inmate weight was made to
provide national-level estimates for the total number of
inmates ages 18 or older who were held at midyear 2008. These
ratios represented the estimated number of inmates by sex
(from BJS's 2008 Annual Survey of Jails and 2008 National
Prisoner Statistics, Midyear) divided by the 3Folsom, Jr.,
R.E., and A.C. Singh, (2002). "The Generalized Exponential
Model for Sampling Weight Calibration for Extreme Values,
Nonresponse, and Poststratification," Proceedings of the
American Statistical Association, Section on Survey Research
Methods, pp. 598-603. number of inmates by sex in the NIS-2
after calibration for sampling and non-response. The national
estimates for state prisons were 1,178,916 males and 88,518
females; for federal prisons, 178,153 males and 12,120
females; and for jails (with an average daily population of 6
or more inmates), 678,136 males and 99,096 females. 

Final ratio adjustments were not applied to inmate weights in
military, Indian country, and ICE facilities. Estimates for
special confinement facilities were made at the facility
level only. 

Standard errors and tests of significance 

The NIS-2 is statistically unable to provide an exact ranking
for all facilities as required under PREA. As with any
survey, the NIS estimates are subject to error arising from
the fact that they are based on a sample rather than a
complete enumeration. Within each facility, the estimated 
sampling error varies by the size of the estimate, the number
of completed interviews, and the size of the facility. 

A common way to express this sampling variability is to
construct a 95%-confidence interval around each survey
estimate. Typically, multiplying the standard error by 1.96
and then adding or subtracting the result from the estimate
produces the confidence interval. This interval expresses the
range of values that could result among 95% of the different
samples that could be drawn. 

For small samples and estimates close to 0%, as is the case
with sexual victimization in most prisons and jails, the use
of the standard error to construct the 95%-confidence
interval may not be reliable. An alternative developed by
Wilson has been shown to perform better than the traditional
method when constructing a confidence interval. (See note 1
on page 7.) This method produces an asymmetrical confidence
interval around the facility estimates in which the lower
bound is constrained to be greater than or equal to 0%. It
also provides confidence intervals for facilities in which
the survey estimates are zero (but other similarly conducted
surveys could yield non-zero estimates). (See tables 2, 4,
and 5 and appendix tables 5, 6, 8, and 9.) 

When applied to large samples, the traditional and the Wilson
confidence intervals are nearly identical. As a result,     
the tables that show national estimates display traditional
standard errors. (See table 1.) The traditional standard
errors have also been used to compare estimates of sexual
victimization among selected groups of inmates that have been
defined by type of incident, demographic subgroup, sexual
history, and criminal justice status. (See tables 6 through
12 and tables 15 through 19.) To facilitate the analysis,
rather than provide the detailed estimates for every standard
error, differences in the estimates of sexual victimization
for subgroups in these tables have been tested and notated
for significance at the 95%-level confidence. 

For example, the difference in the rate of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization among female prisoners (4.7%), compared
to male prisoners (1.9%), is statistically signifi-cant at
the 95% level of confidence (table 6).  In all tables
providing detailed comparisons, statistically significant
dif-ferences at the 95% level of confidence or greater have
been designated with two asterisks (**). 

Exposure period 

To calculate comparative rates of sexual victimization,
respondents were asked to provide the most recent date of
admission to the current facility. If the date of admission
was at least 12 months prior to the date of the interview,
inmates were asked questions related to their experiences
during the past 12 months. If the admission date was less
than 12 months prior to the interview, inmates were asked
about their experiences since they had arrived at the
facility.
 
The average exposure period of inmates participating in the
sexual victimization survey was-- 
 * 9.0 months for federal prisoners 
 * 7.9 months for state prisoners 
 * 3.4 months for jail inmates 
 * 8.4 months for inmates in military facilities 
 * 3.0 months for inmates in ICE facilities        
 * 4.4 months for inmates in Indian country facilities. 
 
 Measurement of sexual victimization 
 
 The survey of sexual victimization relied on inmates
 reporting their direct experience, rather than inmates
 reporting on the experience of other inmates. Questions
 related to inmate-on-inmate sexual activity were asked
 separately from questions related to staff sexual
 misconduct. (For specific survey questions see appendices 1
 and 2.) 
 
 The ACASI survey began with a series of questions that
 screened for specific sexual activities without
 restriction, including both wanted and unwanted sex and
 sexual contacts with other inmates. To fully measure all
 sexual activities, questions related to the touching of
 body parts in a sexual way were followed by questions
 related to manual stimulation and questions related to acts
 involving oral, anal, and vaginal sex. The nature of
 coercion (including use of physical force, pressure, and
 other forms of coercion) was measured for each type of
 reported sexual activity. 
 
 ACASI survey items related to staff sexual misconduct were
 asked in a different order. Inmates were first asked about
 being pressured or being made to feel they had to have sex
 or sexual contact with the staff and then asked about being
 physically forced. In addition, inmates were asked if any
 facility staff had offered favors or special privileges in
 exchange for sex. 
 
 Finally, inmates were asked if they willingly had sex or
 sexual contact with staff. All reports of sex or sexual
 contact between an inmate and facility staff, regardless of
 the level of coercion, were classified as staff sexual
 misconduct. 
 
 The ACASI survey included additional questions related to
 both inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization and staff sexual
 misconduct. These questions, known as latent class
 measures, were included to assess the reliability of the
 survey questionnaire. After being asked detailed questions,
 all inmates were asked a series of general questions to
 determine if they had experienced any type of unwanted sex
 or sexual contact with another inmate or had any sex or
 sexual contact with staff. (See appendix 3.) 
 
 The entire ACASI questionnaire (listed as the National
 In-mate Survey-2) and the shorter paper and pencil survey
 form (PAPI) are available on the BJS web site at
 <http://bjs.ojp.usdoj. gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=278>. 
 
 Interviews checked for inconsistent response patterns 
 
 Once data collection was completed, individual response
 patterns were assessed to identify interviewer error,
 inter-views that had been completed in too short of time,
 and incomplete interviews. In 133 interviews, the
 interviewers administered sex-specific survey items
 inconsistent with the sex of the inmate. In 208 interviews,
 the inmate either failed to complete enough questions to be
 considered a completed interview or completed the survey in
 too short of time. These interviews were excluded from the
 calculations of sexual victimization. 
 
 Interviews were also examined for inconsistent response
 patterns. A list of 18 indicators were developed based on
 in-mate characteristics (e.g., education, age, marital
 status, and time since admission) and items related to
 victimization (e.g., number of times, injuries, willing
 contact with staff, sex of staff perpetrator, and reporting
 of victimization). Indicators compared responses to initial
 questions with responses to detailed follow up questions.
 The results were combined into a count of the total number
 of inconsistent responses for each inmate. 
 
 Overall, the results revealed very high levels of
 consis-tency in survey responses. Of 45,126 completed
 interviews of jail inmates, 94.4% had no inconsistent
 responses, 5.2% had 1, and 0.4% had 2 or more. Of 29,954
 completed interviews of prison inmates, 93.6% had no
 inconsistent responses, 5.9% had one, and 0.5% had two or
 more. 
 
 Definition of terms 
 
 Sexual victimization--all types of sexual activity, e.g.,
 oral, anal, or vaginal penetration; hand jobs; touching of
 the in-mate's buttocks, thighs, penis, breasts, or vagina
 in a sexual way; abusive sexual contacts; and both willing
 and unwill-ing sexual activity with staff. 
 
 Nonconsensual sexual acts--unwanted contacts with another
 inmate or any contacts with staff that involved oral, anal,
 vaginal penetration, hand jobs, and other sexual acts. 
 
 Abusive sexual contacts only--unwanted contacts with
 another inmate or any contacts with staff that involved
 touching of the inmate's buttocks, thigh, penis, breasts,
 or vagina in a sexual way. 
 
 Unwilling activity--incidents of unwanted sexual contacts
 with another inmate or staff. 
 
 Willing activity--incidents of willing sexual contacts with
 staff. These contacts are characterized by the reporting
 inmates as willing; however, all sexual contacts between
 inmates and staff are legally nonconsensual. 
 
 Staff sexual misconduct--includes all incidents of will-ing
 and unwilling sexual contact with facility staff and all
 incidents of sexual activity that involved oral, anal,
 vaginal penetration, hand jobs, blow jobs, and other sexual
 acts with facility staff. 
 
 Logistic regression models 
 
 Multivariate logistic regression estimation is a modeling
 technique used to determine what characteristics are
 statistically significant for predicting a dichotomous
 outcome (e.g., victimized or not victimized) while
 controlling for all the other characteristics in the model. 
 NIS-2 used this technique to determine what inmate-level
 characteristics were significant predictors of
 inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization and staff sexual
 misconduct.  For each outcome, inmate-level characteristics
 were divided into 3 categories: demographic
 characteristics, sexual orientation and history, and
 criminal justice status and history.  For each category a
 logistic model was iteratively run under a backwards
 selection technique until only predictors that were
 significant at the 95% level of confidence remained (tables
 7, 9, 11). 
 
 Each reduced model was then combined to provide 4 models
 (for each type of sexual victimization and facility type).
 Backwards selection was conducted on each of the combined
 models until only predictors significant at the 95% level
 of confidence remained. Results for each model are
 displayed in terms of their conditional predicted
 probability (table 12). 
 
 In each of the logistic regression models, the condi-tional
 predicted probability representsthe probability that an
 inmate with a particular characteristic has experienced
 sexual victimization (by type) conditional on the inmate
 having the mean value for all other predictors in the
 model. For example, based on demographic characteristics
 only, a female prison inmate has a 3.8% chance of being
 victimized by another inmate given that she was at the mean
 of the joint distribution of race or Hispanic origin,
 education level, and marital status. (See table 7 and note
 2 on page 13.) 
 
 Predicting facility-level rates of sexual victimization 
 
 Estimates of the expected rate of inmate-on-inmate and
 staff sexual misconduct in each high rate prison and jail
 were calculated based on the characteristics of the inmates
 housed in the facility and the estimated rates of
 victimization associated with each characteristic. For each
 level of a characteristic, the logistic models provide an
 estimate of the odds that an inmate was sexually victimized
 given that the inmate had that characteristic. (For
 presentation purposes, these odds have been converted into
 conditional probabilities.) Overall, the predicted odds
 that a particular inmate has been victimized is the sum of
 the odds that cor-respond to that inmate's set of
 characteristics.  
 
 For example, the inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization
 model for prison inmates consists of 7 inmate
 characteristics: sex, race or Hispanic origin, marital
 status, sexual orientation, prior sexual assault status,
 most serious offense, and sentence length. The model
 provides estimates of the odds for each level of each of
 these characteristics. The odds of victimization for an
 inmate who is male, white, never married, heterosexual,
 with no prior sexual assault, held for a property offense,
 and sentenced to 1 to 5 years in prison is the sum of the
 individual odds for each of those characteristics. 
 
 Once the overall odds for an inmate has been calculated, it
 can be converted to a probability.  A predicted
 facility-level victimization rate is the weighted average
 of probabilities for all inmates in the facility. This
 weighted average in each high rate facility was calculated
 by summing across all inmates the product of the inmate's
 probability of victimization and the adjusted inmate
 sampling weights and dividing it by the eligible inmate
 population in the survey. 
 
 Five BJS reports on sexual victimization in prisons and
 jails: 
 
 Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004
 (NCJ 210333) 
 
 Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005
 (NCJ 214646) 
 
 Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006
 (NCJ 218914) 
 
 Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons 
 Reported by Inmates, 2007 (NCJ 219414) 
 
 Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates,
 2007 (NCJ 221946) 
 
 An overview of all of the BJS prison rape 
 collections: 
 
 PREA Data Collection Activities, 2010 (NCJ 230448) 
 
 These reports are available online at
 <http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/>. 
 
 BJS 
 
 Office of Justice Programs 
 Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods 
 http://www.ojp.usdog.gov 