U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004


July 2005, NCJ 210333


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca04.htm

--------------------------------------------------------------

By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D.
and Timothy A. Hughes
BJS Statisticians

-----------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Survey selected more than 2,700 correctional facilities
holding 79% of all adults and juveniles in custody

*  The survey met the requirement that BJS draw a random
sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not
less than 10 percent of facilities.

*  Entire systems were selected to maximize reporting
coverage. Local and private facilities were selected with
probabilities proportionate to the number of adults or
juveniles held.

8,210 allegations of sexual violence reported
Nationwide in 2004

*  42% of allegations involved staff sexual misconduct;
37%, inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts;
11%, staff sexual harassment; and 10%, abusive sexual
contact.

*  Correctional authorities reported 3.15 allegations of
sexual violence per 1,000 inmates held in 2004.

Correctional authorities substantiated nearly 2,100
incidents of sexual violence, 30% of completed
investigations

*  Males comprised 90% of victims and perpetrators of
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts in prison and
jail.

*  In State prisons 69% of victims of staff sexual
misconduct were male, while 67% of perpetrators were
female.

*  In local jails 70% of victims of staff sexual 
misconduct were female; 65% of perpetrators, male.  
----------------------------------------------------

On September 4, 2003, President George W. Bush signed
into law the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L.
108-79). The legislation requires the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) to develop new national data collections 
on the incidence and prevalence of sexual violence within
correctional facilities. This report fulfills the 
requirement under Sec. 4 (c)(1) of the act for submission 
of an annual report on the activities of the Bureau with 
respect to prison rape.

As an initial step in a multiphase implementation strategy,
BJS completed the first-ever national survey of 
administrative records on sexual violence in adult and
juvenile correctional facilities. Although data are limited 
to incidents reported to correctional authorities during 
2004, the survey provides an understanding of how 
administrators respond to sexual violence. The survey also 
collects basic counts of substantiated incidents, 
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, and sanctions 
imposed.  

Survey results should not be used to rank systems or
facilities. Future data collections, including victim 
reports of sexual violence in surveys of current and 
former inmates, are being developed to permit reliable 
comparisons. 

BJS conducts the first annual administrative records
collection

Between January 1 and June 15, 2005, BJS completed the
first national survey of the incidence and prevalence of
sexual violence in correctional facilities. The Governments
Division of the U.S. Census Bureau was the data collection
agent for the survey. The survey was conducted to provide
information on occurrences of sexual violence based on
allegations brought to the attention of correctional
authorities. Although the results are limited to incidents
reported to officials and officially recorded during 2004, 
the survey provides an understanding of what officials 
know, how many allegations were reported, how many were
substantiated, basic characteristics of victims and
perpetrators, and sanctions imposed on perpetrators.  

Administrative records alone cannot provide reliable
estimates of sexual violence. Due to fear of reprisal from
perpetrators, a code of silence among inmates, personal
embarrassment, and lack of trust in staff, victims are often
reluctant to report incidents to correctional authorities. 
At present there are no reliable estimates of the extent 
of unreported sexual victimization among prison and jail
inmates and youth held in residential facilities.

BJS is developing and testing methods for more fully
measuring the incidence of sexual violence in 
correctional facilities. The methods will rely on self-
administered surveys to provide anonymity to victims when 
reporting their experiences. At the same time, computer-
assisted technologies will ensure uniform conditions under 
which inmates complete the survey, and sampling techniques 
and supplemental data collections will reduce potential 
biases. (See box below for an update of these activities.)

The 2004 administrative survey provides the basis for the
annual statistical review, as required under the act. 
Though limited to basic counts, these survey data will be
used by the Review Panel on Prison Rape within the
Department of Justice for purposes of conducting public
hearings concerning the operation of correctional facilities
with the highest and lowest incidence of sexual violence.
The number of allegations and substantiated incidents for
each system and sampled facility in the survey is provided.
(See Appenix tables.)

-------------------------------------------------
National implementation of victim self 
reports to begin in 2006 

BJS works toward full implementation of the Prison Rape
Elimination Act. Since January 2004 BJS has entered into
cooperative agreements with --  
1. RTI International (Raleigh, NC) to develop and test the
adult prison and jail collection methodologies 
2. Westat, Inc. (Rockville, MD) to develop and test
methodologies for measuring sexual violence in State
and local juvenile facilities
3. National Opinion Research Center (NORC)(Chicago, IL)
to develop and test methods of collecting data from
soon-to-be released and former prisoners.

Though underlying survey methodology and logistical
procedures differ with each of the data collection efforts,
the measurement strategies will be consistent. The surveys
will consist of an Audio Computer-Assisted Self-Interview
(ACASI) in which respondents interact with a computer-
administered questionnaire using a touch-screen and
follow audio instructions delivered via headphones. The
use of ACASI is expected to over-come many limitations of
previous research. (See Data Collections for the Prison
Rape Elimination Act of 2003, June 2004, NCJ 206109.)

As of June 30, 2005, the following work had been
completed or was underway:

Prison and jail inmates 

*  An ACASI questionnaire for adult inmates had been
developed and reviewed by over 40 prison and jail
administrators, prisoner rights advocates, and
researchers.
 
*  Paper-and-pencil interview (PAPI) forms were under
development, including forms translated into the five most
frequent foreign languages (in addition to Spanish) spoken
by inmates; forms for inmates considered too dangerous
for interaction with survey staff; and forms to gather
administrative data on all inmates.
 
*  Survey materials and methods had been submitted to 
the Office and Management and Budget (OMB) and to an
Institutional Review Board (IRB) for approval to conduct
tests. 
 
*  Procedures for selection of prison and jail facilities 
and for sampling inmates within selected facilities had 
been developed.
 
*  A formal pretest in 10 State prisons, 5 Federal 
prisons, and 10 local jails is planned for October 
2005. 
 
Youth in residential placement facilities

*  A draft ACASI questionnaire for juveniles had been
developed and will be reviewed in a national workshop 
of stakeholders in September 2005.
 
*  Survey procedures and draft questionnaires have been
submitted to an IRB for approval to begin conducting
cognitive testing.  
 
*  A formal pretest of collection methods in up to 20 
juvenile facilities is planned for November 2005. 
 
Former and soon-to-be-released prisoners

*  An ACASI questionnaire and administrative records 
form were being developed to survey former inmates under
active parole or post-custody supervision. 
 
*  Activities were expanded to include the development 
of methods to survey soon-to-be-released prisoners in
community-based facilities.
 
*  Cognitive testing is planned for September 2005.
 
National implementation of data collections is scheduled to
begin with a 10% sample of prisons and jails in June 2006,
and a sample of juvenile facilities in December 2006.
---------------------------------------------

Survey covers more than 2,700 adult and juvenile
correctional facilities

The 2004 survey included all Federal and State prison
systems, State-operated juvenile facilities, and facilities in
the United States operated by the U.S. military. In addition,
a representative sample was drawn of local jails, jails in
Indian country, facilities operated by the Bureau of
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), privately
operated adult prisons and jails, and privately or locally
operated juvenile facilities. Altogether, the administrative
survey covered  2,730 of the 8,663 facilities specified by
the act. These facilities housed more than 1.7 million
inmates, or 79% of all adults and juveniles held at midyear
2004.

The survey was based on 11 separate samples corresponding 
to the different types of facilities covered under the act. 
(See Methodology, page 10.) Each sample was designed in 
accordance with the requirement that BJS draw a random 
sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not 
less than 10% of facilities. Entire systems were selected, 
when possible, to maximize reporting coverage. Local and 
private facilities were sampled to insure at least one in 
each State and with selection probabilities proportionate 
to the number of adults or juveniles held at the time of 
the last facility census.

----------------------------------------------
How sexual violence was measured

The definition of "rape" as required under the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act of 2003 was operationalized by
disaggregating sexual violence into two categories of
inmate-on-inmate sexual acts and two categories of staff
sexual misconduct. The inmate-on-inmate categories
reflected uniform definitions formulated by the National
Center for Injury Prevention and Control, in "Sexual
Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions and
Recommended Data Elements," Center for Disease
Control and Prevention. The categories were --
      
Nonconsensual sexual acts

Contact of any person without his or her consent, or 
of a person who is unable to consent or refuse; and
*   Contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis
and the anus including penetration, however slight; or
*  Contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or
anus; or
*  Penetration of the anal or genital opening of another
person by a hand, finger, or other object.
                                 
Abusive sexual contacts

Contact of any person without his or her consent, or of 
a person who is unable to consent or refuse; and
*  Intentional touching, either directly or through the
clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner 
thigh, or buttocks of any person.
 
Definitions of staff sexual misconduct and staff sexual
harassment were based on "Training for Investigators of
Staff Sexual Misconduct," prepared by the National 
Institute of Corrections.  

Staff sexual misconduct

Any behavior or act of a sexual nature directed toward an
inmate by an employee, volunteer, official visitor, or 
agency representative. Romantic relationships between staff 
and inmates are included. Consensual or nonconsensual
sexual acts include:
*  Intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast,
inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, or
gratify sexual desire; or
*  Completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual
acts; or                 
*  Occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy,
or staff voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment

Repeated verbal statements or comments of a sexual
nature to an inmate by employee, volunteer, official
visitor, or agency representative, including:
*  Demeaning references to gender or derogatory
comments about body or clothing; or
*  Profane or obscene language or gestures.
----------------------------------------------------
  
Two-thirds or more of systems and facilities able to
fully report the most serious forms of sexual violence 

After consulting with experts in sexual victimization, 
prison rape researchers, and corrections administrators, 
BJS developed uniform definitions of sexual violence. 
(See box on page 3.) Incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
violence were classified as nonconsensual sexual acts and 
abusive sexual contacts. Incidents of staff-on-inmate sexual
violence were separated into staff sexual misconduct and
staff sexual harassment. Incidents varied in seriousness,
ranging from the least serious, harassment, to the most
serious, rape. For purposes of this report, all such 
incidents are considered sexual violence.

The most serious forms of sexual violence (inmate-on-
inmate nonconsensual sexual acts and staff sexual 
misconduct) were the most widely reported using survey 
definitions and reporting rules.

Correctional authorities in two-thirds of prison systems 
and more than three-quarters of sampled jails were able to
report incidents of nonconsensual acts as defined in the
survey. Fewer were able to report data fully on abusive
sexual contacts, with 25% of prison systems and 14% of
jails including the lesser forms of sexual violence among
counts of nonconsensual sexual acts. 

Compared to prison and jail authorities, juvenile 
authorities had a greater capacity to adopt the survey's 
uniform definitions and reporting rules for youth-on-youth 
sexual violence. More than 80% of authorities responsible 
for local and privately operated juvenile facilities were 
able to report data using the categories provided.

Most prison administrators (35) were able to report data 
on staff sexual misconduct using survey definitions; 9 
were unable to separate sexual harassment from misconduct; 
3 could report data on some but not all of the occurrences
during the year; 4 could not report any data. Jail 
authorities had similar reporting capabilities, with 88% 
using the survey definitions. 

Fewer prison administrators were able to report
comparable data on staff sexual harassment. Among
prison administrators, 9 were unable to separate
harassment from other forms of staff sexual misconduct,
and 13 did not have any data on staff sexual harassment.

Variations in the reporting capacities of State juvenile
systems and local or private juvenile facilities were 
similar. Some administrators of State systems were unable 
to separate staff sexual misconduct from sexual harassment
(6) or unable to report any data on sexual harassment (4).
Operators of local and private juvenile facilities, which
typically house small numbers of youth, had the greatest
capacity to report data using survey definitions. Nearly 90%
of these facilities reported data on staff misconduct and
harassment. 

Caution needed when interpreting the 2004 survey
results 

In completing the 2004 survey, correctional administrators
frequently expressed concern about the absence of
uniform definitions and differential reporting capabilities.
Many indicated a commitment to improving their offender-based 
information systems and grievance tracking systems to conform 
to future survey requirements. During 2005 BJS expects to 
work with administrators to improve reporting, especially 
those with systems too large for manual searches of paper 
files.

The absence of uniform reporting and tracking procedures
necessitates caution when interpreting the 2004 survey
results. The data should not be used to rank systems or
facilities.  Higher or lower counts may reflect variations 
in definitions, reporting capacities, and procedures for
recording allegations and not differences in the underlying
incidence of sexual violence.

More than 5,500 allegations of sexual violence
reported in survey 

All selected correctional systems and facilities responded
except four: 
*  Navajo Department of Corrections, Window Rock, AZ
*  Colorado Boys Ranch, 
 La Junta, CO
*  Home Youth Family Program, 
Wittenberg, WI
*  Residential Treatment Center,
 Yonkers, NY
Reports of sexual violence varied across systems and
sampled facilities, with every State prison system except
New Hampshire reporting at least one allegation of sexual
violence. Among the 404 sampled local jails, 166 (41%)
reported an allegation.  Among State-operated juvenile
systems, 46 reported at least one allegation. (Iowa,
Montana, South Dakota, and Wyoming were the exceptions.) 
About a third of sampled local and privately operated 
juvenile facilities (96) reported at least one allegation.

Combined, the 2004 survey recorded 5,528 allegations of
sexual violence.  Taking into account weights for sampled
facilities, the estimated total number of allegations for 
the Nation was 8,210. Prison systems reported 42% of 
all allegations; local or private juvenile facilities, 
23%; local jails, 21%; and State juvenile systems, 11%. 

Nearly 42% of the reported allegations of sexual violence
involved staff sexual misconduct, 37% involved inmate-on-
inmate nonconsensual sexual acts; 11% staff sexual 
harassment; and 10% inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual 
contact.

Expressed in terms of rates, there were 3.15 allegations 
of sexual violence per 1,000 inmates held in 2004. Rates 
of staff sexual misconduct were the highest with 1.31
allegations per 1,000 inmates, followed by inmate-on-inmate 
nonconsensual sexual acts, (1.16 allegations per 1,000). 
Rates of alleged abusive sexual contacts (0.33) and staff 
sexual harassment (0.36) were the lowest.

Juvenile facilities reported the highest rates 
of alleged sexual violence

State-operated juvenile facilities, often required by law to
record all allegations and report them to State and local law
enforcement authorities and child protective services, had
the highest rates of alleged staff sexual misconduct (11.34
allegations per 1,000 youth). Local and privately operated
juvenile facilities reported 3.22 allegations of staff sexual
misconduct per 1,000 youth, nearly 3 times the rate in
State prison systems (1.12 per 1,000 inmates) and Federal
prisons (1.33).

Because many States have laws specifying that all sexual
acts involving youth below certain ages are nonconsensual,
rates of alleged nonconsensual sexual acts were high in
juvenile correctional facilities. In 2004 there were an
estimated 7.31 allegations of youth-on-youth
nonconsensual sexual acts per 1,000 youth in local or
private juvenile facilities and 6.75 allegations per 1,000 
in State juvenile facilities. These rates were more than 6
times the inmate-on-inmate rate in State prison systems
(1.05 per 1,000) and nearly 7 times the rate in local jails
(.97 per 1,000). Only jails in Indian country had a higher
rate (10.48); but, due to the small number of reported
allegations, the rate is unstable. (See Methodology, page
10.) 

External authorities often involved in investigating
allegations    

Allegations involving youth in State, local or private 
facilities are typically investigated by external authorities, 
such as the State police, sheriff's department/local police, 
office of inspector general, division of social services, 
child protective services, and other agencies serving youth.
Nearly 80% of local/private juvenile agencies and 64% of
State juvenile systems indicated that external authorities
had sole or shared responsibility for investigating
allegations of youth-on-youth sexual violence. In contrast,
in 21 of the 51 prison systems (41%) and 195 of 404 sampled 
jails (48%) external authorities had a responsibility for 
investigating allegations of inmate-on-inmate sexual
violence.

Responsibility for investigating allegations of staff 
sexual misconduct was left to the prison authorities 
in 22 systems (43%), jail authorities in 166 local jails 
(41%), State juvenile authorities in 14 State systems (28%), 
and local/private juvenile authorities in 69 facilities 
(26%). In other systems and facilities, allegations were 
either referred to external authorities or were jointly 
investigated.  

In State prisons fewer than 20% of allegations 
of nonconsensual sexual acts were substantiated  

Allegations reported in 2004 were classified as:
*  substantiated, if they were determined to have occurred
*  unsubstantiated, if the evidence was insufficient to 
make a final determination that they occurred
*  unfounded, if they were determined not to have occurred
*  investigation ongoing, if a final determination had not
been made at time of data collection.

Overall, inmate-on-inmate allegations of sexual violence
were less likely to be substantiated than allegations of 
staff sexual misconduct. Based on allegations in State 
prisons for which investigations had been completed, 18% 
of nonconsensual sexual acts were substantiated, compared
to 30% of allegations of staff sexual misconduct. In jails
27% of completed investigations of nonconsensual sexual
acts were substantiated, compared to 46% of the
allegations of staff sexual misconduct.

The most common outcome of investigations of sexual
violence was a determination of lack of evidence. Nearly
55% of allegations of staff sexual misconduct in prison 
and 45% of allegations of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual
sexual acts were unsubstantiated. More than a third (37%)
of completed investigations of nonconsensual sexual acts
in State prison and 29% in local jails were determined to 
be unfounded.

In juvenile facilities a third of the alleged
nonconsensual sexual acts were substantiated  

Based on allegations in State-operated juvenile facilities
for which investigations had been completed, 33% of
youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts were substantiated, 
compared to 15% of allegations of staff sexual misconduct. 
In local or private juvenile facilities, 33% of completed 
investigations of nonconsensual sexual acts were 
substantiated, compared to 17% of the allegations of staff 
sexual misconduct.  

About half of all allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts
were determined to be unsubstantiated: 53% in State
juvenile facilities; 49% in local/private facilities. More 
than a third of alleged incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
in State juvenile facilities were determined to be unfounded
(39%); nearly 30% in local/private facilities.

State juvenile authorities reported 212 substantiated
incidents of sexual violence, 24% of allegations for which
investigations had been completed. Local and private
juvenile authorities reported 108 substantiated incidents,
31% of completed investigations. State prison officials
reported 611 substantiated incidents (24%); and jail
administrators 210 (35% of completed investigations).
Federal prison authorities, reporting data only for staff
sexual misconduct and harassment, indicated that 11 of
the allegations had been substantiated and another 6
disposed of administratively through termination or
resignation. As a percentage of completed investigations,
14% of allegations were substantiated or administratively
resolved. 

During 2004 correctional authorities 
substantiated nearly 2,100 incidents of 
sexual violence 

The survey of administrative records recorded 1,213
substantiated incidents of sexual violence. Taking into
account sampling of local jails, private prisons or 
jails, and local/private juvenile facilities, the estimated 
total for the Nation was 2,090. Relative to the number of 
inmates, there were 0.94 substantiated incidents of sexual 
violence per 1,000 inmates reported in 2004.

The rates of substantiated incidents of sexual violence
were highest in juvenile facilities. State juvenile
administrators reported 5.15 substantiated incidents per
1,000 youth; local and private administrators reported 4.97
per 1,000 youth. These victimization rates were nearly 10
times those reported in State prisons (0.52 substantiated
incidents per 1,000 inmates) and 8 times those in local 
jails (0.63 per 1,000 inmates). 

Males comprised 90% of victims and perpetrators of
nonconsensual sexual acts in prison and jail

Characteristics of victims and perpetrators of inmate-on-
inmate sexual violence generally reflected the overall 
composition of the adult inmate population. At midyear 
2004 males represented 93% of State prisoners and 88% 
of local inmates. (See Prison and Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2004, April 2005, NCJ 208801.)  

Approximately, 90% of reported victims of
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts in State
prison were male; 87% of the reported victims in local 
jails. 

Among victims of abusive sexual contacts, women were
over represented compared with the general inmate
population. Females comprised 46% of victims of abusive
sexual contacts in State prison, and 28% of the victims 
in local jails. 

Juvenile authorities reported that girls comprised 17% of
the victims of youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts in
State-operated facilities, 28% of the victims in local/private
facilities. Compared to their percentages among youth held
in juvenile facilities nationwide, girls were over-represented
among victims. In the Census of Juveniles in Residential
Placement, conducted by the Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention in 2001, girls accounted for 11%
of the youth in State facilities and 17% of the youth 
in local and private facilities.

Female staff implicated in staff sexual misconduct in
prisons; male staff in local jails

Characteristics of victims and perpetrators of staff 
sexual misconduct differed among correctional systems 
and facilities:

*  In State prisons 69% of victims of staff sexual
misconduct were male, while 67% of perpetrators were
female.
*  In local jails 70% of victims were female; 65% of
perpetrators, male.
*  In State-operated juvenile facilities, 69% of 
victims were male; 47% of perpetrators, female.
*  In local/privately operated juvenile facilities, 63% 
of the victims and 64% of the perpetrators were male.

Perpetrators of staff sexual harassment, involving 
incidents of demeaning references to gender, derogatory 
comments about an inmate's body, or use of obscene 
language, were divided between male(58%) and female 
(42%) staff.
 
Overall, correctional authorities reported data on 716
perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct or staff sexual
harassment. Of these perpetrators, 50% were female staff.

Most prisons and jails imposed legal sanctions on
perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence 

To better understand how correctional authorities respond
to incidents of sexual violence, the survey included
questions on sanctions imposed on perpetrators.
Authorities who had reported at least one substantiated
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual act or abusive
sexual contact were asked to report all of the sanctions 
that had been imposed.

A legal sanction, including arrest, referral for 
prosecution, or new sentence, was imposed on perpetrators 
in -- 

*  86% of the 36 prison systems reporting a substantiated
incident
*  76% of the 42 jail facilities
*  70% of the 27 State-operate juvenile systems
*  50% of the 40 local/private juvenile facilities.

A change in custody was also a frequently reported sanction. 
Authorities in 89% of State prison systems and 74% of local 
jails with a substantiated incident reported that 
perpetrators were moved to solitary confinement, changed
to a higher custody level, or transferred to another facility
as a result of sexual violence. A change in custody was
imposed on perpetrators in 65% of the local/private juvenile
facilities and 70% of State-operated juvenile systems.

In addition, authorities with substantiated incidents 
during 2004 reported use of other sanctions, including

*  loss of good time in 58% of State prison systems and
44% of State-operated juvenile systems
*  loss of privileges in 56% of State prisons, 48% of local
jails, 74% of State juvenile systems; and 63% of
local/private juvenile facilities 
*  confinement to cell or quarters in 56% of State juvenile
systems and 30% of local/private juvenile facilities.
     
90% of perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct
discharged or referred for prosecution

The survey collected data on 539 staff implicated in 508
substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct during
2004. Correctional authorities indicated that 55% of the
staff had been discharged, 36% referred for prosecution,
and 9% disciplined but not discharged. An additional but
unknown number of staff had resigned before investigations 
had been completed.

State adult and juvenile systems reported the largest
numbers of staff referred for prosecution. In State prisons,
117 staff in substantiated incidents of sexual misconduct
had been referred for prosecution (39%); in State-operated
juvenile systems 44 staff (41%). In local jails staff 
involved in incidents of sexual misconduct were less likely 
to have been referred for prosecution (18%). 

The most common sanction imposed on staff involved in
sexual harassment of inmates was discipline but not
discharge or prosecution. During 2004, 129 staff were
implicated in the 140 reported incidents of staff sexual
harassment. Of these staff, 60% were disciplined; 36%
discharged; and 4 referred for prosecution. 

Methodology

Between January 1 and June 15, 2005, BJS, with the
Governments Division of the U.S. Census Bureau as its
collection agent, conducted the 2004 Survey of Sexual
Violence. The survey was the first-ever survey of
correctional systems and facilities, designed to measure
the number of reported incidents of inmate-on-inmate
sexual violence and staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct.
Based on administrative records, the 2004 survey was
designed to provide an understanding of what corrections
officials know, what information is recorded, how
allegations and substantiated incidents are handled, where
incidents occur and how officials respond to allegations
brought to their attention. It was not designed to rank
systems or facilities.

Sampling design

The survey was based on 11 separate samples, corresponding 
to the different facilities covered under the act. Each 
sample was designed in accordance with the requirement that 
BJS draw a random sample, or other scientifically 
appropriate sample, of not less than 10 percent of all 
Federal, State, and county prisons, and a representative 
sample of municipal prisons.

The following samples were drawn: 

1. The survey included all 50 State adult prison systems
and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Prison administrators
were directed to report only on incidents of sexual violence
that occurred within publicly operated adult facilities.
2. A sample of 27 privately operated prison facilities was
drawn to represent a 10% sample of the 264 private
prisons identified in the 2000 Census of State and Federal
Adult Correctional Facilities. Facilities were sorted by
region and average daily population and then sampled with
probabilities proportionate to size. Each sampled facility
was then weighted to provide a national sum reflecting the
total average daily population of inmates held in private
prisons in the 12-month period ending June 30, 2000.

3. Publicly operated jail facilities were selected based 
on data reported in the 2003 Deaths in Custody collection. 
This collection provided the most up-to-date measure of
jurisdiction size corresponding to the total number of
inmates held on December 31, 2002, plus the number
admitted in 2003.

Jurisdictions were sorted into 6 strata, based on size, and
then sampled systematically, to provide a representative
national sample. A total of 77 jurisdictions were sampled
with certainty (corresponding to the largest jurisdiction in
each State plus 31 jurisdictions selected due to their large
size). An additional 327 jurisdictions were selected from 4
strata, with probabilities of selection proportionate to size. 
Jail administrators were directed to report on all publicly
operated facilities within their jurisdiction. Each facility 
was then weighted to provide a national estimate for inmates
held in local jails.

4. A sample of 5 privately operated jails was also elected
based on the data reported in the 2003 Deaths in Custody
collection. Facilities were sorted by region and size. The
measure of size was the number of inmates held on December 
31, 2002, plus the number of new admissions in 2003. 
Facilities were selected systematically using a random 
start and a fixed sampling interval.  Each facility was 
then weighted to provide a total sum of inmates
corresponding to the number of inmates at risk to sexual
violence in private jails in 2003.
 
5. The survey included all State- operated juvenile
correctional facilities in 49 States and the District of
Columbia. (Arkansas was the only State that did not
operate a juvenile facility.) Based on the 2003 Census of
Juveniles in Residential Placement (CJRP), States
operated a total of 510 juvenile correctional facilities.

6. A separate sample was drawn from the 685 locally
operated juvenile facilities identified in the 2003 Census. 
In meeting the requirement under the act to select a 10%
sample, with at least one facility in each State, the 
largest locally-operated facility in each State was 
selected (37). An additional 32 facilities were then 
sampled from among the remaining facilities. Facilities 
were first sorted by region and facility type 
(commitment and non-commitment) and then ordered by size 
(the number of youth with assigned beds on the day of the 
Census). Facilities were then selected with probabilities 
proportionate to size.

7. A separate sample was drawn from the 2,275 privately
operated juvenile facilities also identified in the 2003
Census. At total of 57 facilities were selected with 
certainty, corresponding to the largest facility in each 
State (51), and 6 other large facilities. An additional 171 
facilities were selected from the remaining 2,218 facilities 
by forming 8 strata (based on region and facility type). 
Within each stratum, facilities were sorted by size (total 
youth with assigned beds) and then sampled with probabilities
proportionate to size.

8. Three additional samples of other correctional facilities
were drawn to represent a) jails in Indian country (10
selected from a total 70 based on probabilities
proportionate to size); b) military-operated facilities 
(all of the 59 facilities operated the Armed Services in the
continental U.S.); and c) 14 facilities operated by the
Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (excluding 
contract facilities holding inmates exclusively for ICE).

-------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence A. 
Greenfeld is director.

Allen J. Beck and Timothy A. Hughes wrote this report. 
Paige M. Harrison provided statistical assistance.  
Lauren E. Glaze and Thomas P. Bonczar verified the 
report, and Tom Hester edited it.

Timothy A. Hughes and Paige M. Harrison, under the
supervision of Allen J. Beck, designed the survey, 
developed the questionnaires, and monitored data 
collection and data processing.

Pamela H. Butler, Lisa A. McNelis, Greta B. Clark, 
and Monica R. Hill, carried out data collection and 
processing, under the supervision of Charlene M. 
Sebold, Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. 
Department of Commerce. Arthur W. Ciampa, Regina M. 
Yates, Patricia D. Torreyson, and Pearl E. Chase
assisted in data collection. Suzanne M. Dorinski 
drew the facility samples and provided sampling 
weights.

June 2005   NCJ 210333

Office of Justice Programs
Partnerships for Safer Communities

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
---------------------------------------

Comparing systems and facilities

Data for each correctional system and sampled facility are
displayed in the Appendix tables. (See pages 13 to 39.) In
each table a measure of population size has been provided
as a basis of comparison. These measures include:

*  Custody population on June 30, 2004, for State and
Federal prison systems (the most recent counts from the
National Prisoners Statistics data series);
*  Average daily population during 2004, for local jails,
private jails and prisons, and other adult correctional
facilities (collected specially for the survey);
*  Number of youth held on December 31, 2004, for State
juvenile systems and local or private juvenile facilities
(collected specially for the survey).
  
These population counts still mask underlying differences
in systems and facilities related to the total number of
inmates or youth who were at risk to sexual victimization
during 2004. Such differences result from variations in
length of stay, and further complicate drawing reliable
comparisons of systems and facilities. 

The 2004 survey results should not be used to rank
systems or facilities.

------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in 
ASCII, its tables, and related statistical data are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

The 2004 Survey of Sexual Violence comprised six
separate questionnaires corresponding to types of
correctional systems and facilities.  Copies of the
questionnaires in Portable Document Format (pdf) are
available on the BJS website. Click on Publications.
--------------------------------------------

Variations in the number of allegations and substantiated
incidents may reflect differences in definitions and reporting
criteria, as well as variations in procedures for recording
allegations and in the thoroughness of subsequent
investigations. Nevertheless, the 2004 survey provides an
understanding of what officials know and how they respond
to incidents brought to their attention.

Future data collections, based on victim reports of sexual
violence in surveys of current and former inmates, are
being developed to permit reliable comparisons that
overcome the limitations of administrative records.


End of file
07/11/05 ih



