U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003

Sexual Violence Reported 
by Correctional Authorities, 2005


July 2006, NCJ 214646


--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format(.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca05.htm

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#svrca
--------------------------------------------------------

By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. 
and Paige M. Harrison
BJS Statisticians

----------------------------------------
Highlights

6,241 allegations of sexual violence in prison and jail
reported in 2005, up from 5,386 in 2004

* 38% of allegations involved staff sexual misconduct; 
35%, inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts; 17%, 
staff sexual harassment; and 10%, inmate-on-inmate 
abusive sexual contact.

* There were 2.83 allegations of sexual violence per 
1,000 inmates in 2005, up from 2.46 in 2004.

Correctional authorities substantiated 885 incidents 
of sexual violence in 2005, 15% of completed 
investigations

* There were an estimated 0.40 substantiated incidents 
of sexual violence per 1,000 inmates in 2005, down from 
the 0.55 recorded in 2004.

* Based on completed investigations only, 37% of 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct in local jails 
and 15% in State prisons were substantiated.

Half of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence involved physical 
force or threat of force; two-thirds of staff misconduct 
was romantic
     
* In prisons 67% of victims involved in staff sexual 
misconduct were male, while 62% of perpetrators were 
female. In jails 78% of victims of staff sexual 
misconduct were female; 87% of the perpetrators, male.

* Staff were arrested or prosecuted in 45% of substantiated 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct; discharged, fired or 
resigned in 82%.
----------------------------------------

On September 4, 2003, President George W. Bush signed into
law the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79). 
The legislation requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) to develop new national data collections on the 
incidence and prevalence of sexual violence within
correctional facilities. This report fulfills the
requirement under Sec. 4 (c)(1) of the act for submission 
of an annual report on the activities of BJS with respect 
to prison rape.

In 2004, as one step in a multiphase implementation strategy, 
BJS completed the first-ever national survey of administrative 
records on sexual violence in adult and juvenile correctional
facilities. In 2005 the survey was expanded to collect
detailed information on substantiated incidents. New survey 
items included the circumstances surrounding each incident,
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, the type of
pressure or physical force, victim injuries, sanctions imposed, 
and victim assistance.

The 2005 survey results should not be used to rank systems
or facilities. Future data collections, based on surveys of 
current and former inmates, are being developed to permit 
reliable comparisons of facilities.
Second administrative records 
collection conducted for 2005

Between January 1 and June 22, 2006, BJS completed the
second national survey of the incidence and prevalence 
of sexual violence in correctional facilities. The 
Governments Division of the U.S. Census Bureau was 
the data collection agent for the survey. Initiated 
in 2004, the survey was conducted to provide information 
on occurrences of sexual violence based on allegations 
brought to the attention of correctional authorities. 
Although the results are limited to incidents reported 
to officials, the survey provides an understanding of 
what officials know, how many allegations were reported, 
and the outcomes of followup investigations.

In 2005 the survey was expanded to obtain data on each
substantiated incident in which the event was investigated 
and determined to have occurred. Using a separate incident 
form, the survey obtained incident-based data on all 
substantiated allegations, providing a basis for an in-depth
analysis of sexual violence. New information included details 
on the circumstances surrounding each incident, characteristics 
of victims and perpetrators, type of pressure or physical 
force used, victim injuries, sanctions imposed, and victim 
assistance.

Administrative records alone cannot provide reliable estimates 
of sexual violence. Due to fear of reprisal from perpetrators, 
a code of silence among inmates, personal embarrassment, and 
lack of trust in staff, victims are often reluctant to report
incidents to correctional authorities.  

BJS is developing and testing methods for more fully measuring 
the incidence of sexual violence in correctional facilities. 
These methods will rely on self-administered surveys to provide
anonymity to victims when reporting their experiences. At the 
same time, computer-assisted technologies will ensure uniform 
conditions under which inmates complete the survey, and 
sampling techniques and supplemental data collections will
reduce potential biases. (See box below for an update of these 
activities.) 

-------------------------------------------------
Collection of victim self reports to begin in 2006

BJS is working toward full implementation of the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act BJS has entered into 
cooperative agreements with —-  

Research Triangle International(RTI)(Raleigh, NC)to 
develop and test the adult prison and jail collection 
methodologies; 

Westat, Inc. (Rockville, MD) to develop and test 
methodologies for measuring sexual violence in State 
and local juvenile facilities;

National Opinion Research Center(NORC)(Chicago, IL) to 
develop and test methods of collecting data from former 
inmates.

Though underlying survey method-ology and logistical procedures 
differ with each of the data collection efforts, the measurement 
strategies will be consistent. The surveys will consist of an 
Audio Computer-Assisted Self-Interview (ACASI) in which 
respondents interact with a computer-administered questionnaire 
using a touch-screen and follow audio instructions delivered via 
headphones. The use of ACASI is expected to overcome many 
limitations of previous research. (See Data Collections for the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003, December 30, 2005.)

As of June 30, 2006, the following work had been completed or 
was underway:

Prison and jail inmates 

* The ACASI questionnaire and survey protocols for adult 
inmates have been developed and tested. Between January and 
May 2006, BJS and RTI completed a pretest with more than 
1,400 inmates in 4 State prisons, 4 local jail facilities, 
and 1 Federal prison. Results of the pretest will be published 
in October 2006 and assessed at a national meeting of 
stakeholders in November.

* In July 2006 BJS will submit an overview of all survey 
procedures, sampling methods, and questionnaires to the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for approval to begin 
national implementation in late 2006. 

* Procedures for selecting prison and jail facilities and 
for sampling inmates within selected facilities have been 
developed. In the first year of implementation, BJS expects 
to select 450 public and private prisons and jails and to 
interview more than 60,000 inmates.

* Upon OMB approval, RTI field staff will begin obtaining 
approval from State-level Institutional Review Boards(IRB) 
and begin interviews in January 2007.

Youth in residential placement facilities

* Survey procedures and questionnaires have been developed 
and reviewed by State and local admini-strators and other 
stakeholders. Cognitive testing of questionnaires with 
eligible youth began in June 2006.

* A formal pretest of collection meth-ods in 10 juvenile 
facilities with up to 600 youth is planned for September 
2006. 

* National implementation is expected in 2007. Initial 
survey efforts will focus on more than 14,000 adjudicated 
youth in a sample of 150 State-operated facilities and 30 
large, local or private facilities. 

Former State prisoners

* An ACASI questionnaire, an administrative records form, 
and survey protocols have been developed to survey former 
inmates under active parole or post-custody supervision. 

* A formal pretest of collection methods in 10-20 parole 
offices with up to 1,000 former inmates is planned for 
September 2006.

* National implementation is scheduled in 2007 with more 
than 11,500 completed interviews expected in 285 parole 
field offices.
------------------------------------------------------

The 2005 administrative survey provides the basis for the annual 
statistical review, as required under the act. These data will 
be used by the Review Panel on Prison Rape within the Department 
of Justice for purposes of conducting hearings concerning the 
operation of correctional facilities. The number of allegations 
and substantiated incidents for each system and sampled facility 
in the survey is provided.

2005 survey covered 1,866 adult 
correctional facilities

The 2005 survey included all Federal and State prison systems 
and facilities operated by the U.S. military and the Bureau 
of Immigration and Customs Enforcement. In addition, a
representative sample was drawn of local jail jurisdictions,
privately operated adult prisons and jails, and jails in 
Indian country. Altogether, the administrative survey covered 
1,867 of the 5,220 adult facilities. These facilities housed 
more than 1.7 million inmates, or 78% of all inmates held
in adult facilities in 2005.***A survey of State-operated 
juvenile systems and privately or locally operated juvenile 
facilities was also conducted. Survey results for juvenile 
systems and facilities will be published in a separate 
report.***

The survey was based on seven separate samples corresponding
to the different types of facilities covered under the act. 
(See Methodology, page 11.) Each sample was designed in 
accordance with the requirement that BJS draw a random sample, 
or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not less than 
10% of facilities. Entire systems were selected, when possible, 
to maximize reporting coverage. Local and private facilities 
were sampled to ensure at least one in each State and with 
selection probabilities proportionate to the number of inmates 
held. 

In 2004 BJS developed uniform definitions of sexual violence. 
(See box to the left.) Incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
violence were classified as nonconsensual sexual acts and 
abusive sexual contacts. Incidents of staff-on-inmate sexual
violence were separated into staff sexual misconduct and staff 
sexual harassment. For purposes of this report, all such 
incidents are considered sexual violence.

----------------------------------------------
How sexual violence was measured

The definition of "rape" as required under the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act of 2003 was operationalized by 
disaggregating sexual violence into two categories of 
inmate-on-inmate sexual acts and two categories of staff 
sexual misconduct. The categories were —-    

Nonconsensual sexual acts

Contact of any person without his or her consent, or of a 
person who is unable to consent or refuse; and
* Contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis and 
the anus including penetration, however slight; or
* Contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus; 
or 
* Penetration of the anal or genital opening of another 
person by a hand, finger, or other object.

Abusive sexual contacts

Contact of any person without his or her consent, or of a 
person who is unable to consent or refuse; and
* Intentional touching, either directly or through the clothing, 
of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks 
of any person.
* Excluding incidents in which the intent of the sexual contact 
is to harm or debilitate rather than sexually exploit.

Staff sexual misconduct

Any behavior or act of a sexual nature directed toward an 
inmate by an employee, volunteer, official visitor, or agency 
representative. Romantic relationships between staff and 
inmates are included. Consensual or nonconsensual sexual 
acts include:
* Intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, 
inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, 
or gratify sexual desire; or
* Completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts; 
or
* Occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or 
staff voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment

Repeated verbal statements or comments of a sexual nature to 
an inmate by an employee, volunteer, official visitor, or 
agency representative, including:
* Demeaning references to gender or derogatory comments about 
body or clothing; or
* Profane or obscene language or gestures.
----------------------------------------------

State prison reporting capabilities 
improve during 2005

The most serious forms of sexual violence (inmate-on-inmate
nonconsensual sexual acts and staff sexual misconduct) were 
the most widely reported using survey definitions and 
reporting rules. During 2005 State and Federal prison
authorities enhanced their abilities to report data on sexual 
violence.  

Correctional authorities in more than 36 State and Federal
prison systems were able to report incidents of inmate-on-
inmate nonconsensual acts as defined in the 2005 survey (up 
from 34 in 2004). Authorities in 38 States were able to report
incidents of abusive sexual contacts separately, while 10 
combined these incidents with the more serious nonconsensual 
acts. Only 2 systems did not record abusive sexual contacts, 
down from 9 in 2004.

The greatest improvements in reporting were for staff sexual
misconduct and harassment. In 2005 most prison administrators 
(44) were able to report data on staff sexual misconduct using
survey definitions, up from 35 in 2004. Six systems were unable 
to separate sexual harassment from misconduct in 2005, down 
from nine in 2004. Only 1 system was unable to report any 
data on sexual harassment in 2005, down from 13 in 2004.

The ability to report incidents of sexual violence by
authorities in sampled jail jurisdictions dropped during 
2005. Also, jail authorities were less likely than prison 
authorities to meet survey definitions. A third of jail 
jurisdictions were unable to separate abusive sexual 
contacts from the more serious nonconsensual sexual acts; 
a fifth were unable to report staff sexual harassment
separately from staff sexual misconduct. 

The lower percents meeting survey requirements may be the
result of the sampling procedures. More than two-thirds of 
the jail jurisdictions (242)received the definitions and 
reporting criteria for the first time in 2005, while all 
of the prison systems received the survey in 2004. BJS
expects to work with administrators to improve reporting,
especially in large jail jurisdictions with systems too 
large for manual searches of paper files.

As first noted in the 2004 report, the absence of uniform
reporting necessitates caution when interpreting the survey 
results. The data should not be used to rank systems or 
facilities. Higher or lower counts, especially among jail 
jurisdictions, may reflect variations in definitions,
reporting capacities, and procedures for recording
allegations and not differences in the underlying incidence 
of sexual violence.

All selected correctional systems and facilities responded
to the survey.  

Sexual violence allegations 
increased

Reports of sexual violence varied across systems and sampled
facilities, with every State prison system except New Mexico 
reporting at least one allegation of sexual violence. Among 
the 347 sampled local jails, 131(38%)reported an allegation. 
About 42% of the 36 sampled privately operated prisons and 
jails reported at least one allegation.

Combined, the 2005 survey recorded 5,247 allegations of sexual 
violence. Taking into account weights for sampled facilities, 
the estimated total number of allegations for the Nation was 
6,241. Expressed in terms of rates, there were 2.83 allegations 
of sexual violence per 1,000 inmates held in 2005, up from 2.43 
per 1,000 inmates held in prisons, jails, and other adult 
correctional facilities in 2004. Prison systems reported 74% of 
all allegations; local jails, 22%; private prisons and jails, 3%; 
and other adult facilities, 1%.

Nationwide, the number of allegations rose by nearly 16%.
Consistent with improvements in reporting capabilities, State 
and Federal prison systems reported a 33% increase in the 
number of allegations; local jails reported a 19% decrease.

About 38% of the reported allegations of sexual violence
involved staff sexual misconduct, 35% involved inmate-on-inmate 
nonconsensual sexual acts; 17% staff sexual harassment; and 
10% inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contacts.

Approximately 15% of allegations 
of nonconsensual sexual acts in 
2005 were substantiated  

Allegations reported in 2005 were classified as:

* substantiated, if they were determined to have occurred
* unsubstantiated, if the evidence was insufficient to make 
a final determination that they occurred
* unfounded, if they were determined not to have occurred
* investigation ongoing, if a final determination had not 
been made at time of data collection.

Overall, inmate-on-inmate allegations of nonconsensual sexual 
violence were less likely to be substantiated than allegations 
of staff sexual misconduct. Based on allegations in State and
Federal prisons for which investigations had been completed,
14% of nonconsensual sexual acts were substantiated, compared 
to 15% of allegations of staff sexual misconduct. In jails
16% of completed investigations of nonconsensual sexual acts
were substantiated, compared to 37% of the allegations of 
staff sexual misconduct.

The most common outcome of investigations of sexual violence
was a determination of lack of evidence. More than 66% of 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct in prison and 49% of 
allegations of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts
were unsubstantiated. More than a third of completed 
investigations of nonconsensual sexual acts in State and 
Federal prisons (37%) and local jails (38%) were determined 
to be unfounded.

During 2005 correctional authorities 
substantiated 885 incidents of 
sexual violence

The survey of administrative records recorded 620 substantiated 
incidents of sexual violence. Taking into account sampling of 
local jails, private prisons or jails, and jails in Indian 
country, the estimated total for the Nation was 885. Relative 
to the number of inmates, there were 0.40 substantiated 
incidents of sexual violence per 1,000 inmates reported in 2005, 
down from the 0.55 per 1,000 inmates in adult facilities in 2004.

Correctional authorities provided 
detail on 82% of substantiated 
incidents

For the first time in the 2005 survey prison systems and sampled 
facilities were asked to provide detailed information on each 
substantiated incident of sexual violence. Using a separate 
incident form, the survey obtained incident-based data, providing 
a basis for an in-depth analysis of sexual violence. Data 
included details on the circumstances surrounding each incident,
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, type of pressure or 
physical force, sanctions imposed and victim assistance. 

Incident-level data were reported on 510 of the 620 substantiated 
incidents (82%). More than two-thirds of the unreported 
incidents were in the Federal system (missing data on 35 
incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence), New 
Hampshire(missing 23 incident reports), and Vermont(missing 
16 reports on staff sexual harassment). An additional 25 
substantiated incidents were missing from local jail 
reports. Because most systems and facilities reported 
fully, there was little evidence of any selection bias 
among the 510 incident reports. 

Data provided on substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate
sexual violence revealed that-- 

* In 4% of the incidents more than one inmate was victimized.
* In 7% of the incidents there was more than one perpetrator.
* Males comprised 88% of the victims and 91% of the
perpetrators in prison and jails.
* 74% of victims in jail and 42% in prison were age 24 or
younger; while 42% of perpetrators in jail and 66% in prison 
were age 30 or older.
* Whites comprised 73% of the victims, 43% of the perpetrators; 
while blacks comprised 12% of victims, 39% of perpetrators.
* 15% of perpetrators were Hispanic, compared to 9% of victims. 
More than half of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence was
interracial: 10% involved a white perpetrator and a nonwhite 
victim; 31% black perpetrators and a non-black victim; 11% a
Hispanic perpetrator on a non-Hispanic victim (not shown).

Physical force or threat of force was 
used in 51% of inmate-on-inmate 
sexual violence 

Correctional authorities reported that force or threat of
force was involved in about half of all incidents of inmate-
on-inmate sexual violence. In less than a third of the 
incidents no force was used or threatened. In other incidents 
of inmate sexual violence, victims were talked into it(18%),
bribed/blackmailed (11%), or offered protection from other 
inmates (6%).

Force was more common among incidents of nonconsensual
sexual activity than among incidents of abusive sexual 
contacts. In nearly a third of nonconsensual sexual acts, 
the victim was physically held down or restrained. In a 
sixth, the victim was physically harmed or injured. 

In more than two-thirds of the inmate-on-inmate incidents,
the sexual violence occurred in the victim's cell (59%) or 
in a dormitory (12%). In only 21% of the substantiated 
incidents did the sexual violence occur in a common area, 
such as a shower or a day room. In less than 9% of the
incidents, the inmate-on-inmate sexual violence occurred 
in a program service area, such as in a storage room, 
hallway, laundry, cafeteria, kitchen or workshop.

Incidents of inmate sexual violence were the most common(44%) 
in the evening between 6 p.m. and midnight and the least 
common (18%) overnight between midnight and 6 a.m. The most
serious forms of inmate sexual violence(nonconsensual sexual 
acts) were most likely to have occurred in the evening (50%); 
while the least serious acts (abusive sexual contacts) were 
most likely to have occurred in the morning between 6 a.m. 
and noon (41%).

In nearly 90% of the substantiated incidents of inmate
sexual violence, the victim or another inmate reported the 
incident. In less than 11% of the incidents had a 
correctional officer made the initial report. In only 4% 
of the most serious incidents (nonconsensual sexual acts) 
had medical or health care staff reported the incident. 

Victims received physical injuries in 
15% of substantiated incidents of 
inmate-on-inmate sexual violence 

In most substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual
violence victims were not physically injured(85%). Anal or
rectal tearing was reported in 6% of the incidents; less 
serious injuries, including bruises, black eyes, sprains, 
cuts, and scratches were reported in 11% of the incidents. 
In fewer than 1% of the incidents, victims received broken 
bones or were knocked unconscious. 

Knife or stab wounds and other internal injuries were not
reported for any of the incidents.

Victims received medical attention, counseling or mental
health treatment in more than two-thirds of the incidents 
of nonconsensual sexual acts. Among the most serious 
incidents, 63% of the victims were given a medical 
examination; 27% were administered a rape kit; 17% were 
tested for HIV/AIDS; 17% were tested for other sexually 
transmitted diseases; and 33% were provided counseling or
mental health treatment.

Half of victims of nonconsensual 
sexual acts were placed in
protective custody or administrative
segregation

The most common response following a reported incident of
sexual violence was to place the victim in administrative 
segregation or protective custody (44%) or to transfer the 
victim to another facility (11%). Given differing housing 
options, prison authorities were more likely than jail 
authorities to move the victims rather than confine them 
to their cell/room. 

Victims of abusive sexual contacts were the least likely to
be moved, with over half (53%) having no change in housing. 
About a third of the victims of nonconsensual sexual acts 
were confined to their cell (11%) or had no change in their
housing (23%).

Most inmate perpetrators received 
legal sanctions or solitary 
confinement  

* A legal sanction, including arrest, referral for prosecution, 
or new sentence, was imposed on perpetrators in 31% of the 
substantiated incidents in prisons; 83% of the incidents in 
jails.
* Perpetrators were referred for prosecution in more than half
of the substantiated incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts; 
in a third of the incidents of abusive sexual contacts.
* Perpetrators were moved to solitary confinement in 72% of
the incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts and in 70% of the 
incidents of abusive sexual contacts.
* Perpetrators also received other sanctions, including
confinement to own cell/room(28%), loss of privileges(21%), 
placement in a higher custody level(20%), or transfer to 
another facility (19%).

Two-thirds of incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct with inmates 
were reported to be romantic 

The survey collected data on 344 substantiated incidents of
staff sexual misconduct and harassment during 2005. In two-
thirds of these incidents, correctional authorities 
determined that staff had a romantic relationship with the 
inmate. Although legally all sexual relationships between 
staff and inmates are considered nonconsensual, fewer than 
15% of the substantiated incidents involved physical force, 
abuse of power or pressure by staff. 

Coercion, including force, pressure, unwanted touching,
indecent exposure, and harassment, was more common among 
incidents in jails (43%) than in prisons (26%). 

Other data reported on substantiated incidents of staff
sexual misconduct and harassment revealed that--  

* In more than half the incidents, either the victim(32%)or
another inmate (26%) reported the misconduct.
* In a third of the incidents, correctional officers(18%)or
administrative staff (16%) reported the incident. In 10% of 
the incidents, the misconduct was reported anonymously.
* Most incidents of staff sexual misconduct and harassment
occurred outside of the inmate's living
area, in a program area (53%), outside of the facility
(12%), or in a common area (10%).
* In prisons, incidents of staff sexual misconduct occurred
most often between noon and 6 p.m.(50%); in jails, incidents 
occurred more evenly throughout the day.
* In 5% of the incidents more than one staff member was
involved in the sexual misconduct.
* In 10% of the incidents more than one inmate was involved.

Female staff implicated in staff 
sexual misconduct in prisons; 
males in local jails

Characteristics of victims and perpetrators of staff sexual
misconduct and harassment differed among prisons and jail 
facilities:

* In State and Federal prisons 67% of the victims of staff
misconduct were male, while 62% of the perpetrators were 
female.
* In local jails 78% of the victims were females; 87% of the
perpetrators, male.
* 47% of the prison staff involved in sexual misconduct and
harassment were age 40 or older; compared to 27% of the jail 
staff.
* In prisons 69% of the perpetrators were white, 25% black,
and 3% Hispanic.
* In jails 74% of the perpetrators were white, 21%, black, 
and 4% Hispanic.

--------------------------------------------------
Among victims of staff sexual misconduct, white inmates 
were overrepresented compared with the general inmate 
population. Non-Hispanic whites comprised 57% of the inmates 
involved in staff misconduct, compared to 36% of all prison 
and jail inmates at midyear 2005. (See Prison and Jail Inmates 
at Midyear 2005, NCJ 213133.) Non-Hispanic blacks comprised 
27% of inmates involved in staff misconduct; 40% of all inmates 
nationwide. Hispanic inmates were 10% of the victims of staff 
misconduct compared to 20% of the inmate population.

Over two-thirds of perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct 
or harassment were correctional officers

Most substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
and harassment involved correctional officers —- 57% of 
the incidents in prisons; 89% of those in jails. In 
prisons, nearly 16% of perpetrators of staff misconduct 
were maintenance and other facility support staff, including 
groundskeepers, janitors, cooks, and drivers. An additional 
10% of perpetrators in prisons were medical or health care 
staff, including counselors, doctors, dentists, nurses, 
psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, and medical 
assistants.

In both prisons and jails, about 13% of the staff perpetrators 
of sexual misconduct or harassment were contract employees or 
vendors.

Inmates involved in staff sexual misconduct often transferred 
or placed in segregation

In 27% of the substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
the inmates involved were transferred to another facility; 
in 20% of the incidents they were placed in administrative 
segregation or protective custody. In incidents involving a 
romantic relationship between inmate and staff, more than 
half of the inmates were either transferred (30%) or placed 
in administrative segregation (22%) (not shown). 

In incidents involving staff coercion, about a third of the 
victims were either transferred (20%) or placed in segregation 
(15%).

In most substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
(74%), victims received no medical followup, counseling, 
or mental health treatment. Excluding incidents involving 
romantic relationships, victims in 15% of the nonconsensual 
acts were given a medical examination and 19% were provided 
counseling or mental health treatment.
-----------------------------------------------

Nearly 90% of perpetrators of staff 
misconduct arrested, referred for 
prosecution, or discharged

Correctional authorities indicated that in 82% of the 
substantiated incidents staff had been discharged or 
resigned; 45% arrested or referred for prosecution, 
and 17% were disciplined, transferred, or demoted.

Among the multiple types of sanctions imposed on staff,
discharge or resignation was the most common--30% of the 
incidents in prison and 55% of those in jails. Many staff 
chose to resign (43%) rather than be terminated. In 
incidents involving a romantic relationship between an
inmate and staff, 90% of staff were discharged or resigned
(not shown). In incidents involving coercion, 64% of staff 
lost their jobs and 53% were arrested or referred for 
prosecution.

Methodology

The 2005 Survey of Sexual Violence was based on seven 
separate samples, corresponding to the different 
facilities covered under the act. The following samples 
were drawn: 

1. The survey included all 50 State adult prison systems and 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Prison administrators were 
directed to report only on incidents of sexual violence that 
occurred within publicly operated adult facilities.

2. A sample of 32 privately operated prison facilities was 
drawn to represent a 10% sample of the 319 private prisons 
identified in the 2000 Census of State and Federal Adult 
Correctional Facilities and updated for new construction and 
closures since 2000. Facilities were sorted by region and 
average daily population and then sampled with probabilities 
proportionate to size. One sampled facility had closed. 

3. Publicly operated jail facilities were selected based on 
data reported in the 2004 Deaths in Custody collection.  
Jurisdictions were sorted into 6 strata, based on their 
average daily populations, and then sampled systematically, 
to provide a representative national sample. A total of 72 
jurisdictions were sampled with certainty (corresponding to 
the largest jurisdiction in each State plus 26 jurisdictions 
selected due to their large size). An additional 278 
jurisdictions were selected from 4 strata, with probabilities 
of selection proportionate to size.  Jail administrators were 
directed to report on all publicly operated facilities 
within their jurisdiction. Of the 350 selected facilities, 
3 had closed.

4. A sample of 5 privately operated jails was also selected 
based on the data reported in the 2004 Deaths in Custody 
collection. The 38 private facilities were sorted by region 
and their average daily population during 2004. Facilities 
were selected systematically using a random start and a 
fixed sampling interval. 

5. Three additional samples of other correctional facilities 
were drawn to represent:

a) jails in Indian country (7 facilities holding adults were 
selected from a total of 68 based on probabilities 
proportionate to size);

b) military-operated facilities (all of the 59 facilities 
operated by the Armed Services in the continental U.S.); 

c) 14 facilities operated by the Bureau of Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement.

Data for each correctional system and sampled facility are 
displayed in the Appendix tables. In each table a measure 
of population size has been provided as a basis of comparison; 
however, the survey results should not be used to rank systems 
or facilities. Variations in the number of allegations and 
substantiated incidents may reflect differences in definitions 
and reporting criteria, as well as variations in procedures 
for recording allegations and in the thoroughness of subsequent
investigations.

----------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. 
Sedgwick is director.

Allen J. Beck and Paige M. Harrison wrote 
this report. Laura Maruschak, Seri Palla, 
and Maura Spiegelman verified the report. 
Tina Dorsey, Carolyn Williams, and Marianne 
W. Zawitz produced and edited the report. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for 
publication.

Timothy A. Hughes and Paige M. Harrison, 
under the supervision of Allen J. Beck, 
designed the survey, developed the 
questionnaires, and monitored data 
collection and data processing.

Pamela H. Butler, Greta B. Clark, and Nicole 
D. Simpson carried out data collection and 
processing, under the supervision of Charlene 
M. Sebold, Governments Division, Census Bureau, 
U.S. Department of Commerce. Patricia D. 
Torreyson, Pearl E. Chase, and D. Alicia 
Gumbs assisted in data collection. Suzanne M. 
Dorinski drew the facility samples and 
provided sampling weights.

July 2006,  NCJ 214646
--------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
This report in portable document format 
and in ASCII and its related statistical 
data and tables—including five appendix 
tables—are available at the BJS World Wide 
Web Internet site: <http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/>
-----------------------------------------

End of file
07/25/06 ih
