U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report 

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006

August 2007, NCJ 218914

------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca06.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may 
be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#svrca
------------------------------------------------------

By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D.
Paige M. Harrison, BJS Statisticians
and Devon B. Adams, Policy Analyst

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79)requires 
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to develop new national 
data collections on the incidence and prevalence of sexual
violence within correctional facilities. This report fulfills
the requirement under Sec. 4 (c)(1) of the Act for submission 
of an annual report on the activities of BJS with respect to 
prison rape.

Between January 1 and June 30, 2007, BJS completed the third
annual national survey of administrative records in adult 
correctional facilities, covering calendar year 2006. Although 
the results were limited to incidents reported to correctional
officials, the survey provides an understanding of what 
officials know, based on the number of reported allegations, 
and the outcomes of follow-up investigations.***Footnote 1: A 
survey of State-operated juvenile systems and privately or
locally operated juvenile facilities was also conducted for 
2006. Results from the 2005 and 2006 juvenile surveys will be 
published in a separate report.***  By comparing results of 
the 2006 survey with those from 2004 and 2005, BJS is able to 
assess trends in sexual violence for the first time since the 
Act was passed.

Administrative records surveys are one part of BJS's multi-
measure, multi-mode implementation strategy. During 2006, BJS 
completed development and testing of survey methodologies that 
rely on reports of victimization provided directly by prison 
and jail inmates, former inmates, and youth held in juvenile 
facilities. These methodologies rely on self-administered 
surveys that offer anonymity to victims of sexual violence to 
report their experiences. Using Audio Computer-Assisted Self-
Interview procedures, respondents interact with a computer-
administered questionnaire using a touch-screen and follow 
audio instructions delivered via headphones. (See box on page 
2 for a status report and national implementation schedule.)

The 2006 administrative records survey provides the basis for
the annual statistical review required under the Act. The 
survey included all Federal and State prison systems and 
facilities operated by the U.S. military and Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement. The survey also included 
representative samples of jail jurisdictions, privately 
operated adult prisons and jails, and jails in Indian 
country. Altogether, the administrative survey included 
facilities housing more than 1.8 million inmates, or 81% 
of all inmates held in adult facilities in 2006. (See 
Methodology for detailed sampling description.)

As with previous administrative records surveys, the 2006
survey results should not be used to rank systems or 
facilities. Given the absence of uniform reporting, caution 
is necessary for accurate interpretation of the survey 
results. Higher or lower counts among facilities may reflect
variations in definitions, reporting capacities, and
procedures for recording allegations as opposed to 
differences in the underlying incidence of sexual violence.

In 2004 BJS developed uniform definitions of sexual violence.
Incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence were classified 
as either nonconsensual sexual acts (the most serious violent
forms of sexual assault) or abusive sexual contacts (less
serious, but unwanted). Incidents involving staff were 
separated into staff sexual misconduct (any act of a sexual 
nature directed toward an inmate) or staff sexual harassment 
(repeated verbal statements of a sexual nature to an inmate). 
For this report, all such incidents are considered sexual 
violence. (See Methodology for detailed definitions.)

Detailed tabulations of the survey results by system and
sampled facility are presented in Appendix tables 1a--4b, 
available on the BJS web site at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/svrca06.pdf>.

Allegations of sexual violence rose during 2006 

Reports of sexual violence varied across systems and sampled
facilities, with every State prison system except Alaska and 
New Mexico reporting at least one allegation of sexual 
violence. Among the 344 sampled local jail jurisdictions 
participating in the survey, 161 (47%) reported an allegation. 
About 52% of the 46 sampled privately operated prisons and 
jails reported at least one allegation. 

The 2006 survey recorded 5,605 allegations of sexual violence. 
Taking into account weights for sampled facilities, the 
estimated total number of allegations for the Nation was 6,528. 
Since the Prison Rape Elimination Act was passed in 2003, the 
estimated number of allegations nationwide has risen by 21% 
(5,386 in 2004; 6,241 in 2005). Some of the increase may have 
resulted from adoption of BJS definitions and improved 
reporting by correctional authorities.

--------------------------------------
Collection of victim self-report of sexual violence 
in prisons and jails underway

BJS is working toward full implementation of the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act. As of June 30, 2007, BJS and its 
data collection agents had completed all phases of 
development and testing. BJS has entered into cooperative 
agreements to collect reports of sexual violence directly 
from inmates in prisons and jails, former State prison 
inmates, and youth in State juvenile facilities. BJS has 
worked extensively with –-

Research Triangle International(RTI)(Raleigh, NC) to 
collect data from inmates in prisons and jails; 

Westat, Inc. (Rockville, MD) to collect data from 
adjuducated youth in State and local juvenile facilities;

National Opinion Research Center(NORC)(Chicago, IL) to 
collect data from State inmates under active parole 
supervision.

Though underlying survey methodology and logistical 
procedures differ with each of these data collections, 
the measurement strategies are consistent. The surveys 
consist of an Audio Computer-Assisted Self-Interview 
(ACASI) in which respondents interact with a computer-
administered questionnaire using a touch-screen and follow 
audio instructions delivered via headphones. The use of 
ACASI is expected to overcome many limitations of previous 
research. 

The following work has been completed or is underway:

Prison and jail inmates 

* Implementation of the National Inmate Survey(NIS)began 
in April 2007 in 148 prisons and 302 jails. Data 
collection will continue through December 2007, with 
about 90,000 completed interviews anticipated. 

* On August 30, 2007, BJS will consult with corrections 
administrators and experts in statistical scaling to 
discuss various measures of sexual violence by which to 
rank facilities.

* Rankings of prison facilities, as required under the Act, 
are expected in October 2007; jail rankings are expected 
shortly after the completion of the data collection.

Youth in custody

* Testing of the National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) 
was completed in June 2007. The test involved 12 juvenile 
facilities in 6 States with more than 750 completed 
interviews. 

* Results of the testing and plans for implementation will 
be presented to juvenile administrators, researchers, and 
other stakeholders at a national workshop on August 28, 2007.

* National implementation is expected in early 2008, pending 
approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 
When fully implemented, the NSYC will include about 15,000 
adjudicated youth in a sample of 208 State-operated 
facilities and 48 large non-State facilities (that had an 
average daily population of 90 or more youth during 2005). 

Former State prisoners

* The Former Prisoner Survey (FPS) was tested in 16 parole 
offices with 788 former inmates on active parole supervision. 
In May 2007, the collection was submitted to OMB for review. 

* The survey will provide a national estimate of the incidence 
and prevalence of sexual vicitimization based on reports of 
former State prison inmates. Data will be collected on the 
totality of the prior term of incarceration, including any 
time in a police lockup, local jail, State prison, or 
community correctional facility prior to final discharge.

* National implementation will begin in late 2007, pending 
OMB approval. When fully implemented the survey will include 
about 16,500 former inmates in a sample of 285 parole offices. 
--------------------------------------

Expressed as rates, there were 2.91 allegations of sexual
violence per 1,000 inmates held in prison, jail, and other 
adult correctional facilities in 2006, up from 2.46 per 
1,000 inmates in 2004. Overall, the rate in State prisons 
(3.75 per 1,000) was higher than the rate in local jails
(2.05 per 1,000).

About 36% of the reported allegations of sexual violence in
2006 involved staff sexual misconduct; 34%, inmate-on-inmate 
nonconsensual sexual acts; 17%, staff sexual harassment;
and 13%, inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contacts. These
percentages were nearly unchanged from those reported in 2005. 
Correctional authorities reported 3,489 allegations of staff 
sexual misconduct and harassment during 2006, compared to 
3,470 during 2005.***Footnote 2: See Sexual Violence Reported 
by Correctional Authorities, 2005 at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca05.htm>.***

Upon investigation, most allegations were 
unsubstantiated or unfounded

The most common outcome of investigations was a determination
that the evidence was insufficient to show whether the alleged 
incident occurred. In 2006 more than half of all allegations 
(55%) were unsubstantiated; more than a quarter (29%) were 
unfounded (determined not to have occurred). About a sixth 
of all allegations (17%)were substantiated. Previous surveys
recorded similar outcomes.

Based on completed investigations, allegations of staff sexual 
harassment and inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts were 
less likely to have been substantiated than other types of
allegations. During 2006, 7% of allegations of staff sexual 
harassment and 14% of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual 
acts were substantiated, compared to 19% of the allegations 
of inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contacts and 25% of the 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct. 

Overall, 967 incidents of sexual violence were substantiated
in 2006, compared to 885 in 2005. Relative to the number of 
inmates, the rate of substantiated incidents of sexual 
violence in 2006 was 4.3 per 10,000 inmates, nearly unchanged 
from the 4.0 per 10,000 inmates recorded in 2005. Rates were 
lowest in Federal prisons and privately operated prisons 
(fewer than 1 in 10,000). Rates of substantiated incidents 
in State prisons, local jail jurisdictions, and privately
operated jails were 4 to 5 times higher. Substantiated
incidents were too few to provide reliable estimates for 
other types of facilities.

Surveys reveal consistent patterns of sexual violence 
in correctional facilities

In 2005 and 2006, correctional authorities were asked to 
provide detailed information on all substantiated incidents 
of sexual violence on a separate incident form. Authorities 
reported information on the circumstances of each incident,
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, type of 
pressure or physical force, sanctions imposed, and victim 
assistance. The two surveys provide a profile of victims and 
perpetrators and reveal consistent patterns among the
substantiated incidents.

Data provided on incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual
violence revealed that -- 

* More than one inmate was reported to have been victimized 
in 8% of the incidents in 2006 and 4% of those in 2005.

* More than one perpetrator was involved in 10% of the
incidents in 2006 and 7% of those in 2005.

* Males constituted 82% of the victims and 85% of the
perpetrators in 2006, compared to 88% of the victims and 91% 
of the perpetrators in 2005.

* In both years, victims were on average younger than
perpetrators. In 2006, 44% of victims were age 24 or younger, 
while 81% of perpetrators were age 25 or older. 

* In 2006 whites made up 72% of the victims; blacks, 16%; and
Hispanics, 9%. Among perpetrators, 39% were white; 49% black; 
and 10% Hispanics. Similar distributions were observed in 
2005.

* In both years at least half of inmate-on-inmate sexual
violence was interracial: 6% of incidents in 2006 involved 
a white perpetrator and a non-white victim; 35%, a black 
perpetrator and a non-black victim; and 8%, a Hispanic 
perpetrator and a non-Hispanic victim (not shown in table).

Most incidents of sexual violence among inmates 
involve force or threat of force and occur in the
victim's cell, in the evening 

Correctional authorities reported that physical force or
threat of force was used in more than half of all 
substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence. 
In 21% of the incidents in 2006, no force was used or 
threatened. In 30% of incidents, victims were talked into
it. In 7% of incidents, victims were offered protection,
bribed, or blackmailed.

Force or the threat of force was more common among incidents
of nonconsensual sexual acts (67%) than among incidents of 
abusive sexual contact (44%). The victim was held down or
restrained in 38% of the incidents of nonconsensual sexual
acts during 2006. In 18% of these incidents, the victim was 
physically harmed or injured. Although abusive sexual 
contacts are typically less serious forms of assault, the 
victim was held down or restrained in 28% of the incidents, 
and the victim was physically harmed or injured in 10% of 
the incidents (not shown in table). 

Overall, the use or threat of force was more prevalent among
incidents reported in 2006(58%)than in 2005(51%). In addition, 
the proportion of victims who were injured rose, from 15% in
2005 to 20% in 2006. Anal or rectal tearing was reported at
nearly the same levels (5% in 2006 and 6% in 2005).

Incidents of sexual violence among inmates occurred most often 
in a victim's cell or dormitory (totaling more than 70% in 
both years). By contrast, 17% of the incidents in 2006 and 21% 
of the incidents in 2005 occurred in a common area, such as a 
shower or dayroom. In 6% of the incidents in 2006 and 9% in 
2005, the location was a program service area, such as a 
storage room, hallway, laundry, cafeteria, kitchen, or 
workshop.

Sexual violence among inmates was more common in the evening
(between 6 p.m. and midnight)than at any other time of the 
day, exceeding 40% of all incidents in both surveys. In 
2005 it was least common between midnight and 6 a.m. (18%); 
in 2006 it was least common between 6 a.m. and noon (20%).

Incidents of sexual violence among inmates, when reported,
are typically reported by a victim or another inmate and not 
by a correctional officer or other staff. In 2006, 83% of 
the substantiated incidents of inmate sexual violence were 
reported by the victim or another inmate; in 2005, 91%. 

Most victims experienced a change in their housing; 
most inmate perpetrators received solitary
confinement 

The most common response to a reported incident of sexual
violence among inmates was to place the victim in 
administrative segregation or protective custody and to move 
the perpetrator to solitary confinement or other higher level 
of custody. Among victims of inmate sexual violence reported 
in the 2006 survey, 40% were placed in administrative 
segregation or protective custody; 13% were placed in a 
medical unit; and 16% were transferred to another facility 
(not shown in table). Nearly a quarter (24%)experienced no 
change in their housing or custody level. Among victims in 
the 2005 survey, nearly the same actions had been taken; a
slightly higher percent (32%) had experienced no change in
housing.

Inmate perpetrators were moved to solitary confinement in 78%
of the incidents of sexual violence in 2006, compared to 71% 
in 2005. Perpetrators of the most serious incidents,
nonconsensual sexual acts, were the most likely to receive
solitary confinement (81% in 2006, 72% in 2005).

Legal sanctions, including arrest, referral for prosecution,
or a new sentence, were imposed on perpetrators in 41% of 
the incidents in 2006 and 51% of the incidents in 2005. This 
drop was attributed to a decline in legal sanctions imposed 
on perpetrators of abusive sexual contacts (39% in 2005; 18% 
in 2006).

In addition, perpetrators in 2006 received a combination of
other sanctions, including confinement to their cell or room 
(16%), loss of privileges (20%), placement in a higher 
custody level (22%), and transfer to another facility (22%). 
These types of sanctions were imposed in 2005 at similar 
rates, except for confinement to their cell or room (28%).

The sexual relationship "appeared to be willing" in 
57% of incidents of staff sexual misconduct and 
harassment 

Correctional authorities also reported detailed data on 544
substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct and 
harassment (up from 344 in 2005). To address concerns about
the reporting and interpretation of data in the 2005 survey,
BJS changed the item related to the nature of the incidents 
in 2006. The option "Romantic" was replaced by "Sexual 
relationship between inmate and staff appeared to be 
willing." The options "Other" and "Level of coercion 
unknown" were added. In addition, the options were re-ordered 
from most to least coercive. (See Methodology for further 
details.)

Though these changes were introduced in 2006, the findings
remained similar to those reported in 2005. 

* The sexual relationship "appeared to be willing" in 57% 
of incidents in 2006. In comparison, the relationship was 
classified as "romantic" in 68% of the incidents in 2005.

* Physical force, abuse of power, or pressure was involved 
in 7% of the incidents in 2006, compared to 15% of the 
incidents in 2005.

* A third of the incidents in 2006 involved other forms 
of assault, including sexual harassment (15%), indecent 
exposure/invasion of privacy(9%), and unwanted touching 
for sexual gratification (5%).

* In 12% of the incidents in 2006, correctional authorities
reported the "level of coercion unknown."

Other data reported on substantiated incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct and harassment during 2006 revealed 
that--
  
* In more than half of the incidents, the victim(29%)or
another inmate (27%) reported the misconduct.

* Most incidents occurred outside the inmate's living 
area: 46% in a program area, 8% in a common area, and 
8% outside of the facility.

* Incidents occurred most often between noon and 6 p.m. 
in prisons (53%) and between 6 p.m. and midnight in local 
jails (74%). 

* More than one staff member was involved in the sexual
misconduct in 2% of the incidents.

* Staff had victimized more than one inmate in 18% of the
incidents.

Female staff more frequently implicated in sexual misconduct
in prisons; male staff in local jails

In the 2006 survey, characteristics of victims and
perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct and harassment 
differed by type of facility:

* In State and Federal prisons, 65% of inmate victims of 
staff sexual misconduct and harassment were male, while 
58% of staff perpetrators were female.

* In local jails, 80% of victims were female, while 79% of
perpetrators were male.

* 49% of staff perpetrators in prisons were age 40 or older,
while 65% of victims were under age 35.

* 56% of staff perpetrators in jails were age 40 or older,
while 86% of victims were under age 35.

* Among staff perpetrators in prisons and jails, 71% were
white; 20%, black; and 7%, Hispanic.

* Among inmate victims, 66% were white; 23%, black; and 8%,
Hispanic.

* A correctional officer was identified as the perpetrator 
in 54% of incidents in prisons, and in 98% of incidents in 
jails.

* A contract employee was involved in 17% of the incidents 
in prisons and in 2% of those in jails.

Three-quarters of staff perpetrators in 2006 lost their 
jobs; 56% were arrested or referred for prosecution

Correctional authorities indicated that staff had been
discharged or resigned in 77% of substantiated incidents 
in 2006, compared to 82% in 2005. Staff had also been 
arrested or referred for prosecution in 56% of incidents 
(compared to 45% of incidents in 2005). Approximately 
10% of staff perpetrators in 2006 were disciplined, 
transferred or demoted, compared to 17% in 2005.

Among the multiple types of sanctions imposed on staff
perpetrators during 2006, discharge or resignation was the 
most common, constituting 79% of incidents in prisons and 
74% of those in jails. Jail staff were more likely than 
prison staff to be arrested or prosecuted (73% versus 43%).

Half of inmates involved in staff sexual misconduct 
were transferred or placed in segregation

Correctional authorities indicated that the victims of staff
sexual misconduct or harassment during 2006 were often 
transferred to another facility (31%)or placed in 
administrative segregation or protective custody (25%). 
Inmate victims had been transferred to another facility
in 48% of the incidents in local jails and in 19% of the
incidents in State and Federal prisons. Victims were less 
likely to have been moved to administrative segregation or 
protective custody when the incident occurred in a jail(19%) 
than in a prison (28%).

In most incidents of staff sexual misconduct or harassment
(76%), victims received no medical followup, counseling or 
mental health treatment. Victims were given a medical 
examination in 6% of the incidents in prisons and jails. 
They were provided counseling or mental health treatment 
in 12% of the incidents. 

Methodology

Measures of sexual violence 

In 2004 BJS developed uniform definitions of sexual violence.
All incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence involve 
sexual contacts with any person without his or her consent, 
or with a person who is unable to consent or refuse. The 
most serious incidents, nonconsensual sexual acts, include:

* Contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis and 
  the anus including penetration, however slight; or
* Contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus; 
  or
* Penetration of the anal or genital opening of another 
  person by a hand, finger, or other object.

The less serious incidents, abusive sexual contacts, 
include:

* Intentional touching, either directly or through the
  clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner 
  thigh, or buttocks of any person.
* Incidents in which the intention is to sexually exploit
 (rather than to only harm or debilitate).

Incidents of staff-with-inmate sexual violence are separated
into two categories.

Staff sexual misconduct includes any behavior or act of a
sexual nature, either consensual or nonconsensual, directed 
toward an inmate by an employee, volunteer, official visitor, 
or agency representative. Such acts include:

* Intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast,
  inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, 
  or gratify sexual desire; or
* Completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts;
  or
* Occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or
  staff voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment involves repeated verbal statements
or comments of a sexual nature to an inmate by an employee, 
volunteer, official visitor, or agency representative. Such 
statements include demeaning references to gender or 
derogatory comments about body or clothing; or profane or 
obscene language or gestures.

Since BJS first developed these definitions, correctional
authorities have significantly enhanced their abilities to 
report uniform data on sexual violence. Authorities in 42 
State and Federal prison systems were able to report 
incidents of abusive sexual contacts separately, as defined 
in the 2006 survey. Only two States limited reports to
substantiated incidents.

Most prison systems (44) were able to report data on staff
sexual misconduct using survey definitions. Five systems 
were unable to separate sexual harassment from misconduct. 
One system did not record staff sexual harassment in a 
central database.

Jail authorities were less likely than prison authorities 
to meet survey definitions. More than a third of the jail 
jurisdictions were unable to separate abusive sexual 
contacts from the more serious nonconsensual sexual acts; 
a quarter were unable to report staff sexual harassment
separately from staff sexual misconduct. 

Sampling procedures

The 2006 Survey of Sexual Violence was based on seven
separate samples, corresponding to the different facilities 
covered under the Act. The following samples were drawn:

The survey included all 50 State adult prison systems and
the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Prison administrators were 
directed to report only on incidents of sexual violence 
that occurred within publicly operated adult facilities.

A sample of 41 privately operated prison facilities was
drawn to produce a 10% sample of the 408 private prisons 
identified in the 2005 Census of State and Federal Adult 
Correctional Facilities. Facilities were ranked by 
average daily population (ADP) in the 12-month period
ending June 30, 2005. Four facilities with an ADP of more
than 2,005 inmates were selected with certainty due to 
their size. The remaining facilities were sorted by region 
and ADP within region and then sampled systematically with 
a probability proportional to their size.

A sample of 350 publicly operated jail facilities was
selected based on data reported in the 2005 Census of 
Jail Inmates. 

Jail jurisdictions were sorted into five strata based on ADP
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2005, and sampled 
systematically to produce a representative national sample. 
In 2006 the second-largest jail jurisdiction in each State 
was selected from stratum 1 to avoid selecting with 
certainty the same jurisdiction as in 2005. (In previous
surveys the 46 largest jails in each State were selected.)

An additional 61 jail jurisdictions (forming stratum 2)were
selected with certainty due to size(an ADP of 1,500 inmates 
or more). 

The remaining 2,813 jail jurisdictions in the 2005 census
were then grouped into 3 strata: stratum 3 contained 1,599 
jails with an ADP of 85 inmates or fewer; stratum 4 included 
785 jails with an ADP of 86 to 183 inmates; and stratum 5 
included 429 jails with an ADP of 284 to 1,499 inmates. Jail 
jurisdictions in these 3 strata were selected systematically 
with probabilities proportionate to their size, resulting in 
46 selections from stratum 3, 52 from stratum 4, and 145
from stratum 5.

Of the 350 selected jail jurisdictions, 5 did not respond to
the survey:

Rockdale County, GA
Beaver County, PA
Lycoming County, PA
Greenville County, SC
Ellis County, TX

One of the facilities closed in 2006:

Crossville City, AL

4. A sample of 5 privately operated jails was also selected
based on data reported in the 2005 Census of Jail Inmates. 
The 42 private facilities were sorted by region, State, 
and ADP. Facilities were systematically sampled with 
probabilities proportionate to size.

Three additional samples of other correctional facilities
were drawn to represent:

a) jails in Indian Country (10 facilities holding adult and
juvenile inmates were selected from a total of 68 based on 
the ADP during 2004);

b) military-operated facilities (all 59 facilities operated
by the Armed Services in the continental U.S.);

c) 14 facilities operated by Immigration and Customs
Enforcement.

Of the facilities selected, one had closed (Navajo Department
of Corrections -- Chinle, AZ). 

Data for each correctional system and sampled facility are
displayed in Appendix tables 1a -- 4b. In each table a 
measure of population size has been provided as a basis for 
comparison.

National estimates and accuracy

Survey responses were weighted to produce national estimates
by type of correctional facility. Data from the Federal Bureau 
of Prisons, all State systems, military facilities, and ICE 
facilities received a weight of 1.00, since these systems and 
facilities were all selected (sampled with certainty). 

Among publicly operated jails, private prisons, private jails
and jails in Indian country, facilities were assigned a weight 
equal to the inverse of their probability of selection. 
Estimates for public jail jurisdictions were adjusted for non-
response by multiplying each estimate by the ratio of the
total ADP in all jurisdictions to the ADP among participating
jurisdictions.

Survey estimates for public jail jurisdictions, private 
prisons and jails, and jails in Indian country are subject 
to sampling error. The error, as measured by an estimated 
sampling error, varies by the size of the estimate and the 
size of the base population. Estimates of the standard 
errors for selected survey items are presented in table 13.

These standard errors may be used to construct confidence
intervals around survey estimates (e.g., numbers, rates, 
and percentages), as well as differences in these estimates. 
For example, the 95% confidence interval around the number 
of allegations of sexual violence is approximately 6,528 
plus or minus 1.96 times 143 (or 6,248 to 6,808).

Detail on substantiated incidents

The 2006 Survey of Sexual Violence recorded 704 substantiated
incidents of sexual violence; that is, incidents that were 
investigated and determined to have occurred. Taking into 
account sampling of local jail jurisdictions, private 
prisons and jails, and jails in Indian country, the
estimated total for the Nation was 967. 

Correctional authorities provided detail on 99% of all
substantiated incidents. Through use of a separate incident 
form, the survey collected details on circumstances 
surrounding each incident, characteristics of victims and 
perpetrators, type of pressure or physical force, sanctions 
imposed, and victim assistance. These data are displayed in 
Appendix tables 5 -- 8. 

In response to concerns raised about the 2005 survey, BJS
changed the survey item related to staff sexual misconduct 
and harassment. Item 27 of the 2006 survey read as follows:

What was the nature of the incident?

(Mark all that apply.) 

Pressure or abuse of power resulting in a nonconsensual
sexual act

Indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or voyeurism for
sexual gratification

Unwanted touching for sexual gratification

Sexual harassment or repeated verbal statements of a sexual
nature by staff

Sexual relationship between inmate and staff that appeared to
be willing

Other -- Specify

Level of coercion unknown

---------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. 
Sedgwick is the director.

Allen J. Beck, Paige M. Harrison and Devon B. Adams, 
wrote this report. Carolyn Williams produced and 
edited the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the 
report for publication, under the supervision of 
Doris J. James.

Pamela H. Butler, Greta B. Clark, and Shannon Clerkin 
carried out data collection and processing, under the 
supervision of Charlene M. Sebold, Governments Division, 
Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. Pearl E. 
Chase, Patricia D. Torryson, Kathryn DiMeglio, and Lisa 
A. McNelis assisted in the data collection. Suzanne M. 
Dorinski drew the facility samples and provided sampling 
weights.

August 2007, NCJ 218914.
----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format (includes 8 
appendix tables) and in ASCII and its related 
statistical data are available at the BJS World Wide 
Web Internet site:
<http://www. ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca06.htm>
-----------------------------------------------


End of file
08/09/07 ih