U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons Reported by
Inmates, 2007

December 2007, NCJ 219414

-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svsfpri07.htm

-------------------------------------------------------------


-------------------------------------------------------------
By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D.,
and Paige M. Harrison, 
BJS Statisticians
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79)
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out,
for each calendar year, a comprehensive statistical review
and analysis of the incidence and effects of prison rape.
This report fulfills the requirement under Sec.
4(c)(2)(B)(ii) of the Act to provide a listing of State and
Federal prisons ranked according to the incidence of prison
rape.
 
Between April and August 2007, BJS completed the first
National Inmate Survey (NIS) of 146 State and Federal
prisons. The survey, conducted by RTI International (Research
Triangle Park, NC), was restricted to adult confinement
facilities, including prisons, penitentiaries, prison
hospitals, prison farms, boot camps, and centers for
reception, classification, or alcohol and drug treatment. The
NIS excluded community-based facilities, such as halfway
houses, group homes, and work release centers. The sample was
designed in accordance with the requirement that BJS draw a
random sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of
not less than 10% of prison facilities. (See Methodology for
sample description.)

Unlike previous BJS surveys of sexual violence that were
based on administrative records, the NIS collected reports of
sexual violence directly from inmates. The NIS survey
consisted of an Audio Computer-Assisted Self Interview
(ACASI) in which inmates, using a touch-screen, interacted
with a computer-assisted questionnaire and followed audio
instructions delivered via headphones. A small number of
inmates (2% of all participants in the survey) completed a
short paper form. These were inmates housed primarily in
administrative or disciplinary segregation or considered too
violent to be interviewed.

Inmate self-reports provide a basis for comparing and ranking
facilities

Past surveys of administrative records could not provide
reliable facility-level estimates of sexual violence because
they were limited to incidents reported to correctional
authorities. Some victims may be reluctant to report
incidents to correctional authorities due to lack of trust in
staff, fear of reprisal from perpetrators, a code of silence
among inmates, or personal embarrassment. Moreover,
administrative records may vary in the way incidents and
allegations are defined, reported, and recorded, which
further complicate facility-level comparisons.

The NIS is a self-administered survey which provides
anonymity to respondents and encourages fuller reporting of
victimization. The survey employs computer-assisted
technology to provide more uniform conditions under which
inmates complete the survey. Facility-level comparisons in
the NIS are further enhanced through the application of
statistical methods that ensure that the estimates reflect
the entire population of each facility, rather than only the
inmates who participated in the survey. (See Methodology for
sample description and non-response adjustments.)

For purposes of calculating comparative rates, the NIS
limited the reports of sexual victimization to incidents that
occurred at the sampled facilities during the 12 months prior
to the date of the interview. Inmates who had served less
than 12 months were asked about their experiences since they
had arrived at the facility. 

Despite efforts of survey staff to reassure inmates that
their survey responses about sexual violence would be kept
confidential, some inmates may not have felt confident to
report experiences of sexual victimization since admission or
in the past 12 months. At the same time, some inmates may
have made false allegations. In 2006, about a quarter of the
allegations brought to the attention of State and Federal
correctional authorities, upon completion of an official
investigation, were determined to have been unfounded (not to
have occurred).***Footnote 1: See Sexual Violence Reported by
Correctional Authorities, 2006, at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svcra06.htm>.***
Although the effects may be offsetting, the relative extent
of underreporting and false reporting in the NIS is unknown. 

An estimated 60,500 inmates experienced one or more incidents
of sexual victimization

Among the 23,398 inmates who participated in the 2007 survey,
1,109 reported one or more incidents of sexual victimization.
Because the NIS is a sample survey, weights were applied for
sampled facilities and inmates within facilities to produce
national-level and facility-level estimates of sexual
violence. The estimated number of State and Federal inmates
experiencing sexual violence totaled 60,500 (or 4.5% of the
Nation's prisoners). 

Nationwide, about 2.1% of inmates (27,500) reported an
incident involving another inmate, and 2.9% (38,600) reported
an incident involving staff. Some inmates (0.5%) said they
had been sexually victimized by both other inmates and staff.

The NIS screened for specific sexual activities. Using
uniform definitions of sexual violence developed by BJS in
2004, reports of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence were
classified as either nonconsensual sexual acts or abusive
sexual contacts only. Approximately 1.3% of all inmates
(16,800, nationwide) said they had nonconsensual sex with
another inmate, including giving or receiving sexual
gratification and oral, anal or vaginal sex. An additional
0.8% of all inmates (10,600) said they had only experienced
an abusive sexual contact, that is, unwanted touching by
another inmate of specific body parts in a sexual way. (See
Methodology for specific survey questions and definitions.)

Among inmates reporting experiences of sexual misconduct by
staff, the number that reported they had sex or sexual
contact willingly (22,700) was nearly identical to those who
reported contact as a result of physical force, pressure, or
offers of special favors or privileges (22,600). A majority
of victims of staff misconduct reported activity beyond
simple touching in a sexual way.

10 facilities had prevalence rates of 9.3% or greater; 
6 facilities had no reported incidents

Among the 146 prison facilities in the 2007 NIS, 6 had no
reports of sexual victimization from the sampled inmates; 10
had an overall victimization rate of at least 9.3% (table 1).
Though other measures may be considered when comparing
facilities, the overall victimization rate is a measure of
prevalence that includes all experiences, regardless of the
level of coercion and type of sexual activity.

Statistically, the NIS is unable to identify the facility
with the highest prevalence rate. Since the estimates are
based on a sample of inmates, rather than a complete
enumeration, they are subject to sampling error. The
precision of each facility-level estimate can be calculated
based on the estimated standard error. For example, the
victimization rate of 15.7% recorded for the Estelle Unit
(Texas) has a precision of plus or minus 5.1% with a 95%
level of confidence. This precision, based on the standard
error of 2.6% multiplied by 1.96, implies that we are 95%
confident that the true prevalence rate in the Estelle Unit
is between 10.6% and 20.8%.

As a consequence of sampling error, the NIS cannot provide an
exact ranking for all facilities as required under the Prison
Rape Elimination Act. However, detailed tabulations of the
survey results by facility and State are presented in
Appendix tables 1 through 9. Facility prevalence rates vary
by level and type of victimization, and observed differences
between facilities will not always be statistically
significant. Consequently, these measures cannot be used to
reliably rank facilities from 1 (the highest) to 146 (the
lowest). 

Despite limitations of sampling errors, the NIS does provide
the ability to statistically identify a small group of
facilities with the highest rates of sexual victimization.
Based on the confidence interval around the Estelle Unit
(15.7% plus or minus 5.1%), 6 facilities would be included in
the interval, but these facilities also have estimated rates
with surrounding confidence intervals. By placing a
95%-confidence interval around the difference between the
Estelle Unit and the Coffield Unit (Texas), we can identify a
group of 10 facilities with the highest prevalence of sexual
victimization. Since the confidence interval around the
observed difference (6.4% plus or minus 6.5%) includes zero,
the Coffield Unit is considered statistically similar to the
Estelle Unit. However, facilities with rates lower than the
Coffield Unit (9.3%) would be considered statistically
different (assuming a standard error of 2.1%). (See
Methodology for calculation of confidence intervals comparing
facilities.) 

Identification of the 3 facilities with the highest rates of
sexual victimization depends on non-statistical judgments 

Among the 10 facilities with the highest overall prevalence
rates, 3 had prevalence rates of staff sexual misconduct that
exceeded 10% (table 2). The rate was highest in Tecumseh
State Correctional Institution (Nebraska), in which 12.2% of
inmates reported one or more incidents of staff sexual
misconduct. This rate was followed by a rate of 11.6% in the
Clements Unit (Texas) and 11.4% in the Charlotte Correctional
Institution (Florida). Among these 3 facilities, the
Charlotte facility had the smallest standard error (2.6%);
its 95%-confidence interval ranged from 6.3% to 16.5%.

Rockville Correctional Facility (Indiana) had the highest
reported rate of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization; 10.2%
of inmates reported one or more incidents. Its 95%-confidence
interval ranged from 5.7% to 14.7%. Three other facilities
had rates that exceeded 5%: Mountain View Unit (Texas), 8.7%;
Estelle Unit (Texas), 8.5%; and Valley State Prison for Women
(California), 7.9%. 
 
For more serious types of sexual victimization (e.g.,
nonconsensual acts among inmates and unwilling sexual contact
with staff involving more than touching), 3 facilities had
rates of 10% or higher (table 3). Charlotte Correctional
Institution had the highest rate of nonconsensual sexual acts
(12.1%), followed by Estelle Unit (11.3%) and Tecumseh State
Correctional Institution(11.2%). The confidence interval for
the Charlotte Correctional Institution was 6.8% to 17.4%.

Similar to types of sexual victimization, levels of coercion
also varied among facilities. Among the 10 facilities with
the highest overall prevalence of sexual victimization, 3
facilities had high levels of physical force in
inmate-on-inmate victimization. The Mountain View Unit
(Texas) had the highest percent of inmates reporting physical
force by another inmate (7.5%), followed by the Rockville
Correctional Facility (6.5%) and the Estelle Unit (5.1%).
Inmates in 2 facilities reported high rates of physical force
used by staff: Tecumseh State Correctional Institution (7.5%)
and Great Meadow Correctional Facility (6.0%).

An estimated 0.8% of inmates nationwide reported being
injured as a result of the sexual victimization.
Approximately 0.5% of the inmates had been injured by another
inmate, and 0.3% had been injured by staff. Injuries included
anal or vaginal tearing, knife or stab wounds, broken bones,
chipped or knocked out teeth, internal injuries, bruises,
black eyes, sprains, cuts, scratches, swelling, or welts.

Although injury rates from sexual victimization were
generally low, 2 facilities among the 10 with the highest
prevalence of overall victimization had rates of injury by
other inmates that exceeded 3% (table 4). Rockville
Correctional Facility (3.7%) and Allred Unit (3.3%) had the
highest rates of inmate-on-inmate injury. Tecumseh State
Correctional Institution (3.9%) and Clements Unit (3.1%) had
the highest rates of injury resulting from staff sexual
misconduct.

Using these different measures of sexual victimization,
comparisons among the 10 facilities with the highest overall
rates may be made. The 3 highest facilities may be selected
based on one or more of these measures.

Inmates reported an estimated 165,400 incidents of
nonconsensual sexual acts with other inmates or staff 

In the 2007 NIS inmates were also asked the number of times
they had experienced each type of sexual victimization. For
each type, inmates were asked to select one of four pre-coded
categories: 1 time, 2 times, 3 to 10 times, or 11 times or
more. Categories containing ranges were provided, rather than
more detailed categories, because of concerns that (1) some
inmates would be unable to accurately report exact counts and
(2) some inmates would be re-traumatized by a request to
recount each incident. The total number of incidents by type
in each facility was estimated by assigning the value 5 to
the category of 3 to 10 times and 12 to the category of 11
times or more. (See Methodology for additional details.)

Based on these measures, the 1,109 inmates participating in
the NIS who reported one or more allegations of sexual
victimization said they had experienced a total of 1,205
incidents of nonconsensual sexual activity with another
inmate and 1,794 incidents of unwilling sexual contact with
staff. Taking into account weights for sampling facilities
and inmates within facilities, the estimated number of
incidents nationwide totaled 165,400 (65,100 nonconsensual
sexual acts with other inmates and 100,300 incidents of
unwilling sexual contact with staff).

Expressed as a rate, nationwide an estimated 123 incidents of
sexual victimization per 1,000 inmates held in State and
Federal prisons were reported by inmates. This excludes
unwanted touching by other inmates and willing sexual
contacts with staff. By type of incident, an estimated 49
incidents of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts per
1,000 inmates and 75 incidents of unwilling sexual contacts
with staff per 1,000 inmates were reported.

11 facilities had nonconsensual sex rates of 300 or more
incidents per 1,000 inmates

Among the 146 prison facilities in the 2007 NIS, 11 had
incident rates of nonconsensual sex that exceeded 300
incidents per 1,000 inmates (table 5). The 5 facilities
recording the highest prevalence rates also recorded the
highest incident rates. Tecumseh State Correctional
Institution (with 928 incidents of nonconsensual sex per
1,000 inmates) had the highest rate, followed by the
Charlotte Correctional Institution (476 per 1,000) and the
Clements Unit (430 per 1,000). In each of these facilities,
unwilling sexual contact with staff was the most frequently
reported type of sexual victimization.

An estimated 94,900 incidents nationwide involved "willing"
sexual contacts with staff. These incidents of staff sexual
misconduct, though reported as willing by inmates, are
considered nonconsensual by law. A total of 71 such incidents
of staff sexual misconduct per 1,000 inmates were reported as
willing (see Appendix table 9).

Further analyses of sexual victimization and facility
variations underway

In response to other provisions of the Prison Rape
Elimination Act, BJS will conduct further analyses of sexual
victimization and facility variations. Expected to be
completed by June 30, 2008, these analyses will examine
victim characteristics and provide detailed descriptions of
the circumstances surrounding reported incidents. They will
include items on characteristics of perpetrators, reporting
of incidents to staff or others, reasons for not reporting,
and subsequent actions taken by administrators. In addition,
BJS will examine characteristics of facilities that may
correlate with sexual victimization, such as size, crowding,
types of inmates held, security level, staff-to-inmate
ratios, staff characteristics, and rates of assault on
inmates and staff. Facility characteristics are based on data
from the 2005 Census of State and Federal Adult Correctional
Facilities and other items included in the 2007 NIS.

BJS is conducting a survey of sexual victimization in local
jails, using the same sampling procedures and ACASI
collection methodologies. Data collection in local jails is
expected to be completed in January 2008. A report listing
the 302 sampled local jail facilities ranked according to the
incidence of sexual victimization is expected to be issued in
April 2008. 

Methodology

The National Inmate Survey (NIS) was conducted in 146 State
and Federal prisons between April and August 2007, by RTI
International under a cooperative agreement with the Bureau
of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NIS comprised two
questionnaires  - a survey of sexual victimization and a
survey of past drug and alcohol use and abuse. Inmates were
randomly assigned one of the questionnaires so that at the
time of the interview the content of the survey remained
unknown to facility staff and the survey interviewers.  A
total of 23,398 inmates participated in the survey.

The interviews, which averaged 27 minutes in length, used
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) and audio
computer-assisted self interviewing (ACASI) collection
methods. For approximately the first 5 minutes, survey
interviewers conducted a personal interview using CAPI to
obtain background data, date of admission to the facility,
conviction status, and current offense. For the remainder of
the interview, respondents interacted with a
computer-administered questionnaire using a touch-screen and
synchronized audio instructions delivered via headphones.
Respondents completed the ACASI portion of the interview in
private, with the interviewer either leaving the room or
moving away from the computer.

A shorter paper questionnaire was made available for inmates
who were unable to come to the private interviewing room. The
paper form was completed by 530 inmates (2.3% of all
interviews), housed primarily in administrative or
disciplinary segregation or considered too violent to be
interviewed.

Before the interview, inmates were informed verbally and in
writing that participation was voluntary and that all
information provided would be held in confidence. Interviews
were conducted in either English (95%) or Spanish (5%). 

Selection of State and Federal prisons

A sample of 130 State prisons was drawn to produce a 10%
sample of the 1,267 adult State confinement facilities
identified in the 2005 Census of State and Federal Adult
Correctional Facilities. The 2005 census was a complete
enumeration of State prisons, including all publicly operated
and privately operated facilities under contract to State
correctional authorities. The 2007 NIS was restricted to
confinement facilities -- institutions in which fewer than
50% of the inmates were regularly permitted to leave,
unaccompanied by staff, for work, study, or treatment. Such
facilities included prisons, penitentiaries, prison
hospitals, prison farms, boot camps, and centers for
reception, classification, or alcohol and drug treatment. The
2007 NIS excluded community-based facilities, such as halfway
houses, group homes, and work release centers. 

State confinement facilities were systematically sampled with
probabilities of selection proportionate to size (as measured
by the number of inmates held on December 31, 2005).
Facilities on the sampling frame were first sorted by public
or private operation, gender housed, region, and State. Prior
to selection, the size measures for facilities housing female
inmates were doubled to ensure a sufficient number of women
to allow for meaningful analyses of sexual victimization by
gender. Facilities were sampled ensuring that at least one
facility in every State was selected. The remaining
facilities were selected from each region with probabilities
proportionate to size.

Overall, these procedures resulted in the selection of 114
male facilities and 16 female facilities. Based on 2005
census data, these 130 facilities held 250,873 inmates (or
20% of inmates held in State confinement facilities
nationwide on December 31, 2005).

Somewhat different sampling procedures were used to select
Federal prisons. Facilities were selected based on data
reported in the Bureau of Prisons' (BOP) Weekly Population
Report on September 28, 2006. At that time the Federal system
had 176 BOP-operated facilities and 13 privately-managed
facilities. Combined, these facilities held 180,152 inmates.
Contract juveniles, long-term boarders, and offenders held in
halfway houses, home confinement, and jail/short term
detention were excluded.

Facilities on the sampling frame were sorted by population
size, region, and public or private operation. They were
selected based on probabilities proportionate to the inmate
count, regardless of gender of inmate housed. The sample
resulted in the selection of 17 BOP-operated facilities and 3
private facilities.

Of the 150 selected State and Federal facilities, 4 were
excluded from the survey for the following reasons:

*Federal Transfer Facility (Oklahoma City, OK) -- Inmates
moved through this facility too quickly (within 24 hours) to
permit data collection. 

*Huron Valley Complex -- Women (Ypsilanti, MI) -- 
Interviewing was terminated early due to concerns regarding
data quality as many of the inmates were involved in a class
action lawsuit against the facility.

*Taft Correctional Institute (Taft, CA) -- The facility was
selected twice, once as a State prison and once as a Federal
facility. (It was excluded from the State sample, but left in
the sample as a Federal facility.)

*Southern Michigan Correctional Facility (Jackson, MI) -- The
facility was scheduled to be closed prior to data collection.

All other selected prison facilities participated fully in
the survey.

Selection of inmates

The number of inmates sampled in each facility varied based
on 5 criteria:

*an expected prevalence rate of sexual victimization of 4%.

*a desired level of precision based on a standard error of
1.75%.

*a projected 70% response rate among selected inmates.

*a 10% chance among participating inmates of not receiving
the sexual victimization questionnaire.

*size of the facility. 

A roster of inmates was obtained just prior to the start of
interviewing at each facility. Inmates under age 18 and
inmates expected to be released prior to the date of data
collection were deleted from the roster. Each eligible inmate
was assigned a random number and sorted in ascending order.
Inmates were selected from the list up to the expected number
of inmates determined by the sampling criteria. A total of
37,362 inmates were selected. (See Appendix table 1 for the
number of inmates sampled in each facility.)

Overall, 26,157 inmates participated in the survey, yielding
a response rate of 72% (after an additional 1,017 ineligible
inmates were excluded). Approximately 90% of the
participating inmates (23,398) received the sexual assault
survey.

Weighting and non-response adjustments

Responses from sampled interviewed inmates were weighted to
provide national-level and facility-level estimates. Each
interviewed inmate was assigned an initial weight
corresponding to the inverse of the probability of selection
within each sampled facility. A series of adjustment factors
were applied to the initial weight to minimize potential bias
due to non-response and to provide national estimates.

Bias occurs when the estimated prevalence is different from
the actual prevalence for a given facility. First, in each
facility, bias could result if the random sample did not
accurately represent the facility population. Second, bias
could result if the non-respondents were different from the
respondents. Post-stratification and non-response adjustments
were made to the data to compensate for these two
possibilities. These adjustments included:

*calibration of the weights of the responding inmates within
each facility so that the estimates accurately reflected the
facility's entire population in terms of known
characteristics. These characteristics included distributions
by inmate age, gender, race, date of admission, and sentence
length. This adjustment ensures that the estimates accurately
reflect the entire population of the facility and not just
the inmates who were randomly sampled.

*calibration of the weights so that the weight from a
non-responding inmate is assigned to a responding inmate with
similar characteristics. This adjustment ensures that the
estimates accurately reflect the full sample, rather than
only the inmates who responded.

For each inmate these adjustments were based on a generalized
exponential model, developed by Folsom and Singh, and applied
to the sexual assault survey respondents.***Footnote 2: R.E.
Folsom, Jr. and A.C. Singh, The Generalized Exponential Model
for Sampling Weight Calibration for Extreme Values,
Nonresponse, and Poststratification, Proceedings of the
American Statistical Association, Section on Survey Research
Methods, 598-603, 2002.***
 
Survey estimates and accuracy

Survey estimates are subject to sampling error arising from
the fact that the estimates are based on a sample rather than
a complete enumeration. Within each facility, the estimated
sampling error varies by the size of the estimate, the number
of completed interviews, and the size of the facility.
Estimates of the standard errors for selected measures of
sexual victimization are presented in Appendix tables 2
through 5 and 8.
 
These standard errors may be used to construct confidence
intervals around survey estimates (e.g., numbers, percents,
and rates), as well as differences in these estimates. 

For example, the 95% confidence interval around the percent
of inmates reporting sexual victimization in the Julia
Tutwiler Prison (Alabama) is approximately 6.3% plus or minus
1.96 times 1.5% (or 3.4% to 9.2%). Based on similarly
constructed samples, 95% of the intervals would be expected
to contain the true (but unknown) percentage. 
 
The standard errors may also be used to construct confidence
intervals around differences between facility estimates. For
example, the 95% confidence interval comparing the percent of
inmates reporting sexual victimization in the Julia Tutwiler
Prison (Alabama), 6.3%, with the Estelle Unit (Texas), 15.7%,
may be calculated. The confidence interval around the
difference of 9.4% is approximately 1.96 times 3.0% (the
square root of the pooled variance estimate, 9.01%). The
pooled variance estimate is calculated by taking the square
root of the sum of each standard error squared, e.g., the
square root of (1.5)2 plus (2.6)2. Since the interval (3.5%
to 15.3%) does not contain zero, the difference between the
Tutwiler prison and the Estelle Unit is statistically
significant.

Exposure period

For purposes of calculating comparative rates of sexual
victimization, respondents were asked to provide the most
recent date of admission to the current facility. If the date
of admission was at least 12 months prior to the date of the
interview, inmates were asked questions related to their
experiences during the past 12 months. If the admission date
was less than 12 months prior to the interview, inmates were
asked about their experiences since they had arrived at the
facility. Overall, the average exposure period of inmates
participating in the sexual victimization survey was 8.5
months.  

Measuring sexual victimization

The survey of sexual victimization relied on the reporting of
the direct experience of each inmate, rather than inmates
reporting on the experience of other inmates. Questions were
asked related to inmate-on-inmate sexual activity separately
from questions related to staff sexual misconduct. (See pages
9 and 10 for specific survey items.) 

The ACASI survey began with a series of questions that
screened for specific sexual activities, without restriction,
including both wanted and unwanted sex or sexual contacts
with other inmates. As a means to measure fully all sexual
activities, questions related to the touching of body parts
in a sexual way were followed by questions related to
explicit giving or receiving of sexual gratification, and
questions related to acts involving oral, anal, or vaginal
sex. The nature of coercion (including use of physical force,
pressure, or other forms of coercion) was measured for each
type of reported sexual activity.  

Once the types of sexual activity and the nature of coercion
were established, inmates were asked to report on the number
of times they had experienced each form of sexual
victimization. Incidents were separated into two categories: 
nonconsensual sexual acts and abusive sexual contacts. (See
Definition of terms on this page.) In reporting the number of
times for each type of incident, inmates could select one of
four pre-coded categories: 1 time, 2 times, 3 to 10 times,
and 11 times or more.

ACASI survey items related to staff sexual misconduct were
asked in a different order from inmate-on-inmate activity.
Inmates were first asked about being pressured or being made
to feel they had to have sex or sexual contact and then asked
about being physically forced. In addition, inmates were
asked if any facility staff had offered favors or special
privileges in exchange for sex. Finally, inmates were asked
if they willingly had sex or sexual contact with staff. All
reports of sex or sexual contact between an inmate and
facility staff were included in the total sexual
victimization classification, regardless of level of
coercion.  

Inmates were also asked to report on the number of times they
had experienced each form of staff sexual misconduct, willing
or unwilling. The same pre-coded categories were provided: 1
time, 2 times, 3 to 10 times, and 11 times or more.

The ACASI survey included additional questions related to
both inmate-on-inmate and staff-on-inmate sexual
victimization. These questions, known as latent class
measures, were included to assess the reliability of the
survey questionnaire. After being asked detailed questions,
all inmates were asked a series of general questions to
determine if they had experienced any type of unwanted sex or
sexual contact with another inmate or had any sex or sexual
contact with staff. (See page 11 for specific survey items.) 

The entire ACASI questionnaire and the shorter paper and
pencil survey form (PAPI) are available on the BJS web site
at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/quest.htm#nis.

Definition of terms

Sexual victimization - all types of sexual activity, e.g.,
oral, anal, or vaginal penetration, handjobs, touching of the
inmate's butt, thighs, penis, breasts, or vagina in a sexual
way and other sexual acts. Includes nonconsensual sexual
acts, abusive sexual contacts, and both willing and unwilling
sexual acitivity with staff.

Nonconsensual sexual acts - unwanted contacts with another
inmate or unwilling contacts with staff that involved oral
sex, anal sex, vaginal sex, handjobs, and other sexual acts.
 
Abusive sexual contacts only - unwanted contacts with another
inmates or unwilling contacts with staff that involved
touching of the inmate's butt, thighs, penis, breasts, or
vagina in a sexual way. 

Unwilling activity - incidents of unwanted sexual contacts
with another inmate or staff. 

Willing activity - incidents of willing sexual contacts with
staff. These contacts are characterized by the reporting
inmate as willing; however, all sexual contacts between
inmates and staff are legally nonconsensual. 

Survey items related to inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization

Males

E16. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to touch your butt, thighs, or penis in a
sexual way?

E17. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to let them touch your butt, thighs, or penis in a sexual
way?

E22. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive a handjob?

E23. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive a handjob?

E26. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive oral sex or a blow
job?

E27. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive oral sex or a blow job?

E32. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have anal sex?

E33. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have anal sex?

E34. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have any type of sex or sexual
contact other than sexual touching, handjobs, oral sex or
blow jobs, or anal sex?

E35. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have any type of sex or sexual contact other than
sexual touching, handjobs, oral sex or blowjobs, or anal sex?

Females


E18. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to touch your butt, thighs, breasts, or vagina
in a sexual way?

E19. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to let them touch your butt, thighs, breasts, or vagina
in a sexual way?

E24. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you give or receive oral sex?

E25. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to give or receive oral sex?

E28. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have vaginal sex?

E29. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have vaginal sex?

E32. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have anal sex?

E33. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have anal sex?

E34. During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force to make you have any type of sex or sexual
contact other than sexual touching, oral sex, vaginal sex, or
anal sex?

E35. During the last 12 months, did another inmate, without
using physical force, pressure you or make you feel that you
had to have any type of sex or sexual contact other than
sexual touching, oral sex, vaginal sex, or anal sex?

Survey items related to staff sexual misconduct

These next questions are about the behavior of staff at this
facility during the last 12 months. By staff we mean the
employees of this facility and anybody who works as a
volunteer in this facility. 
 
G4   During the last 12 months, have any facility staff
pressured you or made you feel that you had to let them have
sex or sexual contact with you?

G5   During the last 12 months, have you been physically
forced by any facility staff to have sex or sexual contact?  

G7   During the last 12 months, have any facility staff
offered you favors or special privileges in exchange for sex
or sexual contact?

G2   During the last 12 months, have you willingly had sex
or sexual contact with any facility staff?

G11  [IF G2 OR G4 OR G5 = Yes] During the last 12 months,
which of the following types of sex or sexual contact did you
have with a facility staff person?   

G11a. You touched a facility staff person's body or had your
body touched in a sexual way.

G11b. You gave or received a handjob.

G11c. You gave or received oral sex or a blowjob.

G11d. You had vaginal sex.

G11e. You had anal sex.

Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no sexual activity
in the screener questions for sexual activity with inmates: 

LCM1 During the last 12 months, did another inmate use
physical force, pressure you, or make you feel that you had
to have any type of sex or sexual contact?

LCM2 How long has it been since another inmate in this
facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you feel
that you had to have any type of sex or sexual contact?

1. -- Within the past 7 days
2. -- More than 7 days ago but within the past 30 days
3. -- More than 30 days ago but within the past 12 months
4. -- More than 12 months ago
5. -- This has not happened to me at this facility 

LCM3 [If Male] During the last 12 months, did another inmate
use physical force, pressure you, or make you feel that you
had to have oral or anal sex?
     [If Female] During the last 12 months, did another
inmate use physical force, pressure you, or make you feel
that you had to have oral, vaginal, or anal sex?

LCM4 [If Male] How long has it been since another inmate in
this facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you
feel that you had to have oral or anal sex?
     [If Female] How long has it been since another inmate
in this facility used physical force, pressured you, or made
you feel that you had to have oral, vaginal, or anal sex?

LCM4a     [If Male]  How long has it been since another
inmate in
this facility used physical force, pressured you, or made you
feel that you had to have oral or anal sex?
     [If Female]  How long has it been since another inmate
in this facility used physical force, pressured you, or made
you feel that you had to have oral, vaginal, or anal sex?

Follow-up questions for inmates reporting no sexual activity
in the screener questions for sexual activity with staff: 

LCM5 During the last 12 months, have you had any sex or
sexual contact with staff in this facility whether you wanted
to have it or not?

LCM6 How long has it been since you had any sex or sexual
contact with staff in this facility whether you wanted to or
not?

1. -- Within the past 7 days
2. -- More than 7 days ago but within the past 30 days
3. -- More than 30 days ago but within the past 12 months
4. -- More than 12 months ago
5. -- This has not happened to me at this facility 

LCM7 In the last 12 months, did you have oral, vaginal, or
anal sex with any staff at this facility whether you wanted
to or not?

LCM8 How long has it been since you had oral, vaginal, or
anal sex with any staff at this facility whether you wanted
to or not? 

LCM8b How long has it been since you had oral or anal sex
with any staff at this facility whether you wanted to or not?

-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and
its related statistical data and tables are available at
the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svsfpri07.htm>.
----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency
of the U.S. Department of Justice.  Jeffrey Sedgwick is
Director. 

Allen J. Beck and Paige M. Harrison wrote this report. RTI
International statisticians, under the direction of Marcus
Berzofsky, produced tables in the appendix. Allen J. Beck,
Paige M. Harrison, and RTI staff provided statistical
review and verification. Doris J. James and Tina Dorsey
produced and edited the report. Jayne E. Robinson prepared
the report for publication. 

Paige M. Harrison, under the supervision of Allen J. Beck,
was project manager for the National Inmate Survey. RTI
staff, under a cooperative agreement and in collaboration
with BJS, designed the survey, developed the
questionnaires, and monitored data collection and data
processing: Rachel Caspar, Principal
Investigator/Instrumentation Task Leader; Christopher
Krebs, Co-Principal Investigator; Ellen Stutts,
Co-Principal Investigator and Data Collection Task Leader;
Susan Brumbaugh, Logistics Task Leader; Jamia Bachrach,
Protection of Human Subjects Task Leader; David Forvendel,
Research Computing Task Leader; Ralph Folsom, Senior
Statistician; and Marcus Berzofsky, Sampling and
Statistical Analysis Task Leader.
   
April 2008   NCJ 219414
-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-----------------------------------------------------------

End of file 03/07/2008 tld