U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Civil Justice Survey of State Courts

Tort Bench and Jury Trials in State Courts, 2005

November 2009, NCJ 228129
------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full
report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/tbjtsc05.htm
------------------------------------------------------------

Thomas H. Cohen, J.D., Ph.D.


BJS Statistician

A tort involves one party alleging injury, damage, or loss
stemming from the negligent or intentional acts of another
party. Torts accounted for about 60% of the estimated 26,948
tort, contract, and real property cases disposed of by bench
or jury trial in a national sample of state courts of general
jurisdiction in 2005. Courts of general jurisdiction
typically handle civil disputes that exceed certain monetary
amounts. The exception is in states that have merged their
limited and general jurisdiction courts (e.g., California).
Data from jurisdictions that provided totals for both trial
and non-trial tort dispositions in 2005 show that nearly 4%
of all tort cases were disposed of by trial. 

Although tort trials account for a small percentage of tort
dispositions in general jurisdiction courts, they warrant
examination because they provide key information on trial
winners, plaintiff award compensation, punitive damages, case
processing times, and post-trial activity. Key information--
such as the terms of settlement--would typically not be made
part of the public record for tort cases that settle. 

This report on tort bench and jury trials in state courts of
general jurisdiction is the third in a series based on data
collected from the 2005 Civil Justice Survey of State Courts
(CJSSC). The first report in this series provided an overview
of tort, contract, and real property bench and jury trials
disposed in a national sample of general jurisdiction courts
in 2005. The second report focused on contract cases disposed
of by trial.

Highlights

*During 2005 an estimated 16,397 tort cases were disposed of
by bench or jury trial in a national sample of state trial
courts. Juries heard about 90% of these cases.

*Together, bench and jury trials accounted for an
estimated 4% of all tort dispositions in 2005. 

*Nearly 60% of tort trials were automobile accident cases,
and 15% involved medical malpractice claims (figure 1).

*Plaintiffs won about half of tort trials.

*Half of plaintiff winners in tort trials were awarded
$24,000 or less in damages.

*Punitive damages were sought in 9% of tort trials with
plaintiff winners. The median punitive damage award was
$55,000.

*In the nation's 75 most populous counties, the number of
tort trials declined by about a third between 1996 and 2005.

The 2005 CJSSC comprises the first detailed case-level data
collection for tort, contract, and real property bench and
jury trials disposed of in state courts of general
jurisdiction in a nationally representative sample of urban,
suburban, and rural counties. ***Footnote 1 The sample of
civil trials excludes civil cases that were not tort,
contract, or real property cases. Trials in state courts of
limited jurisdiction and small claim cases were also excluded
from the sample. See Methodology for a descriptive overview
of sample design.*** Prior collections of the CJSSC focused
on such trials disposed of in general jurisdiction courts in
a sample of the nation's 75 most populous counties.

Automobile accident cases accounted for nearly 60% of tort
trials

During 2005 state courts of general jurisdiction in the
national sample disposed of an estimated 16,397 tort trials.
Nearly 60% of these tort trials were automobile accident
cases (table 1). Medical malpractice cases, involving the
negligent action of a doctor, dentist, or other health care
provider, accounted for 15% of tort trials, while premises
liability, concerning an alleged harm from an inadequately
maintained or dangerous property, accounted for 11% of tort
trials. An estimated 2% of tort trials were product liability
cases in which the primary claim involved a dangerous or
defective product, such as asbestos, toxic substances, breast
implants, or tobacco.

Nine out of 10 tort trials were resolved by juries

Ninety percent of tort trials were decided before a jury,
while judges adjudicated the remaining 10%. ***Footnote 2
About 2% of tort jury trials disposed in the national sample
include trials with a directed verdict, judgments
notwithstanding the verdict, and jury trials for defaulted
defendants.*** The right to a jury trial is guaranteed in
most states; however, if neither the plaintiff nor the
defendant makes a formal request for a jury trial, that right
is forfeited and the trial takes place before a judge.

Cases in which the plaintiff claimed medical malpractice were
most often disposed of by juries (99%), followed by asbestos
(95%) and premises liability (94%) cases. More than 90% of
non-asbestos product liability and automobile accident cases
were disposed of by jury trial. 

Judges decided at least a third of slander or libel, false
arrest or imprisonment, and professional malpractice trials.
About half of conversion cases, which involve the
unauthorized use or control of another person's personal
property, were adjudicated before judges. 

More than 51,000 litigants were involved in tort trials in
state courts

An estimated 51,375 litigants (plaintiffs and defendants)
were involved in the 16,397 tort trials disposed of in 2005
(not shown in a table). Of these tort trial litigants, 45%
were plaintiffs and 55% were defendants. Almost three-fourths
of tort trials (70%) were litigated by only one plaintiff,
while about half (55%) involved only one defendant.

Eight out of 10 tort trials involved individuals suing
businesses or other individuals

Tort trials involved an individual suing either another
individual in 53% of cases or a business in 27% of cases
(table 2). Individuals sued hospitals or governmental
agencies in 15% of tort trials. A relatively small number of
tort trials (4%) involved non-individual plaintiffs such as
governments, businesses, and hospitals.

Two-thirds of automobile accident trials involved individuals
suing other individuals

The majority of automobile accident trials involved
individuals suing other individuals. In comparison,
individuals sued other individuals in only about a third
(35%) of other tort trials (not shown in a table). 
Litigant pairings differed appreciably by case type 
among tort trials that did not involve automobile accident
claims. For example, more than half of medical malpractice
trials involved individuals suing hospitals, while in product
liability cases, nearly 90% of the litigants were individual
plaintiffs suing business defendants other than hospitals.

1 out of 4 product liability trials involved asbestos claims

Although less than 5% of tort trials involved product
liability issues, these cases garner a great deal of societal
interest because of the high degree of publicity surrounding
some of them and the perceived potential for very large
payouts. 

One out of every four product liability trials centered on
asbestos, while another three percent involved other toxic
substances, including tobacco or dangerous chemicals (table
3). Defective construction, electrical, or manufacturing
equipment accounted for another 14% of product liability
trials, and faulty home appliances, food, or transportation
products each accounted for 10% of product liability trials.

Three tobacco product liability trials were disposed of in
the national sample in 2005 (not shown in a table). All three
of these trials were decided by juries that ruled in favor of
the defendants.

About half of all tort trials were won by plaintiffs

Plaintiffs prevailed in about half of all tort trials
concluded in the national sample of state courts in 2005
(table 4). Judges found for plaintiffs in 56% of tort trials,
while juries ruled in favor of plaintiffs in 51% of tort
trials. The differences in plaintiff win rates between bench
and jury trials for tort cases were not statistically
significant. 

Plaintiff win rates varied considerably depending on the type
of tort case litigated. Among tort trials, the estimated
plaintiff win rates exceeded 60% in some case categories,
such as animal attack (75%) or automobile accident (64%).
 Plaintiffs also won in about half of asbestos and
intentional tort trials. Plaintiffs were less successful in
other kinds of tort cases. Plaintiffs prevailed in less than
a quarter of medical malpractice, non-asbestos (other)
product liability, and false arrest or imprisonment trials.

In several types of tort cases, plaintiffs experienced
similar outcomes irrespective of whether the case was tried
before a judge or jury. Plaintiffs won at rates that were
nearly identical in bench and jury trials involving
automobile accident, intentional tort, professional
malpractice, and premises liability issues. 

Half of plaintiff winners in tort trials were awarded $24,000
or less in damages

During 2005, plaintiff winners in tort trials in the national
sample were awarded an estimated $3.6 billion in compensatory
and punitive damages (not shown in a table). The overall
median final award of $24,000 in jury trials and $21,000 in
bench trials did not differ statistically (table 5). 

In some case categories, the median damage awards were
relatively modest. For example, automobile accident, animal
attack, slander or libel, conversion, and intentional tort
cases, which together accounted for nearly 8 out of 10 tort
trials with plaintiff winners, generated median awards of
$38,000 or less. Automobile accident cases alone constituted
about 70% of tort trials with plaintiff winners, and the
median award in these cases was $15,000.

In other tort case categories, the median awards were
considerably higher. Half the plaintiff winners in asbestos
cases were awarded damages of $682,000 or more. The median
damage awards also exceeded $100,000 in non-asbestos product
liability ($500,000) and professional malpractice ($129,000)
trials. 

Medical malpractice trials also garnered relatively high
median damage awards. The awards in medical malpractice
trials ($400,000) were 17 times greater than the overall
median awards in all tort trials. Damage awards of $1 million
or more were awarded in nearly 30% of medical malpractice
trials (not shown in a table). These high award amounts may
be related to the allegations of wrongful death that were
asserted in two-fifths of medical malpractice trials with
plaintiff winners. 

Punitive damages were sought in 9% of tort trials with
plaintiff winners

Awards for punitive damages are almost exclusively reserved
for civil claims in which the defendant's conduct was
considered grossly negligent or intentional. Unlike other
forms of damage relief afforded to plaintiffs, punitive
damages are intended to serve as a means for "punishing the
defendant" and deterring others from committing similar
actions (Black's Law Dictionary).
 
Punitive damages were sought in 9% of the approximately 8,763
tort trials with plaintiff winners in the 2005 national
sample (table 6). Punitive damages were also requested in 9%
of jury and 16% of bench trials with plaintiff winners. 

Punitive damages were sought in nearly half (47%) of slander
or libel trials with plaintiff winners. In approximately 1
out of 3 intentional torts (33%) and other or unknown torts
(27%) trials in which the plaintiffs prevailed, punitive
damages were also requested. Punitive damages were sought in
less than 10% of automobile accident, professional
malpractice, product liability, and premises liability cases
with plaintiff winners. These case types garnered fewer
punitive damage claims because they typically do not involve
acts of gross negligence or intentional harms, which are
necessary elements when seeking punitive damages.

Punitive damages were awarded in 254 of the 8,763 tort trials
with plaintiff winners (3%). The median punitive damage award
was $55,000. Twenty-three percent of punitive awards were
more than $250,000 and 17% were $1 million or more (not shown
in a table). The median punitive damage awards in tort jury
($100,000) and bench ($54,000) trials were not statistically
different.

Punitive damages accounted for more than a third of the sum
of the total awards in conversion and slander or libel cases

The CJSSC collected information on the percentage of total
awards that could be classified into economic, non-economic,
and punitive damages for three-fourths of tort trials with
plaintiff winners (figure 2). Economic damages are associated
with actual financial losses (e.g., medical costs, lost
wages, lost future earnings, property damages), while
non-economic damages are related to injuries where the
plaintiff claims pain and suffering, emotional distress, or
loss of consortium. These award classifications and amounts
were determined by judges or juries when calculating the
assessed damage payouts.

Overall, economic and non-economic damages constituted about
90% of the total monetary awards to plaintiff winners, while
punitive damages accounted for nearly 10% of the total
awards. Monetary payouts were evenly distributed between
economic (47%) and non-economic (44%) damages. Among the
civil trial case types, punitive damages comprised 69% of the
sum of the total awards in conversion cases and more than a
third of the sum of total awards in slander or libel cases.

Damages were reduced in 40% of premises liability trials as a
result of comparative negligence

A plaintiff's own negligent actions may contribute to the
injury sustained. Six states adhere to the doctrine of
contributory negligence. ***Footnote 3 Alabama, Maryland,
South Carolina, Delaware, North Carolina, and Virginia are
contributory negligence states. American Justice Prudence,
2nd edition (1989, supp. 1995), 57B, pp. 1131-49.*** In these
states any negligence on the plaintiff's part automatically
bars recovery for damages. In the remaining states differing
forms of comparative negligence are used. Under comparative
negligence doctrines, damages are proportionally reduced
according to the plaintiff's negligence. 

Compensatory damages awarded to plaintiff winners were
reduced in 15% of tort trials disposed in the national sample
in 2005 (table 7). These awards were reduced by 40% on
average (not shown in a table). 

In two-fifths of the premises liability trials with a
plaintiff winner, the compensatory awards were reduced due to
the plaintiff's own negligence. The award reduction in these
premises liability trials was, on average, about 51% (not
shown in a table).

Tort jury trials lasted 2 days longer on average than tort
bench trials

In 2005 tort jury trials lasted nearly 4 days on average,
while bench trials were disposed within an average of about 2
days (figure 3). For tort jury trials, asbestos cases tended
to take the most time averaging 13 days in trial. Other case
types that took more than a week on average for juries to
dispose include medical malpractice (6 days), non asbestos
product liability (7 days), and professional malpractice (8
days) cases. 


Half of tort jury and bench trials were disposed of within 2
years after the complaint was filed 

Half of the estimated tort trials disposed of in the national
sample in 2005 went from filing of the complaint to final
verdict or judgment within an estimated 23 months for jury
trials and 18 months for bench trials (table 8). Among tort
jury trials, the median case processing time was less than 2
years for animal attack, automobile accident, slander or
libel, and conversion cases. Other case types resolved
through jury trial took substantially longer to dispose. For
example, half the non-asbestos product liability, medical
malpractice, and false arrest or imprisonment cases took 30
months or more to process from initial filing to trial
resolution. Among tort bench trials, the median case
processing times varied from nearly 15 months for false
arrest or imprisonment cases to 23 months for intentional and
other torts.

Litigants sought post-trial relief in nearly 1 out of 3 tort
trials

After a trial reaches final verdict or judgment, litigants
can file post-trial motions seeking to modify or overturn the
trial court outcome. These include motions for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV), motions for a new trial,
motions to modify the award, and motions for some other form
of relief. 

A JNOV provides a mechanism for directly challenging the
jury's verdict. In order to grant a JNOV, the judge must find
that the evidence presented at trial so overwhelmingly
favored the losing party that the jury's verdict should be
reversed and a judgment entered for the party which initially
lost. A motion for a new trial is filed when one party seeks
to have the verdict or judgment discarded and the case tried
again. A motion to modify the award occurs when one party
seeks to have the damage award increased or reduced. Other
relief can involve motions to correct errors that occurred at
trial, modify court costs and fees, and amend judicial
decisions in bench trials. Litigants filed post-trial motions
in nearly 1 out of 3 tort trials disposed in the national
sample in 2005 (not shown in a table).

Plaintiffs and defendants sought post-trial relief at similar
rates in trials where the plaintiff won

In tort trials where plaintiffs prevailed, post-trial relief
was sought at a similar rate by both plaintiffs and
defendants. Plaintiffs filed motions for post-trial relief in
16% of tort trials where they won, while defendants requested
post-trial relief in 18% of tort trials with a plaintiff
winner (not shown in a table). A variety of underlying
factors can influence plaintiff post-trial activity in trials
in which the plaintiff received a favorable outcome,
including dissatisfaction with the damage award imposed at
trial.

The types of post-trial relief sought most commonly by
plaintiff winners in tort trials were motions for new trials
and award modifications (table 9). These forms of post-trial
relief accounted for nearly 90% of plaintiff post-trial
motions. 

In tort trials in which the plaintiff won and the defendant
filed a subsequent motion for post-trial relief, 56% of those
motions were for a new trial while 35% were for a JNOV.

Tort trials where the plaintiff did not win also manifested
substantial post-trial activity. Plaintiffs filed motions for
post-trial relief in almost one-quarter of tort trials (22%)
where they lost (not shown in a table). In 86% of these
cases, the plaintiff requested that the court discard the
verdict or judgment and grant a new trial.

In tort trials where the plaintiff did not prevail,
defendants rarely engaged in post-trial activity. Less than
4% of defendants sought post-trial relief in tort trials
without a plaintiff winner.

Courts were more likely to grant plaintiffs post-trial relief
in trials where the plaintiff prevailed

Plaintiffs were more likely to be granted post-trial relief
if they won at trial. The courts granted post-trial relief to
36% of plaintiff winners seeking to have their verdict or
judgment modified (not shown in a table). The most common
post-trial relief granted to these plaintiffs was classified
as "other," including motions to correct errors that occurred
in trial or modify court costs and fees (table 10). About 30%
of plaintiff winners who sought and were granted post-trial
relief were awarded a new trial, and another 22% received an
award modification.

In comparison, 8% of plaintiffs who did not prevail at trial
and who subsequently filed a post-trial motion received some
form of post-trial relief (not shown in a table). More than
90% of these plaintiffs were granted a new trial.

Post-trial relief was granted to 30% of defendants who sought
to modify a favorable plaintiff verdict or judgment. In about
two-fifths of these cases the relief granted was in the form
of an award reduction, and in 44% of these cases a new trial
or JNOV was granted. Although fewer than 4% of defendants
sought to modify a verdict or judgment that went against the
plaintiff, an estimated 44% of these requests were granted.

Litigants filed notices of appeal in 13% of tort trials

Filing a notice with the trial court to take an appeal to the
state's intermediate appellate court or court of last resort
represents another option for litigants seeking to overturn
or modify a verdict or judgment that they believe does not
comply with state law. Notices to file an appeal were filed
with the trial court by one or both parties in 13% of tort
trials disposed in the national sample (not shown in a
table).

The appeal rate depended on the trial outcome. Plaintiffs
filed appeals in 5% of tort trials in which they prevailed
and 13% of tort trials in which they lost (table 11).
Defendants filed notice of appeal in 8% of tort trials with a
plaintiff winner; however, they rarely filed appeals in tort
trials where the plaintiff did not receive a favorable
verdict or judgment. 

The rate of appeals also varied substantially by case type.
Defendants filed notices of appeal in about two-fifths of
professional malpractice trials in which they lost.
Defendants also gave notice of appeal in more than 30% of
product liability and medical malpractice trials with
prevailing plaintiffs. Among tort trials that the plaintiff
lost, plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal in at least 21% of
intentional tort trials and in 39% of professional
malpractice trials.

Tort trial trends in the nation's 75 most populous counties,
1996, 2001, and 2005

Prior to the 2005 CJSSC, BJS funded three surveys that
examined general civil trials held in a sample of the
nation's 75 most populous counties in 1992, 1996, and 2001.
In addition to the national sample of general civil trials,
the 2005 CJSSC also contained a sub-sample of civil trials
concluded in the nation's 75 most populous counties. The 75
most populous counties sub-sample was maintained for
comparison purposes with earlier iterations of the CJSSC. 

In the trends discussion of this report, data are presented
on tort trial litigation in the nation's 75 most populous
counties rather than the national sample examined in the
analyses described in the earlier sections of this report. In
addition, the analyses have been restricted to tort bench and
jury trials resolved in 1996, 2001, and 2005 because data
from the 1992 survey did not contain case level information
on tort bench trials.

The number of tort trials declined by a third between 1996
and 2005

The number of tort trials concluded in state courts in the
nation's 75 most populous counties declined by about a third
from 10,278 trials in 1996 to 7,038 trials in 2005 (table
12). Among the tort case types, premises (-52%) and product
liability (-48%) registered the largest declines, while the
number of medical malpractice trials remained fairly stable
from 1996 through 2005.

Data from the two most recent BJS civil trial surveys reveal
stabilization in the number of tort trials. From 2001 to
2005, the number of tort trials concluded in the nation's 75
most populous counties declined by 12%, a decrease that was
not statistically significant.

Plaintiff win rates were relatively stable in tort trials
from 1996 through 2005

The plaintiff win rate in tort trials has remained relatively
stable from 1996 to 2005. During this period, about half of
all plaintiffs prevailed in tort trials. The percentage of
plaintiffs prevailing in automobile accident cases increased
slightly from 58% in 1996 to 61% in 2005. In comparison,
plaintiffs won in fewer medical malpractice cases in 2005
(19%) than in 1996 (23%).

Median damage awards in product liability and medical
malpractice trials were higher in 2005 compared to 1996
The median damage awards garnered by plaintiff winners in
tort trials declined from $38,000 in 1996 to $31,000 in 2005,
a decrease that was not statistically significant. ***Footnote
4 The 1996 damage award statistic has been adjusted
to account for inflation using the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
prepared by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(http://www.bls.gov/cpa/home.htm). The CPI, the most commonly
reported measure of consumer price levels, is a statistical
estimate of the level of prices of goods and services bought
for consumption purposes by households. The CPI is a measure
of inflation used to index wages, salaries, pensions, or
contracted prices.*** In comparison to tort cases generally,
several case categories witnessed marked increases in their
median damage awards. This trend was especially apparent in
product liability trials where the median award amounts were
3 times higher in 2005 ($748,000) than they were in 1996
($241,000). For medical malpractice trials, the median damage
awards were nearly 2 times higher in 2005 ($679,000) than
they were in 1996 ($354,000). In intentional tort cases, the
median awards were 2.5 times higher in 2005 ($100,000) than
in 1996 ($40,000).

Plaintiff winners were awarded punitive damages in 5% or less
of tort trials overall between 1996 and 2005

The percentage of tort trials in which the plaintiff winner
received punitive damages rose from 3% in 1996 to 5% in 2001
and then declined to 4% in 2005. Among intentional tort
cases, the percentage of prevailing plaintiffs awarded
punitive damages ranged from 24% to 36% during the 1996 to
2005 reporting period. For the other tort case categories,
the rate at which plaintiff winners received punitive damages
never exceeded 10%.

Case processing time remained relatively stable in tort
trials from 1996 through 2005

In 1996 it took nearly 22 months for half of all tort cases
to proceed from initial filing to verdict or judgment, while
during 2005, 50% of tort cases progressed from filing to jury
or bench disposition within 23 months. These differences were
not statistically significant. Intentional tort cases took 4
months longer to dispose in 2005 (25 months) than in 1996 (21
months).

Bench and jury trials accounted for 4% of tort dispositions
In addition to collecting detailed case-level information on
civil trials, the 2005 CJSSC included aggregate counts of
trial and non-trial dispositions for all tort cases in 104
jurisdictions. Among these 104 jurisdictions, bench and jury
trials accounted for an estimated 4% of the 140,929 tort
cases disposed of in 2005 (table 13).

Trial rates also varied across the tort case categories.
***Footnote  5 Not all 104 jurisdictions were capable of
calculating trial rates by specific CJSSC case types. See
table 13 for the jurisdictions that could calculate a trial
rate by case type.*** Nearly 8% of medical malpractice cases
were disposed of through trial; in comparison, 3% of
automobile accident and less than 1% of non-asbestos product
liability tort cases were resolved through bench or jury
trial.

Methodology

Collection of data on general civil bench and jury trials

The Civil Justice Survey of State Courts (CJSSC) examines
tort, contract, and real property trials disposed of in
general jurisdiction courts. The 2005 CJSSC contained two
sampling frames. First, the sample was designed so that
inferences could be made about general civil trials litigated
in the nation's 75 most populous counties. The 75 most
populous counties design was maintained in order to compute
trends in civil trial litigation. The sample design for the
75 most populous counties sample was the same as the ones
used for the 2001, 1996, and 1992 BJS civil trial studies.
The sample is a stratified sample with 46 of the 75 most
populous counties selected. 

In addition to sampling civil trial litigation in the
nation's 75 most populous counties, a sample of from which to
estimate the civil trial litigation outside the 75 most
populous was developed. 

The sample of civil trial litigation outside the nation's 75
most populous counties was constructed by first forming 2,518
primary sampling units (PSUs) from 3,066 counties 3,141 U.S.
counties total minus the 75 counties from the 2001 CJSSC. The
2,518 PSUs were stratified into 50 strata according to census
region, levels of urbanization, and population size which was
based on the square root of the estimated 2004 population in
each of these PSUs.

From the 50 strata, a total of 100 PSUs containing 110
counties were selected for the supplemental sample of
counties outside the nation's 75 most populous. Hence, a
total of 156 counties, 46 representing the nation's 75 most
populous, and 110 representing the remainder of the nation
were used for the sample. 

------------------------------------------------------------
Civil Justice Survey of State Courts Sampling Framework     
               
                              Sampling frame
                 ------------------------------------- 
                 75 most popu-         Outside the 75 
                 lous counties most     populous counties   
PSUs                    75                    2,518    
Counties sampled        46                      110    
Cases meeting 
  study criteria     5,038                      744    
Weighted cases       7,038                    9,359    
Weight                1.40                    12.58    
-----------------------------------------------------------

The second stage of the sample design involved generating
lists of cases for coding. Each participating jurisdiction
identified cases disposed of by jury trial or bench trial
between January 1, 2005, and December 31, 2005. Some
jurisdictions produced a list covering 12 months of trials
for a fiscal year. 

Trial cases sampled met the following criteria for jury and
bench trials developed by the National Center for State
Courts: both litigants appeared at trial, both sides
presented contested evidence, at least one litigating party
sought monetary damages, and the trial was heard through
completion. These criteria excluded many cases initially
classified as bench or jury trials from the sample. Civil
trials in state courts of limited jurisdiction and small
claim cases were also excluded.

For the sample of tort trials occurring in the nation's 75
most populous counties, data on 5,038 tort trials met the
study criteria. When these trials are weighted to the
nation's 75 most populous counties, they represent 7,038 tort
trials. For the sample of civil trials occurring outside the
nation's 75 most populous counties, data on 744 tort trials
met the study criteria. When these trials are weighted, they
represent 9,359 tort trials disposed in counties outside the
nation's 75 most populous.

The weighted estimate of 16,397 tort trials represents a
small percentage of the reported 7.5 million civil cases
filed in all unified/general jurisdiction state courts
nationwide in 2005. This nationwide count comprises all tort,
contract, real property, small claims, probate/estate, mental
health cases, and other civil cases filed in state courts of
unified/general jurisdiction. Although no nationwide counts
of tort filings in state courts are available, the National
Center for State Courts Court Statistics Project reports
441,307 tort cases being filed in the unified/general
jurisdiction courts of 34 states in 2005. ***Footnote 6
Source: See LaFountain, R., Schauffler, R., Strickland, S.,
Raftery, W., & Bromage, C. Examining the Work of State
Courts, 2006: A National Perspective from the Court
Statistics Project (National Center for State Courts
2007).***

Collection of counts of all civil dispositions

In conjunction with collecting detailed case level
information on general civil trials, the counties
participating in this survey were asked to complete a matrix
that contained information on all general civil cases
disposed in 2005. Frequency counts were obtained for trial
and non-trial dispositions in these counties. The non-trial
dispositions included cases dismissed for want of
prosecution, granted default or summary judgments, settled or
withdrawn prior to trial, settled through mediation or
another method of alternative dispute resolution, or
transferred to another court. This secondary data collection
was used to gather disposition outcomes in trial and
non-trial cases by plaintiff claim type. 

Definitions of case types 

Animal attack: Personal injury or death caused by the
negligent control of an animal.

Automobile accident: Personal injury or death caused by the
negligent operation of a motor vehicle (not boat or
airplane).

Conversion: Personal injury or property damage caused by the
unauthorized use or control of another person's personal
property.

False arrest, imprisonment: Arrest or imprisonment without
proper legal authority.

Intentional tort: Personal injury, death, or property damage
caused by another's intentional act.

Medical malpractice: Personal injury or death caused by a
medical professional's negligent care. 

Other professional malpractice: Personal injury, death, or
property damage caused by the negligent act of a non-medical
professional.

Other negligent acts: Negligence for an act not represented
by other case categories.

Premises liability: Personal injury or death caused by
dangerous condition of residential or commercial property. 

Product liability: Personal injury or damage caused by the
negligent manufacture or design of a product or exposure to
toxic substances.

Slander, Libel, or Defamation: Damage caused to the career or
reputation of an individual due to false accusations,
comments, or statements made by another.

-----------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

This BJS Bulletin presents the third release of findings in a
series of reports from the Civil Justice Survey of State
Courts, 2005. Thomas H. Cohen wrote this Bulletin under the
supervision of Duren Banks. Tracey Kyckelhahn verified the
report.

Data design and collection was conducted by the National
Center for State Courts (NCSC); Nicole L. Waters, Ph.D. was
the project director and provided comments. Shauna M.
Strickland, Paula L. Hannaford-Agor, Cynthia G. Lee and
Chantal G. Bromage of the NCSC also provided comments. James
L. Green, M.A., Senior Statistician at Westat, designed the
sample used for this data collection.

Tina Dorsey produced the report, Catherine Bird and Jill
Duncan edited the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the
report for final printing, under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

November 2009, NCJ 228129
------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/tbjtsc05.htm>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


11/4/2009/ JER 2:30PM