U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Fact Sheet

Traffic Stop Data Collection Policies 
for State Police, 2001


December 2001, NCJ 191158


--------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions may 
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#tsdcp 

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/tsdcp01.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

As of March 2001, 16 of the Nation's 49
State law enforcement agencies whose
primary duties include highway patrol
required all their officers with traffic 
patrol duties to record the motorists' 
race and ethnicity for each traffic stop. 
The 16 State police agencies collecting 
these data represent an increase of 7 
States since 1999.** BJS undertook a similar 
data collection project in 1999. See Traffic 
Stop Data Collection Policies for State 
Police, 1999, February 2000, NCJ 180776.**

An additional 23 State police agencies
required their officers to collect race and
ethnicity data under more limited circumstances, 
such as if an arrest occurred, or if force 
was used.  Ten State police agencies did not 
require traffic patrol officers to collect 
race data for any stops.  

A few States reported that only some of
their specialized units were required to
collect race data.  For example, Oklahoma
and Idaho required only their criminal
interdiction teams to collect race data.

State laws prohibit racial profiling

In addition to the increase in the number
of States that required State law enforcement 
agencies to collect race and ethnicity 
statistics during traffic stops, States have 
recently enacted statutes that prohibit 
law enforcement officers from engaging 
in racial profiling (California, Connecticut,
 Kentucky, Oklahoma, and Rhode Island).  
These statutes generally defined racial 
profiling as stopping a person based solely 
on race or ethnicity instead of an 
individualized suspicion arising from the 
person's behavior. 

Certain States have instituted new data
collections as concerns over racial
profiling have arisen in the media, the 
courts, and State legislatures. State 
police agencies (most frequently designated 
as State police or State highway patrol)
across the Nation have different procedures 
for collecting data on the race and ethnic-
ity of drivers involved in a traffic stop. 

To catalog State police data collection
policies, BJS contacted each of the 49
State agencies.  Hawaii and the District 
of Columbia do not have a formal State
police agency.

State policies for collecting
racial/ethnic data during traffic 
stops

As of March 2001, 16 of the 49 State police 
agencies with patrol duties required
officers to collect the race or ethnicity 
of all drivers involved in a traffic stop.
Thirty-seven State agencies collected the
race or ethnicity of motorists when an
arrest was made, and 22 agencies did so
following a vehicle or occupant search.
Ten State police agencies -- Arizona,
Arkansas, Idaho, Illinois, Minnesota,
Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota,
Oklahoma, and Utah -- did not require
their State troopers to collect race or
ethnicity data.

Race or ethnicity data were required to 
be collected by all State police officers 
under the following traffic stop-related 
scenarios:

Arrest from a traffic stop -- 37 agencies
collected the arrestee's race/ethnicity.

Traffic citation -- 34 States recorded the
race/ethnicity of the driver during stops 
in which a traffic citation was issued.   

Use-of-force encounter during traffic stop
-- 28 State agencies collected the motorist's 
race/ethnicity when force was used during the 
stop.

Search of vehicle or occupant -- 22 State
police agencies collected the driver's
race/ethnicity if a search was conducted. 

Mandate for data collection

In some cases State law enforcement agencies 
have been mandated to implement their data 
collection practices by State law or Federal 
consent decree, while other data collection 
policies were enacted because of an internal 
State police policy.  

Of the 16 State police agencies with 
procedures that require the collection of
race data for each stop, 7 agencies
responded to a State law or executive
order, 7 implemented an internal policy, 
1 (Maryland) responded to both an internal
policy and a court action, and 1 State
police agency (New Jersey) was acting in
accordance with both internal police
agency policy and a Federal consent
decree.  

A number of States have indicated that the 
legislature was considering whether to
require State law enforcement officers to
collect data on the race of the motorist 
during traffic stops.

Among the 23 State police agencies that
required the collection of race data on
some, but not all, stops, most (20) did 
so as part of an internal police policy.   

Collection of additional data items

For those State police agencies which were 
required to collect race and ethnicity data 
at least under some circumstances, other 
data elements were also frequently collected.

In addition to race/ethnicity data, over 
half of the State police agencies required 
law enforcement officers to record one of
more of the following: the identity of the
officer; the gender and age of the motorist; 
the type of enforcement action taken; and 
the date, time, and location of the traffic 
stop. 

Data collection format

The most common format, used by 34 agencies, 
to collect race or ethnicity of motorists 
was the paper-based form filled out by the 
officer at the scene.  Two agencies reported 
that they verbally relayed the information 
to a radio communication dispatch.

One agency reported using a paper-based 
system in conjunction with mounted video 
surveillance.

Most agencies (25) relied on their officers'
observation of the driver's race or ethnicity 
as the method of determining the race or 
ethnicity of the motorist.

Accessibility of the data on
race/ethnicity

Among the 39 State police agencies that 
collected race information on at least
some kinds of traffic-related stops, more 
than half (25 States) stored these data 
electronically.  

A dozen agencies which collected race
data linked their traffic stop data to 
other law enforcement information systems
such as dispatch information, citations,
officer logs, or bureau of motor vehicle
records.

Sixteen of the 39 State police agencies
that collected race data under at least
some traffic stop circumstances, made
their data available to the public --
including 11 of the agencies which
required their State troopers to collect
data on all stops.  

Eighteen agencies reported the use of a
standardized collection form for data on
race of motorists stopped. 

--------------------------------------
Selected State statutes for collection 
of data on race/ethnicity

Connecticut: Conn. Gen. Stat. sec. 54-1m 
   (2001).
Massachusetts: 2000 Mass. Legis. Serv. 
Ch. 228 (West).
Missouri: Mo. Ann. Stat. sec sec. 304.670, 
590.650 (2001). 
North Carolina:  N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 114-10  
   (2001).
Rhode Island: R.I. Gen. Laws sec. 31-21.1-4  
   (2001).
Texas: 2001 Tex. Sess. Law Serv. Ch.947 
  (Vernon).

Selected State laws that prohibit 
racial profiling

California: Cal. Penal Code sec. 13519.4
  (2001).
Connecticut: Conn. Gen. Stat. sec. 54-11
  (2001).
Kentucky: Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. sec. 15A.195  
  (2001).
Oklahoma: Okla. Stat. Ann. Title 22, sec. 34.3 
  (2001).
Rhode Island:  R.I. Gen. Laws sec.31-21.1-2 
  (2001).
---------------------------------------

---------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld, 
Acting Director.

This fact sheet was prepared by BJS
staff:  Kevin Strom, Peter Brien, and
Steven Smith. Matthew Hickman provided 
review. Tina Dorsey produced and edited 
the report. Jayne Robinson prepared the 
report for publication.

December 2001, NCJ 191158
-------------------------------------------

End of file

12/07/01 ih