U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Fact Sheet

Traffic Stop Data Collection 
Policies for State Police, 2004


April 2005, NCJ 209156


--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/tsdcp04.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may be 
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#tsdcp 
---------------------------------------------------------------

Matthew J. Hickman
BJS Statistician

As of October 2004, 29 of the Nation's 49 State law 
enforcement agencies whose primary duties include 
highway patrol required their traffic patrol officers 
to record motorists' race or ethnicity during traffic 
stops. Twenty-two State agencies required officers to 
record race or ethnicity data for all officer initiated 
stops, and seven in more limited circumstances.

The 22 State police agencies collecting race or ethnicity 
data for all traffic stops represent an increase of 6 
States since 2001 and 13 States since 1999.**Footnote: See 
Traffic Stop Data Collection Policies for State Police, 
1999 (NCJ 180776) and Traffic Stop Data Collection Policies 
for State Police, 2001 (NCJ 191158).**  Among the 20 
agencies that did not require traffic patrol officers to 
collect race or ethnicity data in 2004, 14 agencies 
previously reported collection of race or ethnicity data
in 2001. 

In addition to traffic patrol units, 12 of the 29 State 
agencies reported that specialized units (such as 
investigative units) were also required to collect race 
or ethnicity data.  

State policies for collecting racial 
data during traffic stops

As of October 2004, 29 of the 49 State police agencies 
with patrol duties required officers to collect the race 
or ethnicity of drivers under the following traffic 
stop-related scenarios:

All officer initiated traffic stops -- 22 agencies collected 
the arrestee's race or ethnicity.

Traffic citation -- 18 States recorded the race or 
ethnicity of the driver during stops in which a 
traffic citation was issued.  

Arrest from a traffic stop -- 17 agencies collected 
the arrestee's race or ethnicity.

Search of vehicle or occupant -- 14 State police agencies 
collected the driver's race or ethnicity if a search was 
conducted.

Use-of-force encounter during traffic stop -- 13 State 
agencies collected the motorist's race or ethnicity 
when force was used during the stop.

Reactive traffic stops -- 8 State agencies collected the 
motorist's race or ethnicity during reactive stops (for
example, in response to an accident or DUI check point).

Mandate for data collection

In some cases State law enforcement agencies have been
mandated to implement their data collection practices 
by State law or Federal consent decree, while other 
data collection policies were enacted because of an 
internal State police policy. 

Of the 22 State police agencies with procedures that 
require the collection of race or ethnicity data for 
each stop, 7 agencies responded to a State law or 
Executive Order, 6 implemented an internal policy, 4 
responded to both a State law or Executive Order and 
an internal policy, and 1 (California) collected data 
voluntarily in response to a court action. 

One agency (Maryland) responded to both a State law or 
Executive Order and consent decree, 1 (New Jersey) was 
acting in accordance with both internal police agency 
policy and a Federal consent decree, and 1 (Rhode 
Island)collected data in response to both a State law 
or Executive Order and a court action.

Among the seven State police agencies that required the 
collection of race or ethnicity data on some, but not 
all, stops, most (5) did so as part of an internal 
police policy and/or State law or executive order. 
The remaining two agencies collected race or 
ethnicity data on a voluntary basis.  

Collection of additional data items

For those State police agencies which were required to 
collect race or ethnicity data at least under some 
circumstances, other data elements were also frequently 
collected.

In addition to race or ethnicity data, half or more 
of the State police agencies required law enforcement 
officers to record one or more of the following: 

* the identity of the officer 
* the gender of the motorist

* the type of enforcement action taken

* the date, time, and location of the traffic stop. 

Data collection format

The most common format to collect race or ethnicity 
of motorists, used by 24 agencies, was the paper-based 
form filled out by the officer at the scene. Sixteen 
agencies used paper forms only, six used paper forms 
and electronic means (laptop computers, mobile data 
terminals, or other on-line methods), and two used 
paper forms and verbal transmission via radio.

A total of 10 State agencies used laptop computers, 
mobile data terminals (MDT), or other on-line methods 
to collect race/ethnicity data. Three of the agencies 
used electronic methods exclusively.

Five agencies reported that they verbally relayed 
the information to a radio communication dispatch. 
One agency used radio exclusively.

Two agencies reported the use of mounted video 
surveillance in conjunction with other methods.

Eighteen agencies in 2004 reported the use of a 
standardized collection form for data on race or 
ethnicity of motorists stopped.

Determination of race or ethnicity

Most agencies (27) relied on their officers' observation 
of the driver's race or ethnicity as the method of 
determining the race or ethnicity of the motorist. 
Officer observation was the exclusive method in 15 
State agencies.

Twelve agencies also used information on motorist race 
or ethnicity from the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles 
or equivalent agency. This
method was used exclusively by two agencies.

Eleven agencies also used information provided orally 
by the motorist. None of the State agencies used this 
method alone.

Nine of the State agencies used all three sources 
(officer observation, motorist self identification, 
and Bureau of Motor Vehicle data) to determine the 
driver's race or ethnicity.

Accessibility of the data on race or 
ethnicity

Among the 29 State police agencies that collected race 
or ethnicity information on at least some kinds of 
traffic-related stops, almost all (26) stored these data 
electronically. Ten stored the data using only electronic 
means, and 16 used both electronic and paper-based
storage. Three agencies used paper storage only. 

Seventeen agencies that collected race or ethnicity 
data linked their traffic stop data to other law 
enforcement information systems such as dispatch 
information, citations, officer logs, or bureau of 
motor vehicle records. 

Twenty-two of the 29 State police agencies that 
collected race or ethnicity data under at least some 
traffic stop circumstances, made their data available 
to the public. Nine agencies published reports based 
on the data. 

---------------------------------------------
The Racial Profiling Data Collection Resource 
Center at Northeastern University

In June 2001, the U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau 
of Justice Assistance (BJA), awarded a grant to 
Northeastern University to create a web-based Racial 
Profiling Data Collection Resource Center. The website 
is designed to be a central clearinghouse for police 
agencies, legislators, researchers, and others to 
access information about current data collection 
efforts, legislation and model policies, and methods 
for collecting and analyzing data. The website can be 
found at the following URL: 

<www.racialprofilinganalysis.neu.edu>
-----------------------------------------

Six agencies made their data available on the Internet. 
Nine agencies reported that the data were only made 
available to the public upon request.

Eighteen agencies in 2004 reported the use of a 
standardized collection form for data on race or
ethnicity of motorists stopped.

--------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Lawrence A. 
Greenfeld is Director.

This fact sheet was prepared by BJS Statistician 
Matthew J. Hickman.  Steven W. Perry provided review.  
Carolyn Williams produced and edited the report. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for publication.

June 2005, NCJ 209156
------------------------------------------------

End of file
05/25/05 ih