U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Fact Sheet

Unidentified Human Remains in the United States, 1980-
2004 

November 2007, NCJ 219533
------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/uhrus04.htm
------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------
Kristen Hughes, MPA
BJS Statistician
------------------------------------------------------

Between 1980 and 2004, about 10,300 unidentified human 
remains were reported to the National Death Index 
(NDI), maintained by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention’s (CDC) National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS). The NDI is a central computerized 
database of all death records in the United States. 
While death records are submitted annually to NCHS by 
the vital statistics office in each State and the 
District of Columbia, the NDI is not a national system 
for reporting unidentified persons. States do not 
uniformly specify on the death certificate when a 
person’s identity is not known.  

The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI) National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) Unidentified Person 
File is the only national database specifically 
designed to collect information on unidentified 
persons. However, reporting to the NCIC is voluntary 
and has been inconsistent across States and over time. 
California is the only State that mandates reporting 
to the Unidentified Person File.  

10,300 unidentified persons in the NDI; 73% reported 
by 5 states

The NCHS provided estimates of nidentified persons in 
the NDI to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The 
counts varied each year, from a low of 271 in 1984 to 
a high of 688 in 1987 (figure 1). The reported number 
of unidentified persons declined from 1993 through 
2004. This decrease may be due to advances in 
forensics and technology.

Almost three-quarters of unidentified persons were 
reported by 5 States: Arizona, California, Florida, 
New York, and Texas. Two States — California 
and New York — accounted for 50% of all reported 
unidentified persons in the NDI. 

State-level data on unidentified persons reported to 
the NDI varied over time. While States such as 
Georgia, Michigan, New York, and Texas had an 
overall decrease since 1990,  Arizona and Florida had 
substantial increases (table 1). The large increase in 
unidentified persons in Arizona and Florida may be 
attributed to a growing number of illegal immigrants 
in these States. Friends or family members of illegal 
immigrants may not report the person missing or come 
forward to identify them for fear of authorities.

White males accounted for over half of unidentified 
human remains

As of February 2005, the NCIC file contained 
information on approximately 5,900 unidentified 
persons. The 5 States that accounted for 75% of the 
records in the NDI also accounted for 75% of all 
unidentified persons in the NCIC file. California 
accounted for 42% of all persons in the NCIC database.

The majority of unidentified persons were white (70%); 
blacks made up 15% of unidentified persons; and race  
could not be determined in 13% of the cases. Overall, 
72% of unidentified persons were male, and 24% were 
female. Gender could not be determined in 4% of the 
cases. White males acounted for over half of all 
unidentified persons. 

27% of unidentified persons in the NCIC were homicide 
victims

In about half of the cases, the medical examiner or 
coroner could not determine the manner of death 
because the remains were badly decomposed or 
skeletonized. About 27% of the deaths were ruled 
homicides; 12%, accidental deaths; 7%, natural causes; 
and 5%, suicides.

Methodology

The NDI is a centralized index of death records 
reported to CDC from the State vital statistics 
offices. By state law, all deaths in each State must 
be reported and a death certificate prepared by either 
a funeral director, medical examiner, or coroner, 
regardless of whether the person is identified. 
Records are provided to the National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS) electronically. Death records are 
added to the index annually, approximately 
12 months after the end of the calendar year. 
According to CDC, the index contains a standard set of 
identifying information on each death to be used to 
identify and locate death records in State offices.

Estimates of unidentified persons in the NDI, provided 
to BJS by NCHS, were calculated by conducting a 
literal text field search on the first and last 
name categories of the NDI. First and last name 
combinations were used to identify unknown decedents 
when Doe, Black, White, John, or Jane appeared in 
either the first or last name data field. Other 
combinations containing these strings, such as Thomas 
White or John Smith, were counted as known decedents 
and were not included as unidentified persons.  

The number of unidentified persons are annual 
estimates instead of true counts because of the 
criteria used to search the NDI. While the search of 
the death records was comprehensive, some death 
records may have been missed because terms other than 
those specified in the search were used to indicate 
that a person’s identity was not known. In addition, 
some death records reported as unidentified may have 
been identified at a later date. For more information 
about the National Death Index, see the CDC’s National 
Center for Health Statistics Website at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ndi.htm>.

The NCIC Unidentified Person File was provided to BJS 
by the FBI. Records are typically entered by a law 
enforcement agency on behalf of medical examiner and 
coroner offices and are retained indefinitely, unless 
removed by the entering agency. The NCIC contains 
records of unidentified deceased persons, persons of 
any age who are living and unable to determine their 
identity, and unidentified catastrophe victims. Only 
data on unidentified deceased and catastrophe victims 
were included in this analysis. For more 
information about the NCIC, see the FBI’s Criminal 
Justice Information System (CJIS) Division Website at 
<http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/missingpersons.htm>.

End of file
td  11/21/07
