U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Urban, Suburban, and Rural Victimization,
1993-98

October 2000, NCJ 182031


----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/usrv98.htm

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Detis T. Duhart, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

-----------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*  From 1993 to 1998 the trends in violent and property crime 
for urban and suburban areas were similar.  For both urban and 
suburban areas, violent and property crime trends during this 
period decreased at a greater rate than in rural areas.

*  The average annual 1993-98 violent crime rate in urban areas 
was about 74% higher than the rural rate and 37% higher than the 
suburban rate.

*  Urban males experienced violent victimizations at rates 64% 
higher than the average combined suburban and rural male rate and 
47% higher than urban females.

*  Although most violent crimes in urban (60%), suburban (68%), 
and rural (70%) areas were committed without a weapon, firearm usage 
in the commission of a violent crime was higher in urban areas when 
compared to suburban or rural areas (12% urban versus 9% suburban and 
8% rural).

*  Between 1993 and 1998, 19 in 20 suburban and rural households 
owned motor vehicles; however, in suburban households the theft of 
motor vehicles (13 per 1,000 households) was twice the rural rate 
(6 per 1,000 households) during this period.

*  Property crimes were generally completed at higher rates against 
urban households than against  suburban or rural households.

*  Urban violent crime victims were more likely than suburban or 
rural crime victims to be victimized by a stranger (respectively, 
53%, 47%, and 34% of violent crime victims).
------------------------------------------------------------------

Violent and property crime victimization disproportionately affected 
urban residents during 1998.  Urbanites accounted for 29% of the United 
States population and sustained 38% (12 million) of all violent and 
property crime victimizations.

In comparison, the percentages of suburban and rural residents who 
were victims of crime were lower than their percentages of the 
population.  Fifty-one percent of the U.S. population were suburban 
residents who experienced 47% (15 million) of all violent and property
victimizations.  Rural residents accounted for 20% of the U.S. population 
but sustained 15% (5 million) of all violent and property crime
victimizations, according to National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
data.

During 1998 urban residents experienced overall violent crime, rape 
and sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault, and
personal theft at higher rates than suburban or rural residents.  Urban
households also sustained overall property crime, burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and theft at higher rates than suburban or rural households. 

Data and measurement This report presents findings based on NCVS data
collected by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS).  The NCVS gathers 
data about crimes from an ongoing, nationally representative sample of
households in the United States.  NCVS data include information about 
crime victims (age, gender, race, ethnicity, marital status, income, 
and educational level), criminal offenders (gender, race, approximate 
age, and victim-offender relationship), and the nature of the crime 
(time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and 
victims' reaction to attack).  Homicide data are collected by the FBI, 
under the Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) of the Uniform Crime 
Reporting Program (UCR).

Geographic areas in this report are based on Metropolitan Areas (MA's).  
The U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) classifies areas into 
three segments based on their relationship to an MA: central city, 
outside central city, and nonmetropolitan area.  These classification
categories are labeled in this report as urban, suburban, and rural,
respectively.***Footnote 1: For more information about MA's visit
http://www.census.gov/population/www/estimates/metroarea.html.***
  
Urban, suburban, and rural 
victimization, 1998

Victimization theorists and practitioners argue that victimization 
rates are related to locality of residence.  The results of these 
analyses are consistent with previous studies that examined 
victimizations by locality of occurrence.  Urban areas generally 
experienced criminal victimizations at rates higher than suburban 
or rural areas in 1998.

Violent crimes

Urban residents experienced overall violent crime at a higher 
rate than suburban or rural residents during 1998.  Violent 
victimization rates for urbanites, suburbanites, and rural residents 
were 48, 37, and 28 per 1,000 persons, respectively.  Similar 
results were found for all categories of violent crime (rape and 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) with 
two exceptions.  Urban residents' simple assault rate was slightly 
higher than suburban residents' rate, and rape and sexual assault 
rates were similar across all areas during 1998.  Urban, suburban, 
and rural residents' simple assault rates were almost triple the rates 
of any other violent crime. 

Personal thefts

Urbanites were victims of personal theft at a significantly higher 
rate than suburbanites.  The urban personal theft rate was twice the 
rate experienced by suburban residents (2 versus 1 per 1,000 residents).

Property crimes

During 1998 urban households were characterized by a higher overall 
property crime rate than were suburban or rural households.  For 
example, urban households' property crime rate was 36% higher than 
suburban households and 57% higher than rural households (271 urban, 
199 suburban, and 173 rural property crimes per 1,000 households,
respectively).  In addition, urban households experienced burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and theft at higher rates than households in 
other areas.  Theft rates were higher than burglary or motor vehicle 
theft rates in all areas. 

Trends in urban, suburban, and rural 
victimization, 1993-98

Victimization rates are declining.  Violent crime, personal theft, and
property crime rates fell between 1993 and 1998.  The trends in violent 
and property crime for urban and suburban areas were similar, decreasing 
at a greater rate than in rural areas (see appendix table 1 for 
populations).

Violent crimes

Violent victimization rates fell for residents in urban, suburban, 
and rural areas between 1993 and 1998.  There were 74 urban violent
victimizations (per 1,000 urbanites) in 1993 compared to 48 in 
1998 -- a 36% decrease.  Suburbanites experienced violent crime 
victimization at a rate about 25% lower in 1998 than in 1993 (37 
compared to 50 per 1,000 suburbanites).  During the same period, rural
victimization rates fell significantly (34%) from 42 to 28 per 1,000 
rural residents.  The percent decrease in violent crime victimization 
between 1993 and 1998 for urban residents was higher than that 
experienced in suburban and rural areas.

In all types of localities, aggravated and simple assault rates 
were lower in 1998 than they were in 1993.  Urban and rural residents
experienced rape and sexual assault at significantly lower rates; 
suburban residents at somewhat lower rates.  Urban and suburban robbery 
rates fell between 1993 and 1998, while rural robbery rates remained 
similar.

Homicide

From 1976 to 1998 changes in homicide trends were driven by changes 
in the number of homicides in large American cities (defined as cities 
with populations of 100,000 or more).  Over half of the homicides 
during this period occurred in large cities; almost a quarter of the 
homicides occurred in cities with a population of more than 1 million.  
Small cities are defined as those with a population of less than 100,000.

Personal thefts

Urban and suburban personal theft (pocket picking or purse snatching) 
rates declined from 1993 to 1998.  In 1993 urbanites experienced more 
than twice the rate of personal theft than they experienced in 1998 
(5 versus 2 personal thefts per 1,000 urbanites).  For suburbanites, 
personal theft rates fell 41% between 1993 and 1998 (2 versus 1 personal 
theft per 1,000 suburbanites).

Property crimes

On average, urban, suburban, and rural property crime rates were 33% 
lower in 1998 than they were in 1993.  Specifically, urban rates fell 
34%, suburban rates 35%, and rural rates 31%. 

For each category of property crime, burglary, motor vehicle theft, 
and theft, rates were lower in 1998 than in 1993, regardless of type of
locality considered.  Urban household rates of burglary and motor vehicle
theft declined more than suburban or rural household rates.

Average annual urban, suburban, 
and rural victimization, 1993-98

Violent crime

Individuals living in urban areas were victims of overall violent 
crime, rape and sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and 
simple assault at rates significantly higher than for those living 
in suburban or rural areas.  The average annual overall violent crime 
rate in urban areas was about 74% higher than the average rural rate 
and 37% higher than the average suburban rate.

In all localities rates for robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault in which no injuries occurred were higher than rates for 
these same offenses resulting in injuries.

Personal theft

On average, urban residents experienced personal theft at higher 
rates than suburban or rural residents (3 versus 2 and 1 per 1,000,
respectively).  Purse snatchings and pocket pickings were completed 
at a rate of 3 per 1,000 urban residents, twice the suburban rate, 
and 4 times the rural rate.

Property crime

Urban households experienced overall property crime at rates 
significantly higher than those for other households. Burglaries 
were sustained among urban households at rates higher than rural 
households (46 per 1,000), which in turn experienced burglaries at 
rates higher than suburban households (40 per 1,000). Urban households 
also experienced thefts at higher rates than suburban households.

A higher percentage of suburban and rural households owned motor 
vehicles than did urban households (96%, 95%, and 87%, respectively).  
The percentage of completed motor vehicle thefts was highest among rural
households (79% in rural areas, 66% in urban areas, and 69% in suburban
areas). 

Demographics characteristics 
of violent crime victims

Certain population groups -- especially males, blacks, persons in 
low income categories, the young, persons who never married, and 
divorced or separated persons -- experience higher rates of 
victimization than others.  The same groups were also most susceptible 
to victimization in urban, suburban, and rural areas.

Gender

Urban males and females were violently victimized at rates higher 
than males and females in other areas.  Across all areas of interest, 
urban male violent victimization rates were the highest.  Stated 
differently, urban males experienced violent victimizations at a rate 
87% higher than rural males and 47% higher than urban females.

Race

Violent crimes were committed against blacks at rates higher than 
whites in urban localities.  Black urbanites experienced 68 violent
victimizations (per 1,000) while urban whites were victimized at a 
rate of 59 (per 1,000).  Suburban blacks experienced violent crime at 
a rate marginally higher than white suburbanites.  Rural residents of 
other races were twice as likely to be victims of violent crime as 
were black or white rural residents (68 victimizations compared to 
31 and 34 per 1,000 persons, respectively).***Footnote 2: For 
information about urban, suburban, and rural victimizations among
American Indians, see American Indians and Crime, NCJ 173386,
February 1999.***

Ethnicity

In all areas, violent crime victimization rates among Hispanics were
statistically similar. Non-Hispanics in urban areas experienced 
violent crime at a higher rate than Hispanics (61 versus 52 per 1,000,
respectively), while suburban and rural Hispanics sustained violence
at a higher rate than respective non-Hispanic residents.

Annual household income

In general regardless of the type of area considered, as annual 
household income increased, violent victimization rates decreased.  
Persons with household incomes of less than $7,500 in all areas 
experienced a violent victimization at more than twice the rate of 
persons with household incomes of $75,000 or more.  Urban residents 
in the highest income category were victims of violent crime more than 
similar suburban or rural residents.  Urban residents in the lowest 
income category were violently victimized at a rate slightly higher 
than low-income suburbanites and 41% higher than low-income rural 
residents.

Age

Residents younger than 20 years old in all areas experienced violent 
crime more than all other age groups, while residents age 65 or over
experienced violent crime the least of all age groups.  In each age 
group, urbanites were victims of violent crime at rates higher than 
suburban or rural residents.  

Marital status

In urban and suburban areas, persons  who had never married were 
violently victimized more than those in any other category of marital 
status.  Urban residents, whether never married, married, or widowed, 
were victimized at higher rates than similar residents in suburban or 
rural areas.  Divorced or separated urbanites were violent crime 
victims at a rate somewhat higher than similar suburbanites and at 
a rate higher than rural residents. 

Demographic characteristics of 
victims of rape and sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and 
simple assault 

In general, regardless of the characteristics, urban residents were 
victims of all types of violent crimes at higher rates than suburban 
or rural residents.

Gender

Urban females were raped or sexually assaulted at rates 53% 
higher than suburban or rural females.  Males were robbed and 
assaulted more than females in all localities of interest.  The 
rate of aggravated assault against urban males was about twice 
that of urban females. 

Race

Blacks were robbed and experienced aggravated assault more than 
whites and persons of other races in urban and suburban areas.  
In rural areas robbery rates were similar for all races; however, 
slightly more aggravated assaults occurred among rural blacks than 
among rural whites.  White rural residents were simple assault victims 
more often than blacks in similar areas. Rural residents of other 
races were simple assault victims more than white or black rural 
residents.  

Annual household income

Generally, in all localities, residents with low household incomes 
experienced all categories of violent crime more than residents with 
high household incomes.  For all levels of income, urban residents 
were robbed more than other residents.  Urban and suburban residents 
in the lowest and highest income categories were aggravated assault 
victims at similar rates.  Except for households with incomes between
$7,500-$24,999 and $35,000-$49,999, the simple assault rate among urban
residents was similar to suburbanites and higher than rural residents.

Age

In general, in all areas, younger residents were victims of all 
categories of violent crime at higher rates than older residents.  
Rape and sexual assault rates among 20-49 year old urbanites were 
marginally higher than suburbanites' rates in the same age category.  
Except for residents age 65 or older, urban residents were robbed and
experienced aggravated assaults more than suburban or rural residents.  
Urban residents younger than age 20 experienced simple assault at 
rates similar to suburban residents of the same ages, and at higher 
rates than all other residents, regardless of age. 

Marital status

In all types of localities, residents who never married or were 
divorced or separated were raped and sexually assaulted, robbed, and 
assaulted more than people who were married or widowed.  Urban robbery 
rates were higher than suburban or rural rates for all marital categories
except among widowed residents.  Aggravated assault rates were higher 
in urban areas for never married and married residents.  Widowed and 
divorced or separated residents aggravated assault rates did not vary
significantly by location.

Demographic characteristics of 
property crime victims

Gender

Urban households headed by males experienced property crime at 
a rate about 9% higher than that found among urban households headed 
by females. Urban households with male and female heads were victimized 
at rates significantly higher than equivalent suburban and rural 
households.  

Race

Black and white households experienced property victimization at 
similar rates whether living in urban or rural areas.  Both black 
and white urban households were victims of property crime at 
significantly higher rates than black and white suburban and rural 
households.  In suburban areas, blacks experienced property crimes 
at rates higher than whites.  Rural households headed by persons of 
other races were victims of property crime at higher rates than black 
or white rural households (343, 200, and 211 per 1,000 households,
respectively). 

Ethnicity

Urban households headed by Hispanic or non-Hispanic persons experienced
property crime at rates higher than similar suburban or rural households. 
Regardless of locality, Hispanics were victims of property crime more than
non-Hispanics.

Annual household income

Urban households at all income levels experienced property crime at 
higher rates, followed by suburban and rural households.  For example, 
the property crime rate for urban households with annual incomes of
$25,000-$34,999 was 375 crimes per 1,000 households.  Suburban and 
rural households at this income level had property crime rates of 
257 and 225 crimes per 1,000 households, respectively.    

Age of household head

Generally, younger households in all areas of residence were more likely 
to experience property crimes than households headed by older residents. 
Urban households headed by persons under age 20 experienced property 
crimes at more than twice the rate sustained by households headed by 
persons ages 50-64.  Urban households headed by persons age 20 or over 
were victims of property crime at significantly higher rates than similar
suburban or rural households.

Marital status of household head

Households headed by divorced or separated persons and households 
headed by persons who never married were victims of property crime 
at higher rates than households of married or widowed persons regardless 
of the locality of residence.  Urban households were the victims of 
property crime at higher rates when compared to suburban or rural 
households for all categories of marital status. 

Demographic characteristics of 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and 
theft victims

In general, households in urban areas experienced overall property 
crime, burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft, at rates significantly 
higher than suburban or rural households.

Gender

Female-headed households were burglarized more than male-headed 
households in all areas of residence.  The burglary rates for rural 
male-and female-headed households were higher than suburban male- and
female-headed household rates (42 rural males and 54 rural females 
per 1,000 households compared to 37 suburban males and 46 suburban 
females per 1,000 households).  Motor vehicle theft rates were 
similar for male- and female-headed households in all localities 
except urban areas; where households headed by males were victims 
of motor vehicle theft more than households headed by females.  
Male-headed households experienced theft more than households 
headed by females in all areas.

Race

Black households were burglarized and sustained motor vehicle thefts 
at rates higher than white households in urban and suburban areas, 
while rural blacks and whites experienced these crimes at similar 
rates.  Theft rates for white households were higher than black 
household rates in urban areas and somewhat higher in rural areas.  
Rural households of other races were victims of thefts at rates 
higher than black or white households.  Rural households of other 
races were burglarized more than white households and slightly 
more than black households.  

Annual household Income

Households with low incomes were generally burglarized at higher 
rates than households with higher annual incomes across all areas 
of residence.  Generally, within each type of area, motor vehicle 
theft rates were similar for all levels of income.  However, in all 
areas of residence, households in high-income categories were 
generally more likely to be the victims of thefts than households 
in low-income categories.  

Age of household head

In all areas, households headed by younger persons were generally 
victims of burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft at rates higher 
than older households.  Except among households headed by persons 
between the  ages of 12-19 years, urban households were the victims 
of burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft more than suburban or 
rural households.

Marital status of household head

In all areas households with heads who never married or those who 
divorced or separated were burglarized at rates higher than households 
headed by married or widowed persons.  Never married, widowed, and 
divorced or separated rural households were burglarized more than 
similar suburban households.  Motor vehicle theft and theft rates 
were lowest for widowed households regardless of residence location.  
Motor vehicle theft and theft rates for suburban households were higher 
than rural for all categories of marital status except for theft among 
widowed households. 

Characteristics of victimization

Many characteristics of crime were similar across all types of locality. 
Location of residence had very little effect on the time of victimization,
victims' reaction to the attack, type of injury sustained from the
victimization, and whether offender used a weapon in the commission of 
the act.

Location of victimization

Most violent crimes in urban and suburban areas occurred in open 
areas, on the street, or on public transportation.  Between 1993 and 
1998, more than a quarter (26%) of violent crime victimizations among 
urban residents, and about a fifth (19%) among suburban residents 
occurred in these areas.  Rural residents were more likely to be 
victimized in their homes when compared to other areas where 
victimizations occurred.  About 18% of rural victims of violent 
crime were victimized at their homes compared to urban (15%) or 
suburban (14%) victimizations.

Time of victimization

Crimes happened at similar times of the day among residents living 
in urban, suburban, and rural areas. 

About half of the violent crime experienced by urban (49%), 
suburban (52%), and rural (51%) residents were committed between 
6 a.m. to 6 p.m.  Around 3 out of 10 violent crimes occurred 
between 6 p.m. and midnight.

Victims' reaction to attack Most violent crime victims did not 
defend themselves or their property (no resistance, unarmed 
confrontation, and non-confrontational tactics) in urban (87%), 
suburban (85%), and rural (86%) areas.  About  3% of violent crime 
victims in urban and rural areas compared to 2% of suburban victims 
defended themselves by threatening or attacking their assailant with 
a firearm or other weapon.

Type of injury 

About 20% of violent crimes in all areas resulted in minor 
injury; about 5% resulted in serious injury.
 
Weapons used

Most violent offenders were unarmed in every type of locality 
(60% urban,  68% suburban, and 70% rural).  Urban violent offenders 
were more likely than offenders elsewhere (12% urban versus 9% 
suburban and 8% rural) to use a firearm.

Characteristics of offender

Gender of offender

Males were perceived to be the offenders of violent crimes more often 
than females regardless of the area examined.  Males were perceived 
to have committed 80% of the urban violent victimizations and 79% of 
suburban and rural violent crimes.  Although the percentage of females
perceived to have committed violent crimes in suburban and rural areas 
was similar (16%), the percentage of females committing violent crimes 
in suburban areas was significantly higher than the percentage of 
females committing violent crimes in urban areas (14%).  The percentage 
of violent crime committed by females in rural areas was slightly higher 
than the percentage committed by females in urban areas.

Race of offender

Whites were perceived to be the assailants in violent crime more 
often than blacks or persons of other races in all types of localities. 
However, the percentage of whites in the urban, suburban, and rural
populations was higher than the percentage of offenses perceived to 
have been committed by whites in each area.  In contrast, the percentage 
of blacks in all localities was lower than their percentage of violent 
crime victimizations.  For example, between 1993-98, 90% of the rural
population was white and whites were perceived to have committed 72% of 
rural violent victimizations.  Although blacks comprised 8% of the rural
population, they were perceived to have committed 16% of rural violent 
crimes (see appendix table 1 for total populations).

Age of offender

In all localities, almost two-thirds of the violent crime victims 
perceived the offender to have been age 18 or older (urban 63%, 
suburban 62%, and rural 64%).  Only about a quarter of violent 
offenders in all localities was perceived to be younger than age 18.  
The percentage of suburban and rural crime victims who perceived their
offender to be less than 18 was higher than urban victims' percentage 
(23% and 24% versus 19%, respectively).

Offender substance abuse

The percentage of urban and suburban violent crime offenders perceived 
to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs was similar (29%); the
percentage of rural offenders perceived to be under the influence 
of alcohol or drugs while committing a violent crime (35%) was 
higher than that in urban or suburban areas. 

Victim offender relationship

In suburban and rural areas, victims were more likely to be victimized 
by someone they knew than by a stranger.  About 50% of suburban victims 
and 63% of rural victims knew their offender compared to 47% and 34% of
stranger victimization in each respective area.  Urban violent crime 
victims were more likely to be victimized by a stranger, accounting 
for 53% of all urban violent victimizations.

Who reports to the police

Gender

Females were more likely to report victimizations to the police than 
males   in urban and rural areas.  Suburban males and females reported 
to the police at similar percentages.

Race

Urban and suburban blacks reported their victimizations to the police 
at higher percentages than whites in similar localities.  Blacks and 
whites living in all reported victimizations to the police at similar
percentages.  Residents of other races were least likely to report 
being victimized to the police in suburban areas.

Ethnicity

Hispanics and non-Hispanics reported crimes at similar rates in all
localities.  Non-Hispanics reported more crime than Hispanics in urban 
and suburban areas; in rural areas both groups reported at similar
percentages.

What crimes are reported         
to the police

In all localities robberies and aggravated assaults were the violent 
crimes most likely to be reported to the police.  Rape and sexual 
assaults were the least likely to be reported in urban and suburban 
areas.  In rural areas rape and sexual assaults and simple assaults 
were reported the least.  Residents of all localities reported about 
3 in 10 personal thefts to the police.

Victims of motor vehicle thefts reported their victimization to the 
police more than any other property crime.  Rural residents reported 
household burglaries less than suburban residents and slightly less 
than urban residents.

Methodology

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) measures personal 
and household offenses, including crimes not reported to the police.  
The crimes measured are rape and sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
and simple assault, personal theft (purse snatching and pocket picking),
household burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft.  Information is 
obtained from a continuous, nationally representative sample of 
households in the United States.

The sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings.  Crew 
members of merchant vessels, Armed Forces personnel living in military
barracks or temporary housing, and institutionalized persons, such as
correctional facility inmates, and hospital or nursing home patients, 
were not included.

Between 1993 and 1998 approximately 293,400 households and 574,000 
individuals age 12 or older were interviewed about the crimes they 
experienced in the previous 6 months.  Yearly response rates for the 
NCVS data presented varied between 93% and 96% of eligible households 
and between 89% and 92% of eligible individuals.

Estimates for 1998 in this report are obtained about victimizations
experienced in the same calendar year, called a data year.  The data 
in the BJS Bulletin Criminal Victimization 1998: Changes 1997-98 with 
Trends 1993-98 were collected during the calendar year being estimated, 
termed a collection year.  Estimates for 1998 in this report and 
estimates in the Bulletin may differ somewhat because of differences 
in the two collection methods.

Standard error computations for NCVS 
estimates

Comparisons of percentages and rates in this report were tested 
to determine if differences were statistically significant.  
Differences described in the text as higher, lower, or different 
and changes over time characterized as having increased or decreased 
passed a hypothesis test at the .05 level of statistical significance
 (95% confidence level).  That is, the tested difference in the 
estimates was greater than twice the standard error of that difference.  
For comparisons that were statistically significant at the .10 level of
statistical significance (90% confidence level), the terms somewhat 
different, marginally different, or slight difference are used to 
note the nature of the difference.

Caution is required when comparing estimates not explicitly discussed 
in the text.  What may appear to be large differences may not test as
statistically significant at the 95% or the 90% confidence level. 
Significance testing calculations were conducted at the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.  These programs take into
consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when 
calculating generalized variance estimates.

Trends in violent and property 
victimization

A linear trend test was used to test the change in violent and 
property crime estimates over time.  This test allows one to examine 
whether, for example, the rate of violent crime victimization decreased 
(or increased) over time.  Based on a regression with, for example, 
time as the independent variable and violent victimization rate as the
dependent variable, the test involves computing the regression 
coefficient (b) and its corresponding standard error (F).  The ratio 
of these two (b/F) is the test statistic t.  If t is greater than 
1.96, the null hypothesis is rejected.  In addition, independent 
sample t tests were conducted on the adjusted yearly rates of 
victimizations in urban, suburban, and rural areas to determine if 
the decline in each area differed significantly from each other. 

Calculation of rates and annual levels

Except as noted, the rates in this report are average annual rates 
for 1993-98.  The numerator of a given number is the sum of crimes 
that occurred for each year from 1993 through 1998; the denominator 
is the sum of the annual population of persons or households for these 
years (or the number falling within the particular demographic group 
being measured).  These numbers are multiplied by 1,000 to obtain the 
average annual rates.  Average annual levels of criminal victimization 
are obtained by summing the number of victimizations between 1993 and 
1998 and dividing by six.

Population totals used in this report are calculated from estimates 
derived from the NCVS.  Included in the population are persons age 12 
or older living in the households, including group quarters such as
dormitories.  Population estimates do not include children less than 
age 12, institutionalized persons, U.S. citizens living aboard, crew 
members of merchant vessels, and Armed Forces personnel living in 
military barracks.  The percentages are calculated using the method 
similar to the one used for average annual rates.

Homicide data

Homicide data presented in this report are collected by the FBI, 
under the Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) of the Uniform Crime 
Reporting Program (UCR).  The homicide data provide incident-level 
data on about 92% of the homicides in the United States, including 
the victim and offender relationship. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is 
the statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice.  Jan M. 
Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a 
specific topic in depth from one or 
more datasets that cover many 
topics.  

Detis T. Duhart, Ph.D., wrote this 
report under the supervision of 
Michael Rand.  Tom Hester and 
Ellen Goldberg produced and edited 
the report, with assistance from 
Rhonda C. Keith.   

Callie Rennison provided statistical 
assistance, and Cathy Maston 
provided verification.

October 2000, NCJ 182031


End of file
10/13/00 ih



