U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

Use of Victim Service Agencies by Victims 
of Serious Violent Crime, 1993-2009

Special Report

August 2011

NCJ 234212

Lynn Langton, BJS Statistician 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2432 
-----------------------------------------------------------

From 1993 to 2009, an average of 9% of victims of
serious violent crime--rape or other sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault--received assistance
from a victim service agency (figure 1). Victim service
agencies are publicly or privately funded organizations
that provide victims with support and services to aid their
physical and emotional recovery, offer protection from
future victimizations, guide them through the criminal
justice system process, and assist them in obtaining
restitution.

Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
reveal no measurable change in the percentage of serious
violent crime victims age 12 or older who received help
or advice from a victim service agency in 1993 and 2009
(figure 1). However, because the serious violent crime rate
declined in the United States during this period, a smaller
number of serious violent crime victims received assistance
in 2009 than in 1993.

From 2000 to 2009, the majority of victims of serious violent
crime did not receive assistance from a victim service
agency. A greater percentage of female victims of serious
violent crime (15%), victims of intimate partner violence
(23%), and victims who suffered an injury (15%) received
assistance from a victim service agency, compared to male
serious violent crime victims (6%); victims of crimes by a
stranger, acquaintance, or relative (8%); and victims who
were not injured during the offense (7%).

---------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* About 9% of serious violent crime victims received direct
assistance from a victim service agency from 1993 to 2009.

* From 2000 to 2009, 14% of violent crime victims
who reported the crime to the police received direct
assistance from a victim service agency, compared to 4%
when the crime was not reported.

* Victims who received direct assistance from a victim
service agency were more likely to see an arrest made in
the case and have contact with a non-law enforcement
criminal justice official, such as a judge or prosecutor,
than victims who did not receive direct assistance.

* About 1 in 5 victims of rape or other sexual assault
received assistance from a victim service agency.

* A greater percentage of serious intimate partner violence
victims (23%) received assistance from a victim service
agency than other serious violent crime victims (8%).

* From 2000 to 2009, a greater percentage of female (15%)
than male (6%) victims of serious violent crime received
assistance from a victim service agency.

* A slightly greater percentage of serious violent crime
victims
living in rural areas (12%) received assistance from victim
service agencies than victims living in urban areas (8%).
--------------------------------------------------------

Victims who received direct assistance from a victim service
agency were more likely to experience a follow-up criminal
justice system action related to the crime, such as an arrest
or contact from a judge or prosecutor, compared to victims
who did not receive assistance from a victim service agency.
Using data from the NCVS, this report primarily examines
the trends from 2000 to 2009 in the percentage and type of
crime victims who received assistance from a victim service
agency. It also examines the relationship between victims
receiving assistance and reporting the crime to the police,
and other criminal justice system actions pertaining to the
crime.

From 1993 to 2009, the percentage of victims receiving
assistance from victim service agencies remained relatively
stable

While the percentage of serious violent crime victims who
received assistance from victim service agencies remained
relatively stable from 1993 to 2009, the number of victims
who received assistance declined. From 1993 to 1999, an
annual average of 297,000 serious violent crime victims
received assistance, compared to an annual average of
193,000 from 2000 to 2009 (not shown in a table).
Footnote***The counts exclude victims of simple assault, 
property crimes, and other crimes reported in the NCVS,  
such as identity theft  and stalking, who also received 
assistance from victim service agencies.  Estimates generated
by other organizations on the use of victim service  agencies 
may also include the family and friends of victims who  
received assistance  and may count each repeated use of 
services separately.*** The percentage  of serious violent  
crime victims who received assistance from a victim service 
agency increased slightly during the mid-2000s before
returning to a level in 2009 comparable to 1993 (figure 2).

In 1993 a similar percentage (3%) of serious violent crime
victims' received assistance from government-funded
and privately funded victim service agencies. However,
the percentage of victims who received assistance from
a government-funded victim service agency increased
from about 3% in 1993 to about 5% in 2009. In 2009,
the percentage of victims who received assistance from
a publicly funded agency (5%) was more than double
the percentage of victims who received assistance from a
privately funded agency (2%).

A greater percentage of serious violent crime victims
received assistance when the crime was reported
to the police (14%), compared to victims whose
victimization was not reported (4%)

From 2000 to 2009, about 58% of serious violent crimes were
reported to the police (not shown in a table). The percentage
of serious violent crime victims who received assistance
from a victim service agency was more than 3 times greater
among those whose victimization was reported to the police
(14%) compared to those whose victimizations was not
reported (4%) (table 1). About 1.5 million serious violent
crime victims who reported to the police received assistance
from a victim service agency during the 10-year period,
while about 300,000 victims who did not report received
assistance (not shown in a table). The apparent relationship
between the victim reporting the crime to the police and
receiving assistance may suggest that the police refer
victims to victim service agencies or that a greater
percentage of victims decide to contact the police after
receiving assistance. About 9.5 million victims who reported
to the police did not receive assistance during the 10-year
period (not shown in a table).

Among persons whose victimization was reported to the
police, the percentage receiving assistance was similar in
2009 (12%) and 2000 (11%). However, during this period
the percentage of victims who reported to the police and
received assistance varied depending on victim and crime
characteristics (appendix table 1).

A greater percentage of serious violent crime victims
who received assistance experienced a follow-up
criminal justice system action compared to those who
did not receive assistance

The NCVS collects data on four types of criminal justice
system actions that can be taken in response to a crime:
police are notified of the crime, a formal complaint is
signed, an arrest is made, and the victim receives contact
from a non-law enforcement criminal justice authority, such
as a prosecutor or a judge. From 2000 to 2009, a greater
percentage of victims who received assistance from a victim
service agency experienced each type of follow-up action
than victims who did not receive assistance (figure 3).
The percentage of victims who experienced all four types
of criminal justice system actions was more than 5 times
greater among victims who received assistance (24%) than
among victims who did not (4%).

Similarly, the percentage of victims who received assistance
from victim service agencies was greater among victims
who had experienced all four types of criminal justice
system action (39%) than those who had not (8%)
(appendix table 4). Together, these finding may suggest that
some victims who receive assistance take steps to move
the case through the process and that some victims whose
cases have moved further through the system may then
receive assistance.

From 2000 to 2009, about 1 in 5 victims of rape or other
sexual assault received assistance from a victim service
agency

Overall, a greater percentage of serious violent crime
victims (10%) than victims of simple assault (7%) and
property crime (2%) received assistance from a victim service
agency from 2000 to 2009 (table 2). Among violent crime
victims, more than double the percentage of rape or other
sexual assault victims (21%) received assistance from a
victim service agency, compared to victims of robbery (8%),
aggravated assault (9%), and simple assault (7%).

The percentage of property and serious violent crime victims
who received assistance remained relatively stable from
2000 to 2009, while the percentage of simple assault victims
who received assistance decreased from about 9% in 2000
to about 5% in 2009. Comparing 2000 to 2009, there were
no measurable changes in the percentage of victims of rape
or other sexual assault, robbery, or aggravated assault who
received assistance from a victim service agency.

While rape or other sexual assault victimizations accounted
for 12% of the total serious violent crime victimizations,
they accounted for 24% of those who received assistance among
victims whose victimization was reported to the police.
Among serious violent crime victims whose victimization
was not reported to the police, rape or other sexual assault
victims accounted for 35% of those who received assistance
(not shown in a table). Compared to victims of robbery
(4%) and aggravated assault (3%), a greater percentage
of rape or other sexual assault victims (9%) who did not
report to the police received assistance from victim service
agencies (appendix table 1). This finding may suggest that
rape victims are more likely to be referred to victim service
agencies through non-law enforcement organizations, like
hospitals or counselors, or that these victims are more
likely to seek out services on their own.

Victims of crimes perpetrated by an intimate partner or
resulting in an injury were more likely to receive assistance
from a victim service agency

From 2000 to 2009, nearly 1 in 4 victims of serious violent
crime committed by a spouse, partner, boyfriend, girlfriend,
or a former intimate partner received assistance from a
victim service agency (table 3). Despite a similar percentage
of victims of intimate partner (60%) and non-intimate (57%)
violence who reported to the police during the 10-year
period, a greater percentage of victims of serious violent
crimes committed by intimate partners (23%) received
assistance from a victim service agency than other serious
violent crime victims (8%) who were not intimately involved
with their offender. Among serious violent crime victims
whose victimization was not reported to the police, victims
of intimate partners violence accounted for 36% of victims
who received assistance (not shown in a table). Similar to
victims of rape and other sexual assault, a greater
percentage of victims of intimate partner violence who did
not report to the police (15%) received assistance from
victim service agencies compared to victims of other serious
violent crimes committed by nonintimates (3%) (appendix table
1).

Victims who were injured during a serious violent crime
were more likely to report the crime to the police (66%) than
victims who were not injured (53%). From 2000 to 2009,
a greater percentage of serious violent crime victims who
were injured (15%) during the crime received assistance
from a victim service agency, compared to those who were
not injured (7%) (figure 4). A similar percentage of victims
who suffered serious injuries (15%) (such as broken bones,
internal injuries, or loss of consciousness) and those who
suffered minor injuries (14%) (such as scratches and bruises)
received assistance from a victim service agency.

A lower percentage of younger and male serious
violent crime victims received assistance from a victim
service agency, compared to older and female victims
From 2000 to 2009, a greater percentage of female (15%)
serious violent crime victims received assistance from a
victim service agency, compared to male serious violent
crime victims (6%) (figure 5). Though 43% of serious violent
crime victimizations were against women, women accounted
for about two-thirds (66%) of the victims who received
assistance from a victim service agency (not shown in a
table).

The percentage of victims of serious violent crime who
received assistance from a victim service agency was greater
among victims age 35 or older (12%), compared to victims
between 18 and 34 years old (9%). Among victims of serious
violent crime, a lower percentage of Hispanic victims (6%)
than victims who were black (non-Hispanic) (9%), white
(non-Hispanic) (11%), or of more than one race (17%)
received assistance from a victim service agency. Among
blacks, whites, and Hispanics there were no measurable
differences in the percentage of victims who received
services in urban, suburban, and rural areas (appendix table
2).

A slightly greater percentage of serious violent crime
victims living in households in rural areas (12%) received
assistance from victim service agencies than victims living
in urban areas (9%) (figure 6). There were no measurable
differences in the percentage of serious violent crime
victims who received assistance from victim service agencies
by income level. However, a greater percentage of victims
with a household income of less than $25,000 living in rural
areas (16%) received assistance compared to those living
in urban areas (9%). In rural areas, nearly (50%) of victims
who received assistance lived in households with an income
of less than $25,000, while 38% of serious violent crime in
rural areas was against persons in that income category (not
shown in a table).

Methodology

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an
annual data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau
for the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal crimes, both reported and not
reported to the police, against persons age 12 or older in a
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. Survey
results are based on data gathered from residents living
throughout the United States, including persons living in
group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and
religious group dwellings. The survey excludes personnel
living in military barracks and persons living in
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital
facilities. For more detail, see the Survey Methodology for
Criminal Victimization in the United States, 2007 at
http://bjs.gov.

The NCVS asks all victims two questions pertaining to the
use of victim services:

l. Did you (or someone in your household) received any
help or advice from any office or agency other than the
police that deals with victims of crime?

2. (If yes to the first question) Was that a government or
private agency?

The analyses in this report use data from these two
questions.

Standard error computations

If estimates are derived from a sample rather than the
entire population, as is the case with the NCVS, caution is
warranted when drawing conclusions about the size of one
population estimate in comparison to another, or whether
a time series of population estimates is changing. Although
one estimate may be larger than another, estimates based
on responses from a sample of the population each have
some degree of sampling error. The sampling error, or
margin of error, of an estimate depends on several factors,
including the amount of variation in the responses, the size
and representativeness of the sample, and the size of the
subgroup for which the estimate is computed.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an
estimate is the standard error. The standard error can
vary from one estimate to the next. In general, a smaller
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of
the true value than an estimate with a higher standard error.
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are
associated with less precision and reliability, and should be
interpreted with caution.

The relative standard error (RSE) is a measure of an
estimate's reliability. The RSE is the ratio of the standard
error to the estimate. In this report, the RSE was calculated
for all estimates, and in cases where the RSE was greater
than 50% or when the estimate is based on 10 or fewer
sample cases, the estimate was noted with a "!" symbol. Such
estimates should be interpreted with caution.

A statistical test is used to determine whether differences
in means or percentages are statistically significant once
sampling error is taken into account. Comparisons made
in the text were tested for statistical significance at the
p < .05 level to ensure that the differences were larger than
might be expected due to sampling variation. Significance
testing calculations were conducted at BJS using statistical
programs developed specifically for the NCVS by the U.S.
Census Bureau. These programs take into consideration
many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when
calculating estimates. Standard errors for average annual
estimates were calculated based on the ratio of the sums of
victimizations and respondents across years.

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related
to one another and to other variables not included in the
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences
based on the results presented.

---------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This special report was written by Lynn Langton. Michael
Planty verified the report.

Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey produced the
report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final
printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

August 2011, NCJ 234212

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the
website: http://www.bjs.gov/index. cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2432.
--------------------------------------------------------

7/26/2011/JER/2:21