U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report 

Veterans in State and Federal Prison, 2004

May 2007, NCJ 217199


--------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vsfp04.htm 

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may 
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#V
--------------------------------------------------------

By Margaret E. Noonan
BJS Statistician
and Christopher J. Mumola
BJS Policy Analyst

The percentage of veterans among State and Federal prisoners
has steadily declined over the past three decades, according 
to national surveys of prison inmates conducted by the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics (BJS). In 2004,10% of State prisoners 
reported prior service in the U.S. Armed Forces, down from 
12% in 1997 and 20% in 1986. Since BJS began surveying Federal
prisoners in 1991, they have shown the same decline over a 
shorter period. Overall, an estimated 140,000 veterans were 
held in the Nation's prisons in 2004, down from 153,100 in 
2000.

The majority of veterans in State (54%) and Federal(64%)prison 
served during a wartime period, but a much lower percentage 
reported seeing combat duty(20% of State prisoners, 26% of 
Federal). Vietnam War-era veterans were the most common wartime 
veterans in both State(36%) and Federal(39%)prison. Veterans
of the Iraq-Afghanistan eras comprised 4% of veterans in both
State and Federal prison. The average length of military 
service of veterans in prison was about 4 years. An estimated 
62% of veterans received an honorable discharge and 38% 
received various types of other discharges.

Veterans in State and Federal prison in 2004 were almost
exclusively male (99%). When compared to other men in the U.S. 
resident population, male veterans have had lower incarceration 
rates. Among adult males, the incarceration rate of veterans 
(630 prisoners per 100,000)was less than half that of 
nonveterans (1,390 prisoners per 100,000). This lower rate is 
due in part to age differences since older men typically have 
lower incarceration rates. Most male veterans(65%)were at least 
55 years old in 2004, compared to 17% of nonveteran men.

More than half (57%) of veterans in State prison were serving
time for a violent offense, including 15% for homicide and 23% 
for sexual assault which included rape. Among nonveterans, less 
than half (47%) were in State prison for a violent offense; 1 
in 5 were held for homicide (12%) or sexual assault (9%).

Veterans had shorter criminal records than nonveterans in
State prison, but reported longer prison sentences and 
expected to serve more time in prison than nonveterans. 
Nearly a third of veterans and a quarter of nonveterans were
first-time offenders. The average maximum sentence reported
by veterans in State prison(147 months)was 2 years longer 
than that of nonveterans (119 months). On average veterans 
expected to serve 22 months longer than nonveterans (112 
months compared to 90 months).

Less than half of veterans in State prison (43%) reported
recent drug use, compared to 58% of nonveterans. At the 
time of the offense, a quarter of veterans and a third of 
nonveterans reported being under the influence of drugs.

Half of State prisoners reported ever having a mental health
problem, regardless of veteran status. However, veterans(30%)
were more likely than nonveterans (24%) to report a recent 
history of mental health services, including an overnight 
stay in a hospital, use of a prescribed medication, or
treatment by a mental health professional.

Detailed information on the characteristics of veterans 
and nonveterans in State and Federal prison is provided 
in appendix tables available on the BJS website at
<http:www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vsfp04.htm>. 

After rising for two decades, number of veterans 
dropped since 2000

Between 1985 and 2000, the estimated number of veterans in
State and Federal prison rose by more than 50,000, or 53%. 
During the same period, the overall State and Federal 
prisoner growth was three times greater. Since 2000, the
annual prisoner growth has slowed dramatically, and the
number of veterans in prison fell by 13,100 or 9%.

The decline in the percentage and number of veterans in the
Nation's prisons reflects in part the declining number of 
veterans in the U.S. resident population. According to the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), there were an 
estimated 24,523,300 veterans in the United States
resident population in 2004.***See Methodology for veteran 
population estimates. In this report, veteran refers to any 
person who served in the U.S. Armed Forces.***  Since 1985 
the number of veterans living in the U.S. has declined by 
nearly 3.5 million persons, dropping from 16% of the adult 
U.S. resident population to 11%. During the same period, 
active-duty personnel in the U.S. Armed Forces dropped by 
34%, a decline of over 700,000 active-duty personnel.

Male veterans were half as likely as other men to be 
held in prison; the gap increasing since the 1980s

Over 90% of veterans in the U.S. population were men, and
veterans in both State and Federal prison in 2004 were almost 
exclusively male (99%). When compared to other men in the U.S. 
resident population, veterans have had consistently lower 
incarceration rates.

The gap between these groups has grown over time. In 1985 the
prison incarceration rate of male veterans (368 prisoners per
100,000 veterans) was just over half that of nonveteran men 
(646 per 100,000). By 2004 the incarceration rates of each 
group had risen sharply, but more so among nonveterans(115%)
than veterans(71%). Male veterans(630 prisoners per 100,000) 
were less than half as likely as nonveteran men (1,390 
prisoners per 100,000) to be in prison in 2004.

The difference in male incarceration rates by veteran status
is largely explained by age. Veterans were older than other 
men in the U.S. population. In 2004 two-thirds of all male 
veterans were age 55 or older, compared to 17% of nonveteran 
men. The incarceration rate of these older male veterans(182
per 100,000)was far lower than for those under age 55(1,483
per 100,000). Veterans also had a much lower incarceration 
rate among men age 25 to 34, which is the largest age group 
of State prisoners. If veteran men had the same age 
distribution as nonveteran men, the incarceration rates
would be similar. The age-controlled incarceration rate for 
veteran men(1,253 prisoners per 100,000) would be 10% lower 
than that of nonveteran men(1,390 per 100,000).

U.S. Army accounted for 46% of veterans living in the 
U.S., but 56% of veterans in State prison in 2004

While veterans held in State prison in 2004 represented all
branches of the U.S. Armed Forces, Army veterans were over-
represented in prison. The VA estimated that 46% of veterans 
living in the U.S. during 2004 had served in the Army, but 
56% of veterans in State prison were Army veterans. By 
contrast, Air Force veterans accounted for 18% of all 
veterans in the U.S., but 9% of veterans in State prison.
     
Half of incarcerated veterans performed wartime military
service; 1 in 5 reported combat duty

Although a majority of incarcerated veterans served during a
wartime period, a much lower percentage reported seeing combat 
duty. In 2004 most State prison veterans(54%)reported service 
during a wartime era, while 20% saw combat duty. In Federal 
prison two-thirds of veterans had served during wartime, and
a quarter had seen combat. 

Vietnam-era veterans were the largest group of wartime service 
veterans in both State(36%)and Federal prison (39%). These 
percentages have been nearly stable since 1997. The percentage 
of veterans reporting service during the Persian Gulf War-era 
(1990 to 1991) was stable in State prison(14% in 2004, 12% in 
1997), but grew from 13% to 21% of veterans in Federal prison 
over this period. 

Service during either World War II or the Korean conflict was
reported by 2% of State and 3% of Federal prison veterans in 
2004, compared to 4% and 6%, respectively in 1997. Fewer than 
5% of veterans held in either State or Federal prison in 2004 
reported service during the Afghanistan and Iraq War-era(2002 
to 2004). 

-------------------------------------------------------
Number of active-duty personnel held in military prison
declining; sexual assault most common offense

According to data reported by the U.S. Department of 
Defense (DoD), the number of active-duty military 
personnel held in military correctional facilities 
fell 22% between 1994 and 2004. These facilities hold 
military personnel whose offenses fell under the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice rather than civilian jurisdiction. 
These counts do not include prisoners of war or enemy 
combatants captured during military operations.

The drop in military prisoners outpaced the decline in 
the number of active-duty personnel. As a result, the 
military incarceration rate declined from 174 prisoners per 
100,000 active-duty personnel in 1994 to 153 per 100,000 
in 2004. The rate of incarceration varied widely by branch 
of service. The Navy and Air Force had the lowest rates over 
this period, while the Marine Corps had the highest rate. 
By 2004 the Marine Corps' incarceration rate had dropped 34% 
from its 2000 peak, but remained the highest of all the 
services.

Rape or sexual assault (29%) was the most common offense for 
which active-duty personnel were held in DoD custody. Violent 
offenses accounted for half (46%) of all inmates, followed 
by drug (22%) and military offenses (14%).
-----------------------------------------------------

Veterans were older, better educated than other State 
and Federal prison inmates

Veterans differed from nonveteran prisoners on a variety of
measures. Half of veterans in State prison were white non-
Hispanics, compared to a third of nonveteran inmates. The 
median age (45) of veterans in State prison was 12 years 
older than that of nonveterans (33). Nonveteran inmates
(55%) were nearly 4 times more likely than veterans (14%) 
to be under the age of 35. 

Veterans in State prison were more likely to have been
married at one time(74%)than nonveterans(40%),although 
the percentage of currently married inmates was much more 
similar (22% of veterans, 16% of nonveterans). Veterans
(43%) were over twice as likely as other State prisoners
(17%) to be divorced. 

Veterans were also much better educated than other prisoners.
Nearly all veterans in State prison (91%) reported at least 
a high school diploma or GED. An estimated 40% of nonveterans 
lacked either. The rate of college attendance among veterans 
in State prison(1 in 3)was triple that of nonveterans(1 in 10). 

Veterans and nonveterans in Federal prison differed on many
of the same measures as State prisoners. Veterans in Federal 
prison were twice as likely as nonveterans to be white non-
Hispanics or to have attended college. Nearly 80% of veterans 
in Federal prison had been married at one time, compared to
half of nonveterans. 

Nearly 1 in 4 veterans in State prison were sex 
offenders, compared to 1 in 10 nonveterans

While veterans had lower prison incarceration rates than
nonveterans, veterans were more likely than other prisoners 
to report serving time for a violent offense. A majority of 
veterans in State prison (57%) were serving time for violent 
offenses, including over a third who were serving sentences 
for homicide (15%) or rape/sexual assault (23%). Fewer than 
half of nonveterans in State prison (47%) were violent 
offenders, with 1 in 5 held for homicide(12%)or rape/sexual 
assault (9%). Veterans 15%)were also less likely to be drug
offenders than other State prisoners (22%).

A fifth of veterans in Federal prison(19%)were serving time
for a violent offense, compared to 14% of nonveterans. The 
percentage serving time for rape/sexual assault was 3% of 
veterans and 1% of nonveterans. Most nonveterans in Federal 
prison (56%) were drug offenders; 46% of veterans in Federal 
prison were serving drug sentences. 

Veterans were more likely than other violent offenders 
in State prison to have victimized females and minors

Among violent offenders, 60% of veterans reported victimizing
only females during their current crime, compared to 41% of 
nonveterans. Veterans were also more likely than other violent 
offenders in State prison to report victimizing a minor. A 
quarter of violent offenders without prior military service 
said that at least one of their victims was under age 17. 
Among veterans the percentage was 40%. In particular, 
veterans (20%) were twice as likely as nonveterans(10%)to 
report a victim under age 13. 

Over two-thirds of veterans reported that they knew the
victim of their violent crime. Among nonveterans, half knew 
their victim. While veterans were no more likely than other 
violent offenders in State prison to have victimized an 
intimate partner, friend or acquaintance, the percentage
who said they victimized a relative (25%) was twice that 
reported by nonveterans (11%). 

Veterans had shorter criminal histories than 
nonveterans in State prison

Veterans in State prison had shorter criminal histories than
their nonveteran counterparts. Nearly a third of veterans and 
a quarter of nonveterans were first-time offenders. At the 
time of arrest, 33% of veterans were on probation or parole, 
while 44% of nonveterans had some type of prior criminal 
justice status. Fewer veterans (35%) than nonveterans (44%) 
reported at least 3 prior sentences to incarceration or 
probation. 

More than a third of veterans in State prison had 
maximum sentences of at least 20 years, life, or death

On average veterans reported longer prison sentences and
expected to serve more time than nonveterans. The average 
maximum sentence reported by veterans in State prison 
(147 months) was at least 2 years longer than that of
nonveterans (119 months). A quarter of veterans (24%) in
State prison reported a maximum sentence of at least 20 
years, and 13% received a life or death sentence. 
Nonveterans were less likely to report a sentence of at 
least 20 years (17%) or a life or death sentence (8%).

Veterans in State prison expected to serve an average of 22
months longer than nonveterans (112 months compared to 90 
months). On average both veterans and nonveterans expected 
to serve three-quarters of their maximum sentence in prison.

Veterans reported longer average sentences than 
nonveterans, regardless of offense type

The longer sentences reported by veterans were not entirely
the result of violent offenses. Veterans of all offense types 
reported longer sentences than nonveterans. The difference 
was largest among violent offenders (on average, 28 months),
but among property and public-order offenders, veterans' 
sentences averaged nearly 2 years longer than nonveterans.

Federal inmates reported less variation in sentencing based
on veteran status. On average sentences reported by veterans 
were less than a year longer than nonveterans. The percentage 
of veterans (22%) who reported a sentence of at least 20 years, 
life or death was similar to that reported by nonveterans(17%). 
The average total time expected to be served by veterans and
nonveterans differed by 6 months.

Veterans were less likely than nonveteran prisoners 
to have used drugs 

Veterans (75%) in State prison reported past drug use less
often than nonveterans (84%). Recent drug use showed greater 
differences 42% of veterans used drugs in the month before 
their offense, compared to 58% of nonveterans. At the time 
of the offense, a quarter of veterans and a third of
nonveterans were under the influence of drugs. The types 
of drugs used most commonly by each group were the same. 
Marijuana use was reported most often, followed by cocaine 
(including crack) and stimulants(including methamphetamines).

Drug use reported by Federal prisoners showed less variation
by veteran status. Forty-three percent of veterans and 51% 
of nonveterans reported drug use in the month before the 
offense. A quarter of each group reported using drugs at the 
time of the offense.

While veterans generally reported lower rates of prior drug
use, they were more likely than nonveterans to report having 
used intravenous (IV) drugs at some time. Among State 
prisoners, 24% of veterans and 17% of nonveterans reported 
past IV drug use. In Federal prison, 17% of veterans and 11% 
of nonveterans reported intravenous drug use.

No relationship between veteran status and alcohol 
dependence or abuse

The 2004 survey included an alcohol and drug use assessment
tool which was based on criteria defined in the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition 
(DSM-IV). Using this tool, no relationship between veteran 
status and alcohol dependence or abuse was found. Nearly 
equal percentages of veterans (43%) and nonveterans(44%)in 
State prison met the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol dependence 
or abuse in the 12 months prior to their prison admission. 
Based on DSM-IV criteria for drug use, veterans (43%)
were less likely than other State prisoners (55%) to be
dependent on or abusing illicit drugs.

Among Federal prisoners veteran status was unrelated to both
alcohol and drug dependence or abuse. Equal percentages of 
veterans and nonveterans met the DSM-IV criteria for either 
alcohol or drug abuse or dependence.

Veteran status unrelated to inmate reports of mental 
health problems

Similar percentages of veteran(54%)and nonveterans(56%)in
State prison met one of two criteria for a recent mental 
health problem –- a recent history of mental health services 
or a report of recently experiencing symptoms of a mental 
health disorder. The symptoms were measured according to 
criteria defined in the DSM-IV.

Veterans in State prison (45%) were slightly less likely than
nonveterans (50%) to report symptoms of mental health disorders 
in the last 12 months. These disorders included mania and 
psychotic disorders, as well as a major depressive episode. 
Among Federal prisoners, 35% of veterans and 40% of
nonveterans reported these symptoms.

Despite experiencing fewer symptoms of mental health disorders, 
veterans (30%)were more likely than other State prisoners (24%) 
to report a recent history of mental health services. These 
services included an overnight hospital stay for a mental 
health problem, the use of prescribed medications, a diagnosis 
by a mental health professional, and participation in mental
health therapy. 

Veterans may be more likely to have received mental health
services for a variety of reasons. This difference may be 
partially explained by veterans' access to VA services in 
the community which are not available to nonveterans.
However, VA services may not be available to those veterans
who failed to receive an honorable discharge (38% of veterans 
in State prison). It may also be that the symptoms reported 
by veteran inmates were more severe than those experienced 
by nonveterans. Given that veterans had a median age 12 
years older than nonveterans, it is also possible that they 
have had more opportunities for a diagnosis.

-------------------------------------------------
Despite generational differences, Vietnam-era and
post-Cold War veterans in prison had similar
backgrounds

Despite a median age gap of nearly 20 years, there was 
little measurable difference between State prisoners 
who served in the military during the Vietnam-era and 
those who enlisted after the close of the Cold War 
(1990 or later). 

While Vietnam-era veterans outnumbered post-Cold War 
veterans by 2-to-1, they were in State prison for the 
same types of crimes. Nearly equal percentages of 
Vietnam-era veterans (61%) and post-Cold War veterans 
(57%) were serving a sentence for a violent offense. 
The percentage serving sentences for drug crimes were 
also nearly identical (13% of Vietnam-era veterans, 12% 
of post-Cold War veterans).

Drug use patterns were also similar for both generations 
of military veterans. Around 40% of each group reported 
using drugs in the month before their offense, while a 
fifth of each group said they committed their current 
offense while under the influence of drugs. The overall 
level of substance abuse or dependence (about 60%) was 
similar among each groups of veterans.

While a majority post-Cold War veterans in State prison 
(57%) reported indications of a recent mental health 
problem, compared to 48% of Vietnam-era veterans, this 
difference was not statistically significant.
-------------------------------------------------

Combat service not related to prevalence of recent 
mental health problems

In terms of mental health histories, there was little
difference between combat veterans and noncombat veterans in 
State prison. Just over half of both combat and noncombat 
veterans reported any history of mental health problems.
A third of both groups had a recent history of mental health
services, of which therapy was the most common (20% of combat 
veterans, 22% of other veterans). Reports of recent symptoms 
of mental health disorders were also similar for both groups 
(40% of combat veterans, 45% of other veterans). Mania
disorder was the most commonly reported disorder among both
combat (33%) and noncombat (40%) veterans.
     
Methodology

Data in this report were based on personal interviews with
prisoners, conducted through the Survey of Inmates in State 
and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2004. Conducted every 
5 or 6 years since 1974 (Federal facilities were added for 
the first time in 1991), the inmate surveys are the only 
national source of detailed information on criminal offenders, 
including special populations such as military veterans.

Detailed descriptions of the methodology and sample design of
the surveys can be found in: Drug Use and Dependence, State 
and Federal Prisoners, 2004
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/dudsfp04.htm>, and
Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/mhppji.htm>. For
generalized standard errors for the survey estimates 
presented in this report, see Appendix tables 13 and 14, 
available on the BJS website at
<http:www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vsfp04.htm>. 

Estimates of the veteran population in the United States

This report includes incarceration rates for veteran and
nonveteran adults in the U.S. population. These rates were 
calculated based on estimates of the veteran population 
generated by the VA Office of Policy, Planning and
Preparedness. To estimate the size of the veteran population
in the U.S., the VA uses the Veteran Population Model which 
incorporates data on military service from the decennial U.S. 
Census, discharge data from the DoD Defense Manpower Data 
Center (DMDC), and projections of separations from active-
duty service generated by DoD's Office of the Actuary.
Incarceration rates for 1985 include veterans residing in 
Puerto Rico. (In 1990 VA estimated that 5.5% of veterans 
lived in Puerto Rico; in 2000 the estimate was 5.4%.) For
more information on veteran population estimates and 
projections, see the VA Office of Policy veteran data web 
page <http://www1.va.gov/vetdata/>.

The U.S. Department of Labor also estimates the number of
veterans living in the U.S. based on its Current Population 
Survey (CPS), which is a monthly household survey of about 
60,000 U.S. households. Data on veteran status was
collected in a biannual supplement to the August CPS
collection, most recently collected in 2005. In August 2005 
the CPS produced an estimate of 23,402,000 veterans in the 
U.S. resident population which was 3% lower than the VA
estimate of 24,128,000 for September 2005.

The VA and CPS estimates also differ slightly in their
definition of the term veteran. The VA estimates exclude 
persons who were dishonorably discharged from their military 
service. CPS estimates of veterans include all persons
reporting active-duty service in the U.S. Armed Forces,
regardless of discharge type. Both the VA and CPS estimates 
only include reservists who were called to active-duty. BJS 
defines veterans the same way as the CPS, and include all 
reserve-duty veterans.

Military prison statistics

In 1994 the DoD Corrections Council established an annual
military confinement report. The council, comprising 
representatives from each branch of military service, adopted 
a standardized questionnaire with a common set of definitions. 
With the Corrections Council, BJS produced a series of tables
that provide a unified profile of U.S. military personnel
under the custody of U.S. military authorities. These counts 
include all U.S. military correctional facilities, including 
those located outside of the United States. Prisoners of war 
or enemy combatants held in U.S. military custody are not
included in this collection.

Until 1998 these tables were included in Correctional
Populations in the United States, a discontinued series. For 
the 1998 edition of this report please see
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cpusst.htm>. Since
1999 the counts of U.S. military personnel held in military 
facilities have been presented in the annual Prisoners
bulletin series. See Prisoners in 2005
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/p05.htm>.

------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is director.

This Special Report was written by Margaret 
E. Noonan and Christopher J. Mumola, under 
the supervision of William J. Sabol. Laura M. 
Maruschak, Lauren E. Glaze, Tracy L. Snell and 
William J. Sabol verified the report. Tina 
Dorsey and Carolyn C. Williams of BJS produced 
and edited the report, assisted by Joanna Bradford. 
Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final 
printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

Tracy L. Snell, under the supervision of Allen J. 
Beck, was project manager for the Survey of Inmates 
in State and Federal Correctional Facilities. For a 
listing of U.S. Census Bureau offices and staff 
responsible for carrying out the Survey, see Drug Use 
and Dependence, State and Federal Prisoners, 2004
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/dudsfp04.htm>.

May 2007, NCJ 217199
----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII 
and its related statistical data and tables are 
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vsfp04.htm> 
----------------------------------------------------


End of file
05/17/2007 ih