U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

National Crime Victimization Survey, 1995-2000

Violent Victimization of College Students


December 2003, NCJ 196143


--------------------------------------------------------------- 
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.  
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.opj.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vvcs00.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#vvcs
----------------------------------------------------------------

By Timothy C. Hart 
BJS Statistician

-----------------------------------------------------
Highlights

From 1995 to 2000 violence against college students 
decreased 40% while violence against nonstudents of 
similar ages fell 44%

On average, from 1995 to 2000, comparing persons age 18-24  -

*  College students experienced overall violence, robbery,
aggravated assault, and serious violent crime at rates lower
than those for nonstudents. (College students' simple assault
rate was somewhat lower.)

*  Among women, except for rape/ sexual assault for which
there were no statistical differences, college students
experienced crimes of violence at lower rates than those of
nonstudents.

*  Among men, college students experienced robbery at a lower 
rate than that of nonstudents but had a slightly higher rate 
of simple assault. 

*  For both whites and blacks, students were victims of
violence overall at rates lower than those of nonstudents. 

*  Hispanic college students and nonstudents were victims of
violence at similar rates.

*  In 41% of all violent crime experienced by college students, 
the offender was perceived to be under the influence of drugs 
and/or alcohol.

*  Firearms were present in 9% of all violent crimes, 7% of
assaults, and 30% of robberies against college students.

*  The number of off-campus victimizations of college students 
was over 14 times greater than the number of on-campus 
victimizations. About 19% of students reside on campus, and about 
15% of the violent crimes they experienced took place there.

*  Violence against college students (34%) was less likely to
be reported to the police than violence against nonstudents
(47%).
----------------------------------------------------

On average between 1995 and 2000, college students were victims 
of about 526,000 crimes of violence annually: rape/sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. Of these violent 
crimes, an average of about 128,120 per year involved a weapon 
or serious injury to the victim.

Over the same years college students experienced violent
crimes at a lower average per capita rate than nonstudents
(68 and 82 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 18-24).
(For this report nonstudents, like students, were persons
age 18-24, but nonstudents were not enrolled full or part
time in a college or university.) Similarly, students
sustained serious violent crime -- rape, robbery, and
aggravated assault -- at a lower rate than did nonstudents
(25 and 34 victimizations per 1,000 persons, respectively). 

Findings about rape, sexual assault, robbery, and assault
victimization of college students come from the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) data collected by the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 

Characteristics of violent crime victims, 
1995-2000

College students

On average annually between 1995 and 2000, about 7.7 million
people age 18 to 24 were enrolled full or part time in a college 
or university. These college students experienced overall violent
crime, robbery, aggravated assault, and serious violent crime at
rates lower than those of nonstudents of similar ages.  The rate 
of simple assault was somewhat lower for students than for
nonstudents. 

Simple assault accounted for about two-thirds of college student
violent victimizations (63%), while rape/sexual assault accounted 
for an estimated 6%.

Gender

The average annual rate of overall violent crime against
female college students (47 per 1,000) was about half that 
of male college students (91 per 1,000). The average rate 
of overall violent crime against female nonstudents (78 per
1,000) was about 11% less than that of male nonstudents
(87 per 1,000), 1995-2000.

Male college students and nonstudents of similar ages were
victims of overall violent crime and aggravated assault at
similar rates. The average annual rate of robbery against
male college students (8 per 1,000) was lower than that of
male nonstudents (14 per 1,000). Male college students were
slightly more likely to be victims of simple assault (56 per
1,000) than were male nonstudents (48 per 1,000).  

The average annual violent victimization rate for women
college students was less than that for women nonstudents
(47 and 78 per 1,000 persons, respectively). 

In addition to overall violent crime, women college students
were less likely than women nonstudents to be victims of
robbery, aggravated assault, simple assault, and serious
violent crime.  

---------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization Survey 

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source of information 
on the frequency, characteristics, and consequences of
criminal victimization.  One of the largest continuous 
household surveys conducted by the Federal Government,
the NCVS collects information about crimes both reported
and not reported to police.

The survey provides the largest national forum for victims 
to describe their experiences of victimization, the impact 
of crime, and the characteristics of violent offenders.

This report presents the first NCVS estimates of crime against 
college students. Questions were added to the NCVS in 1995 to 
obtain information on college enrollment.

For the most current overall estimates of criminal victimization 
in the United States, see Criminal Victimization, 2002,
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ abstract/cv02.htm>. 

Other findings from the NCVS are also on the BJS website.
-------------------------------------------

The apparent difference in rape/sexual assault rates between
female students and nonstudents was not statistically
significant.

Race 

Both white and black college students were victims of overall
violent crime and simple assault at rates higher than college
students of "other races"-- American Indians, Alaska Natives, 
Asians, and Pacific Islanders. 

Black college students were victims of robbery at a rate
higher than that of white students. Among students, the rate
of serious violent crime was somewhat higher for blacks than
for whites. Black college students were victims of simple
assault at a rate lower than that for white college students.

Black college students were victims of overall violent crime,
robbery, simple assault, and serious violent crime at rates
lower than those of black nonstudents. Rape/sexual assault
and aggravated assault rates for black college students were
similar to those for black nonstudents, 1995-2000.  

College students of other races were victims of violence at
rates similar to those nonstudents of "other race."  

Hispanic origin

Hispanic and non-Hispanic college students were victimized
by violent crime at similar rates, 1995-2000. 

Hispanic college students and nonstudents were victims of
overall violence at similar rates.

Characteristics of violent crime offenders, 
1995-2000  

Victim-offender relationship 

For overall violent crime, college students were more likely
to be victimized by strangers than by people they knew, 1995-
2000. 

Strangers committed 59% of all violent victimizations of
college students.  About 1 of 3 violent victimizations
against college students was a simple assault committed
by a stranger. The NCVS does not obtain information on
whether the offenders were college students.

Rape/sexual assault was the only violent crime against
college students more likely to be committed by a person
the victim knew. Nonstrangers committed 74% of the
rape/sexual assaults against college students.
Rape/sexual assaults committed against a college student
by a known offender accounted for 4% of all violent
victimizations against college students.

Gang membership

A relatively small percentage of college student victims of
violent crime believed that the offender was a gang member. 
The percentage of victimizations for which the student victim 
identified the offender(s) as gang members ranged from 2% for 
rape/sexual assault to 10% for aggravated assault, 1995-2000.

While about 55% of college student victims of violent crimes 
reported that offender(s) were not gang members, about 40% 
could not discern whether the offender(s)belonged to a gang.

Drug and alcohol use

In 41% of all violent crime experienced by college students
and in 38% of the violence against nonstudents, the offender
was perceived to be under the influence of drugs and/or
alcohol, 1995-2000. 

Offenders perceived to be using drugs and/or alcohol
committed about 2 in 5 rape/sexual assaults and about 1 in
4 robberies against college students.

About 4 in 10 college-student victims of violent crime could
not discern whether the offender was under the influence of
drugs and/or alcohol.

Characteristics of criminal events, 
1995-2000

Presence of a weapon

In all categories of violent crime except robbery, college
students were more likely to be victimized by unarmed
than by armed offenders, 1995-2000. 

Weapons were present in 27% of all violent college-student 
victimizations.  The percentage of crimes committed with 
weapons ranged from 5% for rape/sexual assault to 58% for 
robbery.
  
Firearms were present in 9% of all violent crimes against
college students, including 30% of robberies and 7% of
assaults.   

Offenders were identified as being armed with a knife
during 7% of all violent crimes, including 21% of robberies
and 6% of assaults committed against college students.  

Location and time

From 1995 to 2000 the majority of violent crimes against
college students occurred off campus. The number of
off-campus victimizations of college students was over 14
times greater than the number of on-campus victimizations. 
Seventy-four percent of college students lived off campus, 
19% lived on campus, and 7% did not indicate where they 
lived.

Among students with quarters in student housing, about
85% of violent victimizations occurred off campus. Among
students living off campus, about 95% of victimizations
also occurred off campus. 

Seventy-one percent of the off-campus violence against
college students occurred at night(between 6 p.m. and 6
a.m.).  

Most on-campus violence (57%) against college students
occurred during the day (between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m.).

Injuries and medical treatment

Most college students were not injured as a result of the
violence against them, 1995-2000: 24% of college-student
victims of violence reported being injured. 

Most injuries to college-student victims were minor,
including bruises, cuts, and scrapes. Sixty percent of
injured college-student victims were not treated for 
their injuries. 

Injured college-student victims who received treatment were 
more likely to receive treatment at the scene or home (16%) 
or at a hospital or emergency department (15%)than at a 
doctor's office or clinic (6%). 

College student and nonstudent victimization 
trends, 1995-2000

From 1995 to 2000 victimization trends among college students
and nonstudents differed by crime type. 

Overall violent crime against students fell from 88 to 52
victimizations per 1,000 college students while the rate among
nonstudents dropped from 102 to 57 victimizations per 1,000
nonstudents.

Over the 6-year period, robbery and simple assault rates decreased
for college students while nonstudents experienced declines in
robbery, aggravated assault, simple assault, and serious violent
crime).

For each year from 1995 to 2000 college students were victims 
of robbery at rates at least somewhat lower than those of 
nonstudents.

For most years from 1995 to 2000, college students and nonstudents 
were victims of aggravated assault at similar rates. In 1995 and 
1998 college students were victims of aggravated assault at rates 
lower than those for nonstudents. 

While the rates of overall violent crime and simple assault among
students and nonstudents declined from 1995 to 2000, the declines
were similar for both groups.  

The apparent difference in trends from 1995 to 2000 of rape/sexual
assault rates among college students was not statistically
significant. 

Reporting to the police

In general most violence against college students was not
reported to police, 1995-2000. Thirty-four percent of all
violence against college students and 47% of violence
against nonstudents were reported.

Eighty-six percent of all rapes/sexual assaults committed
against college students were not reported to police,
compared to 12% that were reported, 1995-2000.  

Fifty-two percent of aggravated assaults and 69% of
simple assaults committed against college students were
not reported to police. From 1995 to 2000 a majority of
serious violent crime (57%) suffered by college students
went unreported to police.

Except for rape/sexual assault and robbery, there was no
difference in who reported incidents of victimization of
college students to police, 1995-2000.  

Rape/sexual assault (73%) and robbery (61%) were more likely to 
be reported by the college-student victim than by someone else. 
Other crimes were equally reported by the victim and someone 
else, such as a household member, an official other than the 
police, or the police at the scene.  

In general, college-student victims said that violent crime
was reported to the police in an effort to “prevent future
violence” (20%), to "stop the incident" (19%), or to “punish
the offender” (10%), 1995-2000.

From 1995 to 2000 a variety of reasons accounted for why
college-student victimizations were not reported to police.
In general, victims said that college-student victimizations
were not reported to police because it was a "private or
personal matter" (24%) or because the violence was
considered  “small/no loss” (20%).

From 1995 to 2000, 8% of violence against college students was 
not reported to police because it was "reported to another 
official," while 5% was not reported to police because of "fear 
of reprisal," because of police apathy, or to "protect the offender." 

Concerns about the police did not prevent college-student
victimizations from being reported. Police inefficiency was
cited as a reason for not reporting violence 3% of the time,
and “police would be biased” was cited 1% of the time as a
reason violence was not reported to police, 1995-2000.

Survey methodology

This report presents data on rape, sexual assault, robbery,
aggravated assault, and simple assault against college age 
(18-24 years old) persons from the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS gathers data on
crimes against persons age 12 or older, reported and not
reported to the police, from a nationally representative
sample of U.S. households. The NCVS provides information about 
victims (age, gender, race, ethnicity, marital status, income, 
and educational level), offenders (gender, race, approximate 
age, and victim-offender relations) and the nature of the crime 
(time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, 
and economic consequences).  

The Violence Against Women Act of 1994 mandated the study
of campus victimization. Beginning in 1995 BJS added new
items to the NCVS to ascertain the student status of victims of
crime.  

This report compares violent victimization experienced by self-
identified, full- or part-time college or university students who
are age 18-24 to violent victimization of nonstudents of similar 
age. Characteristics of offenders and the criminal event involving
student victims are examined.

Between 1995 and 2000, 549,090 individuals age 12 or older were 
interviewed. For the overall population, for the years measured, 
response rates varied between 89% and 91% of eligible individuals. 

Standard error computations

Comparisons of percentages and rates made in this report
were tested to determine if observed differences were
statistically significant. Differences described as higher,
lower, or different passed a hypothesis test at the .05 level
of statistical significance (95% confidence level). The
tested difference was greater than twice the standard error
of that difference. For comparisons that were statistically
significant at the 0.10 level (90% confidence level), "somewhat," 
"slightly," or "marginally" is used to note the nature of the 
difference. 

Significance testing calculations were conducted at the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS by the U.S. Census Bureau. These programs take into 
consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when 
calculating generalized variance estimates.

Definitions

Violent acts covered in this report include rape, sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. Overall violent 
crime is a combination of each type of crime. Serious violent 
crime includes all types except simple assault: rape/sexual 
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.  

Definitions are as follows:

Rape is forced sexual intercourse, including both psychological 
coercion and physical force. Forced sexual intercourse means 
vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the offender(s). This 
category includes incidents in which the penetration is by a 
foreign object, attempted rapes, male and female victims, and 
heterosexual and homosexual rape.

Sexual assault covers a wide range of victimizations
distinct from rape or attempted rape. These crimes include
completed or attempted attacks generally involving
unwanted sexual contact between the victim and offender. 
Sexual assaults may or may not involve force and include
such things as grabbing or fondling. Sexual assault also
includes verbal threats.

Robbery is a completed or attempted theft directly from a
person, of property or cash by force or threat of force, with
or without a weapons, and with or without an injury. 

Aggravated assault is defined as a completed or attempted
attack with a weapon, regardless of whether or not an
injury occurred, and an attack without a weapon in which
the victim is seriously injured.

--------------------------------------------
Examining NCVS data 
on college students

The NCVS does not differentiate between full-time or
part-time students, between students attending private or
public institutions, and between students who are enrolled
in an undergraduate or graduate program. The NCVS asks
all household members 12 or older if they are currently
attending or enrolled either full- or part-time in a college or
university.

For this report, in order to best compare the experience of
college students to a similar population of non-college
students, the analysis was restricted to persons age 18-24.
-------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------
School crime against younger students and their
safety

For more information about school crime against younger
students, see Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2002,
a National Center for Education Statistics and BJS report,
October 2002,
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs02.htm>. Highlights of
this report include the following:

*  Students age 12 through 18 were victims of about 1.9
million crimes of violence or theft at school in 2000,
including about 128,000 serious violent crimes.

*  Between 1995 and 2000, the percentage of students
who reported being victims of crime at school decreased
from 10% to 6%.

*  The percentage of students age 12 through 18 who
reported avoiding one or more places at school for their
own safety decreased from 9% to 5% between 1995 and
2001. 
------------------------------------------------

Simple assault is an attack without a weapon resulting
either in no injury, minor injury (such as bruises, black 
eyes, cuts, scratches, or swelling) or an undetermined
injury requiring less than 2 days of hospitalization. 
Simple assaults also include attempted assaults without 
a weapon.

-----------------------------------------
The BJS website <www.ojp.usdoj. gov/bjs> offers this
report and the data that it analyzes.
--------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
Get immediate e-mail notification of BJS releases from
JUSTSTATS. Subscribe at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/juststats.htm>.
-------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld 
is director.

Timothy Hart wrote this report under the supervision of
Michael Rand. Callie Rennison and Patsy Klaus provided
statistical assistance and verification. Tom Hester and 
Tina Dorsey edited the report. Jayne Robinson prepared 
the report for publication.

December 2003, NCJ 196143
------------------------------------------------


End of file
10/29/03 ih