U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report

Violence in the Workplace, 1993-99


December 2001, NCJ 190076
            

-------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available.  To view a list of all in the series go to the
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#vw

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
format (.wk1) and the full report including tables and
graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/vw99.htm
--------------------------------------------------------

Detis T. Duhart, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician
            
--------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

1993-99, violent crime in the workplace 
declined 44%, compared to a 40%-decrease
in the overall rate of violent crime
            
*  Of the occupations examined, police
officers experienced workplace violent
crime at rates higher than all other
occupations (261 per 1,000 persons).

*  The workplace violent crime rate for
whites (13 per 1,000 in the workforce)
was 25% higher than the black rate 
(10 per 1,000) and 59% higher than 
the rate for other races (8 per 1,000). 
This contrasts with overall violent 
crime (including both workplace and
non-workplace violence) for which blacks
have the highest rates.

*  Most workplace victimizations were
intraracial.  About 6 in 10 white and black
victims of workplace crime perceived their
assailant to be of the same race.

*  Private sector and Federal Government
employees were victimized at similar
rates.

*  Elementary school teachers experienced 
workplace violence at a rate lower than 
junior high and high school teachers (17 
versus 54 and 38 per 1,000 in the workforce, 
respectively).

*  Almost 4 of every 10 robberies occurring 
while the victim was at work or on duty were 
committed against persons in retail sales 
or transportation.   

*  More than 80% of all workplace homicides 
were committed with a firearm.  From 1993 to 
1999 the number of workplace homicides 
declined 39%.
------------------------------------------------------  

Between 1993 and 1999 in the United States, 
an average of 1.7 million violent 
victimizations per year were committed
against persons age 12 or older who were
at work or on duty, according to the
National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS).  In addition to the nonfatal
violence measured by the NCVS, about
900 work-related homicides occurred
annually.  Work-place violence accounted
for 18% of all violent crime during the 
7-year period.  

Of the occupations examined, police officers 
experienced workplace violent crime at rates 
higher than all other occupations (261 per 
1,000 police officers).  College or university 
teachers were victimized the least among
occupations examined (2 per 1,000 college 
teachers).  

This report focuses on nonfatal violence 
in the workplace -- rape and sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple
assault -- as measured by the NCVS.  In
addition, data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics are included to describe the
nature of workplace homicide.  All tables
describe nonfatal victimizations occurring
while at work or on duty, unless otherwise
noted as including homicide. 

Violence in the workplace

Rape and sexual assault, robbery, and
homicide accounted for a small percentage 
(6%) of all workplace violent crime 
occurring between 1993 and 1999. The 
majority of workplace violent incidents, 
almost 19 of every 20, were aggravated 
or simple assaults.  (See Glossary for 
definitions.)  Violent crime was 
experienced by persons at work or on
duty at a rate of 13 per 1,000 persons 
in the work-force. The simple assault rate 
(9 per 1,000 persons in the workforce) was
more than 4 times the rate of all other
categories of violent workplace crime. 
Homicides were less than 1% of all workplace 
violent crimes.

Trends in workplace violence

The percent decreases in the rates of
workplace violence and of violent crime
overall were similar between 1993 and
1999.  There were 16 workplace violent
victimizations (per 1,000 persons in the
workforce) in 1993 compared to 9 in 1999
-- a 44% decrease.  During the same
period, overall violent crime victimization
rates fell significantly (40%) from 55 to 
33 per 1,000 persons.  Each category of
violent workplace crime was lower in 1999
than it had been in 1993.  For example,
persons working or on duty experienced 7
simple assaults per 1,000 persons in the
workforce during 1999 versus 11 in 1993.

------------------------------------------
The National Crime Victimization
Survey 

The NCVS is the Nation's primary source
of information on the frequency,
characteristics, and consequences of
criminal victimization. One of the largest
continuous household surveys conducted
by the Federal Government, the NCVS
collects information about crimes, both
reported and not reported to police. The
survey provides the largest national forum
for victims to describe the impact of 
crime and the characteristics of violent
offenders.

This report updates Workplace Violence,
1992-96, a BJS Special Report, July
1998, NCJ 168634. Findings from the 
NCVS are also on the BJS website:
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>.
---------------------------------------------

Characteristics of victims of workplace
violence

Males were victimized more than females
for both workplace violent crime and
violent crime overall during 1993-99. The
violent crime victimization rate for working
or on duty males was 56% higher than the
female rate (15 versus 10 per 1,000 in the
work-place).  Overall, 18% of violent
crimes were workplace victimizations;
22% of all male and 15% of all female
violent crimes were committed while the
victim was working or on duty.

               Percent of violent victimizations
                                      Non-
Gender             All   Workplace  workplace
 
  All victims      100%     18%        82%
Male               100      22         78
Female             100      15         85

Although NCVS data have consistently
shown that blacks experience violent
crime at rates higher than whites and
persons of other races, violent workplace
crime rates were highest among whites. 
While working or on duty, whites 
experienced 13 workplace victimizations
per 1,000 in the work-force, a rate 25%
higher than the black rate (10 per 
1,000 in the workforce) and 59% higher 
than the rate among persons of "other" 
races.***Footnote 1: In this report, 
"other races" and "others" are defined as 
Asians, Native Hawaiians, other Pacific 
Islanders, Alaska Natives, and American 
Indians considered together.***  The black 
workplace victimization rate was similar 
to that of Hispanics (10 per 1,000 in the 
workforce) and slightly higher than the 
rate for persons of "other" races.

Persons age 20-34 experienced workplace 
violence at a rate higher than any other 
age group considered.  Workers age 12-19 
and 35-49 experienced workplace crime at 
similar rates (12 per 1,000 in the work-
force). 

Workplace victimization rates for never
married and divorced or separated persons 
were similar, and both were higher than 
the rates for married or widowed persons.

Type of crime and gender

Except for rape and sexual assault, males
experienced all categories of workplace
violent crime at higher rates and
percentages than did females.  About
two-thirds of all robberies, aggravated
assaults, and simple assaults in the
workplace were committed against males. 
The rates of victimization (per 1,000 in 
the workforce) for these crimes were at 
least 54% higher for males when compared 
to those for females.

Type of crime and race

Whites experienced more than four-fifths
of all rapes and sexual assaults (88%),
robberies (81%), aggravated assaults
(86%), and simple assaults (89%) occurring 
in the workplace.  Per capita rates of 
aggravated assault in the workplace were 
similar for all racial categories.  The 
rate of workplace simple assault for whites 
was higher than that for blacks and persons 
of other races. Blacks and whites were robbed 
while working or on duty at similar rates 
(1 per 1,000 in the workforce).

Average annual rate of victimization 
in the workplace, by occupation, 
1993-99

Occupation was measured by categorizing the 
victim's reported job at the time of the 
victimization into broad occupational fields. 
(See Methodology on page 11 for definitions.)  
Between 1993 and 1999 the rates of workplace 
violence for all occupational categories fell, 
and all the declines were statistically 
significant except for mental health. The 
percentage decline in the workplace 
victimization rate for the law enforcement 
field (55%) was somewhat greater than the 
decline in percentage among mental health
employees (28%).

Persons employed in law enforcement were 
victimized while at work or on duty at
the highest rate of all occupations
examined -- followed by persons working
in the mental health field.  Retail sales
workers were victimized in the workplace
at a somewhat higher rate (20 per 1,000
in the workforce) than those employed in
the teaching, transportation, or medical
field.

Among the occupational groups examined, 
police officers accounted for 11% of all 
workplace victimizations and were victimized 
while at work or on duty at a rate higher 
than all other occupations examined (261 per 
1,000), while college or university teachers 
were victimized the least (2 per 1,000). 

The workplace violent crime victimization
rate for nurses was not significantly
different from that for physicians;
however, nurses experienced work- place
crime at a rate 72% higher than medical
technicians and at more than twice the
rate of other medical field workers (22
versus 13 and 9, respectively). Professional 
(social worker/ psychiatrist) and custodial 
care providers in the mental health care 
field were victimized while working or on 
duty at similar rates (68 and 69 per 1,000, 
respectively)  -- but at rates more than 
3 times those in the medical field.

Except for junior high school teachers, 
the workplace victimization rate for persons
employed in special education facilities
was highest among teachers.  Elementary
school teachers experienced workplace
violence at a rate lower than that for 
junior high and high school teachers (17 
versus 54 and 38 per 1,000 in the workforce,
respectively).  Junior high school teachers' 
workplace violent crime rate was somewhat 
higher than that of high school teachers.

Private security workers' workplace violent
crime rate was the lowest of all law
enforcement workers (87 per 1,000 private 
security workers).  Within the retail
sales field, bartenders were victimized
while working at a rate similar to that of
gas station attendants and somewhat higher 
than that of convenience store workers.  
Within the transportation field, taxi 
cab drivers were victimized while
working or on duty at the highest rate.  

Assault, by occupation

Simple and aggravated assaults accounted 
for 94% of all workplace violent
victimizations.  There were 4 simple
assaults for every aggravated assault
occurring while the victim was at work 
or on duty.  The rate at which persons 
in law enforcement experienced aggravated 
assault (29 per 1,000 in the workforce) 
was more than 3 times the rate for all 
other occupational fields. The workplace 
aggravated assault rate among mental 
health workers was somewhat higher than 
the rate among retail sales employees and 
significantly higher than the rate for the 
medical, teaching, transportation, or other 
fields.

Mental health workers experienced simple
assault at rates higher than all other
occupational fields except law enforcement; 
persons working in the law enforcement field 
experienced simple assault at a rate at least 
twice that of all other occupational fields.

Robbery, by occupation

Almost 4 of every 10 robberies occurring
while the victim was at work or on duty
were committed against persons in the
retail sales or transportation field.
Transportation workers were robbed at a
higher rate than any other occupational
field reported (3 per 1,000 in the
workplace).

Employers of workplace violence
victims

For every 1,000 State, city, or local
government employees, there were 33
workplace violent crimes experienced
between 1993 and 1999. The victimization 
rate of these workers was highest when 
considering type of employer, while the 
self employed were victimized the least 
(7 per 1,000). Private company and Federal 
Government employees were victimized at 
similar rates. The rate of workplace 
victimization for government agency 
employees   Federal, State, city, and 
local combined   (29 per 1,000) was higher 
than the rate of victimization among 
private company employees and the self 
employed.
 
Characteristics of victimization

Time of victimization

Overall, more workplace crimes occurred
between noon and 6 p.m. than in any
other 6-hour period of the day.  

Time of occurrence
of violent crime in   Percent of
the workplace         victimizations
 
Day                       59.5%
 6 am-noon                21.6
 Noon-6 p.m.              37.9
 
Night                     35.7%
 6 p.m. to midnight       24.7
 Midnight-6 a.m.          11.0
 
Did not know               4.8%
   
About 55% of all workplace crimes occurring 
against employees in the law enforcement 
field were committed at night. Law enforcement 
was the only field experiencing more workplace 
crime at night (between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.) 
than during the day (between 6 a.m. and 6
p.m.). Retail sales workers experienced
workplace crime at similar percentages
regardless of the time of their shift.

Victim's reaction to attack 

More than three-quarters of all workplace
violent crime victims did not physically
resist (no resistance, unarmed confrontation, 
and nonconfrontational tactics during the 
attack).***Footnote 2: Actions such as keeping
still during the incident, yelling for help,
attempting to appease or persuade the offender,
and bargaining with the offender are all
classified as "no physical resistance."*** 



                      Violent victimizations
Victim's              in the workplace,
reaction              1993-99
to assailant           Number    Percent
  Total              12,328,000    100%
No physical
  resistance          9,535,400   77.3
Threatened or
  attacked offender     333,200    2.7
Unknown method        2,459,400   19.9
 
Note: Detail may not add to total
because of rounding.

Three percent of workplace violence victims 
defended themselves by threatening or 
attacking their assailant with a firearm or 
other weapon.  

Law enforcement officers victimized while
working or on duty were more likely to
threaten or attack their assailant with a
weapon or firearm than any other victims
of workplace violence (9% of all workplace
crimes committed against them). 

                     Victims of workplace
                     violence who threatened
                     or attacked the offender
Occupational         With a weapon
field                   Number    Percent
Medical                   0*         --
Mental health             0*         --
Teaching              4,600*         0.4%*
Law enforcement     218,700          9.2
Retail sales         31,200          1.6
Transportation       12,800*         2.4*
Other                65,900          1.4
 
*Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases.
See Methodology on page 11.

Victim's injury

Twelve percent of all workplace violence
victims sustained injuries from the incident.  
Of those injuries sustained from workplace 
violence incidents, about 10 out of 11 were 
minor injuries.***Footnote 3: Minor injuries 
include bruises, black eyes, cuts, scratches, 
swelling, chipped teeth, and undetermined 
injuries requiring less than 2 days of 
hospitalization.***   Fifty-three percent 
of all injured victims were not treated or 
did not receive medical care for injuries 
sustained, while 26% received treatment from 
a medical office, clinic, or hospital.
 
Weapon use

Armed assailants committed a fifth of all
workplace crimes.  Armed assailants were
more likely to use a firearm than a knife or
other weapon such as rocks, clubs, bottles, 
or other objects (8% versus 6%, respectively).  
Transportation workers were victimized on 
the job by offenders with a weapon at a 
percentage somewhat higher (32%) than any 
other occupational field.

Victim's           Percent of workplace
occupational       victims victimize
field              offender with a we
 
Transportation          31.7%
Retail sales            23.3
Law enforcement         23.2
Other                   22.0
Mental health           14.9
Teaching                10.9
Medical                 10.5
 
Characteristics of offenders
as reported by victims

Although males made up 48% of the
1993-99 population, they were the
offender in more than four-fifths of 
all workplace crime. Females were the
offender less often than males (13% 
of all workplace crimes) and comprised 
52% of the population during the period.  
Males were more likely to be victimized 
by males than by females in workplace 
violence. Males committed about 9 out of 
10 male victimizations.  In workplace 
violence against females, the offender 
was also more likely to be a male than a 
female. The percentage of males victimizing
females (71%) was more than twice the
percentage of females victimizing females
(25%).

               Percent of violent victimi-
               zations in the workplace:
Gender         Gender of victim
of offender         Male       Female
Male                88.5%       70.8%
Female               6.4        25.2
Unknown              5.1         4.0

Whites made up 84% of the 1993-99
population and were the offender in 55%
of all workplace victimizations.  Blacks
comprised 12% of the 1993-99 population
and were the assailant in 30% of all
workplace crime.  Most victimizations
were intraracial for blacks and whites.  
In about 6 of every 10 workplace violence
incidents involving a white or black victim
and offender, the offender was perceived
to be of the same race as the victim.
 
               Percent of violent victimizations
Race of        in the workplace: Race of victim
offender         White    Black    Other
 
White             58.2%    25.5%    40.4%
Black             27.0     58.6     35.3
Other              9.0      8.7     21.0
Unknown*           5.9      7.2      3.2
 
*Includes groups with offenders
of more than one race.
 
In addition, the percentages of black and
white victims who perceived their offender
to be of a different race were similar. 
Persons of other races were victimized by
blacks and whites at similar percentages
while working or on duty.

Between 1993 and 1999 persons age 30
or older, when compared to younger
persons, were perceived to have
committed the highest percentage (43%)
of crimes occurring at work or on duty. 
About a fifth of workplace offenders were
perceived to be younger than age 20. A
lone offender committed more than 8 of
every 10 workplace crimes.

About a third of victims of workplace
violence believed the offender was
drinking or on drugs at the time of the
incident.  About 36% of workplace victims
did not know if the offender had been
drinking or if the offender 
was on drugs at the time of the incident.
Victims perceived that more than a quarter 
of all workplace violence offenders had 
not been drinking or were not on drugs.

             Percent of workplace victims
             perceiving whether the offender
             was drinking or using drugs
 
  Total                100 %
No                    27.4
Yes                   35.1
Did not know          35.8
Unknown                1.7

Law enforcement and retail sales were the
only occupations for which the offender
was perceived to have used alcohol or
drugs more than they were perceived to
have not used alcohol or drugs. A higher
percentage of offenders of workers in the
mental health field were perceived to have
not been drinking or on drugs than the 
offenders of workers in any other
occupational field. 

Workplace violence victims were more
likely to be victimized by a stranger than
by someone they knew. In more than half
of all workplace victimizations, a stranger
was the perpetrator. About 1% of all
workplace crime was committed by a current 
or former boyfriend, girlfriend, or spouse -- 
an intimate -- of the victim.

Victim-offender     Percent of
relationship        workplace violence
Total                       100 %
Intimate                    1.1
Other relative              0.5
Casual acquaintance        39.4
Stranger                   55.6
Do not know                 3.5

Workers in the mental health field and
teachers were the only occupations more
likely to be victimized by someone they
knew than by a stranger. Law enforcement 
employees were victimized by a stranger 
more than any other occupation; about 
three-quarters of all law enforcement 
victimizations were committed by a 
stranger.

Who reports workplace 
victimizations to the police

Workplace victimizations against males
were equally likely to be reported as not
reported to the police.  In contrast,
workplace victimizations against women
were less likely to be reported. Of the 
4 million workplace crime incidents
committed against females from 1993
through 1999, 40% were reported to the
police. 

Workplace violence was reported to the 
police in similar percentages, regardless 
of race or Hispanic origin. Less than 
half of all workplace violence against 
whites was reported to the police. When 
comparing the percentage of reported and 
not reported victimizations for blacks, 
other races, and Hispanics, the apparent 
differences for these groups were not 
statistically significant.

Workplace crime incidents in which the
victim sustained an injury were reported 
to the police more than those workplace
incidents occurring without injury to the
victim (62% versus 44%, respectively). 
Workplace victimizations in which the
victim was injured were more likely to be
reported to the police than not reported.

Crimes reported to the police

Rape and sexual assaults were reported
to the police at the lowest percentage
(24%) when compared to other violent
crimes in the workplace.  The percentage
of robberies and aggravated assaults
reported to the police were similar.  
These crimes were reported to the police 
at a higher percentage than were other
workplace violent crimes.  About 4 in 10
simple assaults sustained while working
or on duty were reported to the police.

Category of violent 
victimization in the   Percent reported
workplace              to the police
Rape/sexual assault         23.6 %
Robbery                     71.4
Aggravated assault          64.3
Simple assault              41.1

More than 936,000 of the nearly 2 million
workplace crimes committed yearly were
not reported to the police.  About 56% of
all victimizations not reported to the police
were reported to another official.  About
5% of the workplace crimes not reported
to the police were not reported because
the victim believed the police could or
would not help. 

When reporting is examined by occupational 
fields, victimizations against persons working 
in law enforcement (including the police) were
most likely to be reported to the police,
followed by victimizations of retail sales
workers. 

                      Crime
Occupational          reported
field                 to police
Medical                 39.6 %
Mental health           22.9
Teaching                28.1
Law enforcement         74.8
Retail sales            53.9
Transportation          37.0
Other                   38.7

Except for victims working in the mental
health field, victims in the teaching
profession were more likely than any other
workers to report the crimes to a non-law
enforcement official. Victims reporting to
officials other than law enforcement most
often informed persons such as guards and 
apartment managers of the crime.

Workplace homicides

Trend in workplace homicide

Similar to the trend in nonfatal violent
crime, the number of work-related
homicides decreased between 1993 and 1999.  
There were 651 work-related homicides in 
1999, a 39%-decrease from the 1,074 in 1993. 

Characteristics of victims of homicide 
in the workplace

Males accounted for four-fifths of all
workplace homicide victims.  Persons
between ages 25 and 44 were the victims
of more than half of all workplace
homicides.  Whites experienced more
workplace homicides than blacks or
persons of other races between 1993 and
1999.

Homicide victim/offender association

During 1993-99, 84% of all workplace
homicides were committed by offenders
who were strangers to the victim, primarily
during robberies or attempted robberies. 
Coworkers or former coworkers committed a 
higher percentage of homicides in the 
workplace when compared to customers or 
clients (7% versus 4% of all workplace 
homicides, respectively).  The number of 
work-related homicides committed by a 
husband over the 7-year period was 40 
times the number committed by a wife 
(122 versus 3, respectively).

Personal acquaintances such as boyfriends 
or other acquaintances committed similar 
percentages of work-related homicides (1%).

Characteristics of incidents of
workplace homicide

Most workplace homicides were committed 
with guns.  Shooting accounted for more 
than 80% of all workplace homicides. Of 
all 4-hour periods in the day,the highest 
percentage of work-related homicides occurred 
between 8 p.m. and midnight, accounting for 
more than a fifth of all workplace homicides.

Methodology

Data for nonfatal crimes in this report
come from the Bureau of Justice Statistics
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS).  
The NCVS measures personal and household 
offenses, including crimes not reported to 
the police.  

Information is obtained from a continuous,
nationally representative sample of around 
86,000 households comprising nearly 156,000 
persons age 12 or older in the United States.  
The sample for this report includes those 
respondents who reported that they were 
working or on duty during the week prior 
to the interview. Victimizations measured 
are those violent crimes that occurred 
while working or on duty.  Only for the 
occupational category of teaching, those 
crime victims who stated that they were on 
their way to or from work were also included 
in the analysis.  This is done to make data 
for teachers comparable to estimates
presented in Indicators of School Crime
and Safety.  Violent crimes against teachers 
in transit to or from work account for 10% 
of all workplace violent crime against 
teachers.
  
Because the NCVS does not measure murder, 
the homicide data included in this report 
were drawn from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' 
Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (CFOI).

Standard error computations 
for NCVS estimates

Comparisons of percentages and rates in
this report were tested to determine if
differences were statistically significant. 
Differences described in the text as
higher, lower, or different and changes
over time characterized as having
increased or decreased passed a hypothesis 
test at the .05 level of statistical 
significance (95%-confidence level). That 
is, the tested difference in the estimates 
was greater than twice the standard error 
of that difference. For comparisons which 
were statistically significant at the 0.10 
level of statistical significance (90%-
confidence level), the terms somewhat 
different, marginally different, or slight 
difference is used to note the nature of 
the difference.

Caution is required when comparing
estimates not explicitly discussed in 
the text.  What may appear to be large
differences may not test as statistically
significant at the 95%- or the 90%-
confidence level.  Significance testing
calculations were conducted at the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics using statistical 
programs developed specifically for the 
NCVS by the U.S. Census Bureau. These 
programs take into consideration many 
aspects of the complex NCVS sample design 
when calculating generalized variance 
estimates.

Estimates based on 10 or fewer sample
cases have high relative standard errors. 
Because calculated standard errors for
such estimates may not be accurate, care
should be taken when comparing estimates 
based on 10 or fewer cases to other 
estimates.  It is not advisable to make 
comparisons between estimates when both 
are based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

Calculation of rates and annual levels

The rates in this report are average
annual rates for 1993-99. The numerator
of a given number is the sum of violent
crime that occurred while at work or on
duty for each year from 1993 through
1999; the denominator is the sum of the
annual workforce population of persons
for these years (or the number falling
within the particular demographic group
being measured).  The resulting
proportions are multiplied by 1,000 to
obtain the average annual rates. Average
annual levels of workplace victimization
are obtained by summing the number of
workplace victimizations each year
between 1993 and 1999 and dividing by
seven.

Population totals used in this report 
are calculated from estimates derived 
from the victimization survey. Included 
in the population are persons age 12 or 
older living in the households, including 
group quarters such as dormitories. 
Population estimates do not include children 
under 12, institutionalized persons, U.S. 
citizens living abroad, crew members of 
merchant vessels, and Armed Forces personnel
living in military barracks. The percentages 
are calculated using the method similar to 
the one used for average annual rates.

Terminology

Workplace violence - The terms workplace 
violence, work-related violence, and violence 
occurring while working or on duty are 
used interchangeably in this report.

Occupation -- The terms occupation, field,
job category, and occupational field are
interchangeable.

Measurement of occupation 
by the NCVS

Victims reported their job at the time of 
the victimization by answering the following
question: 

Which of the following best describes your 
job at the time of the incident?

Medical profession -- as a --
01.  Physician
02.  Nurse
03.  Technician
04.  Other

Mental health services field -- are your
duties --
05.  Professional (social
worker/psychiatrist)
06.  Custodial care
07.  Other

Teaching profession -- were you
employed in a --
08.  Preschool
09.  Elementary
10.  Junior high or middle school
11.  High school
12.  College or university
13.  Technical or industrial school
14.  Special education facility
15.  Other

Law enforcement or security field -- were
you employed as a  --
16.  Law enforcement officer
17.  Prison or jail guard
18.  Security guard
19.  Other

Retail sales -- were you employed as a --
20.  Convenience or liquor store clerk
21.  Gas station attendant
22.  Bartender
23.  Other

Transportation field -- were you 
employed as a --
24.  Bus driver
25.  Taxi cab driver
26.  Other
OR
27.  Something else
98.  Residue
99.  Out of universe  

Glossary

Homicide -- the
willful unlawful
killing of one
human being by
another.

Rape -- forced sexual intercourse, 
including both psychological coercion 
and physical force.  Forced sexual
intercourse means vaginal, anal, or 
oral penetration by the offender(s).  
This category includes incidents where
the penetration is from a foreign object 
such as a bottle.  Also included are
attempted rapes, male and female
victims, and heterosexual and homosexual 
rape.

Sexual assault -- A wide range of 
victimizations distinct from rape or
attempted rape. These crimes include
completed or attempted attacks generally 
involving unwanted sexual contact between 
the victim and offender. Sexual assault 
may not involve force and include such 
things as grabbing or fondling. Sexual 
assault also include verbal threats.

Robbery -- completed of attempted theft 
directly from a person, of property or
cash by force of threat of force, with 
or without a weapon, and with or without 
an injury. 

Aggravated assault -- a completed or 
attempted attack with a weapon,
regardless of whether or not an injury
occurred, and an attack without a weapon 
in which the victim is seriously injured.

Simple assault -- an attack without a 
weapon resulting in either no injury,
minor injury (such as bruises, black
eyes, cuts, scratches, or swelling) or 
an undetermined injury requiring less
than 2 days of hospitalization. 
Simple assaults also include attempted 
assaults without a weapon.

-----------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the
statistical agency of the U.S. Department
of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld is
acting director.

Detis T. Duhart, Ph.D., BJS Statistician,
wrote the report under the supervision of
Michael Rand.  Craig Perkins provided
statistical review. Tom Hester edited and
produced the report.  Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for printing.

December 2001,  NCJ 190076
--------------------------------------

End of file
12/12/01 ih